4606 99857096 22768
The historie of Cambria, now called Wales: A part of the most fa∣mous Yland of Brytaine, written in the Brytish lan∣guage aboue two hundreth yeares past: translated into English by H. Lhoyd Gentleman: Corrected, augmented, and continued out of Re∣cords and best approoued Authors, by Dauid Powel Doctor in diui∣nitie. CVM PRIVILEGIO.
To the Right worshipfull Sir Philip Sydney knight. IT is the maner of most writers (Right worshipfull) in dedicating of their bookes, to praise and extoll the ver∣tues and no∣ble qualities of such men as they choose to be the patrons of their works, whereby to winne some credit and countenance to themselues: the which thing I see to be doone by a great number of writers (as well strangers as countreymen) who haue set out the praise and commendati∣on of your noble gifts: I am therefore at this time to direct my stile the rather to admonish
you how to emploie and vse the same, to that end that they are bestowed vpon you, than o∣therwise vainelie with suspicion of flatterie to speake of them. And first I would haue you to consider with your selfe, that you haue recei∣ued all the good gifts you haue at the hands of almightie God, who is the giuer of all good∣nesse, for the which your dutie is to render most humble and hartie thanks vnto his di∣uine maiestie. The end also for the which they are giuen vnto you, is at no time to be forgot∣ten, that is, the setting foorth of the glorie of God, & the benefit of your countrie. Call al∣so to remembrance, that they be talents deli∣uered vnto you of credit to vse for a time, for the which you must render an account when∣soeuer it pleaseth the owner to call you to it: the more you haue, the greater your account will be; for he that hath receiued fiue talents is further to be charged than he which hath re∣ceiued but one; and he that hath receiued ten, deeper than he that hath receiued but fiue. Vse them therefore and hide them not in a napkin, for they are the better for the wearing; the more you vse them, the more they will in∣crease; the more you laie out, the richer you shalbe. Haue alwaies before your eies the
glorie of God, neuer forget the same in anie thing you doo: seeke the weale publike of your countrie, labour to doo it good in anie thing you may, while you haue time so to doo: for you haue but a while to remaine heere, a∣waie you must go after the common course of nature. Let the remembrance of your account when your stewardships is ended, be neuer out of your mind. These be the cheefe points leading the right path to true nobilitie: these you shall find set out at large in that booke, wherewithall you are most delighted. For the putting of these things in practise, I am to laie downe two examples for you to imitate, the which (because they are domesti∣call) ought to mooue you to be the more wil∣ling to follow them. The one in your own no∣ble father, who alwaies hath beene and yet is more inclined and bent to doo good to his countrie, than to benefit or inrich himselfe, as Wales and Ireland, beside his owne can beare him witnesse. The other in your honorable fa∣ther in lawe, Sir Francis Walsingham, hir Maie∣sties cheefe Secretarie, a man for his zeale of Gods glorie, and loue towards them that feare God vnfainedlie, well knowne to the world. Follow their steps, with the remem∣brance
of that noble house, out of the which you are descended by your honourable mo∣ther, and then you cannot doo amisse. Labour by the example of your father to discouer and bring to light, the acts of the famous men of elder times, who with conference of the estate and gouernment of all ages, will bring you to the perfect experience of those things that you haue learned out of Aristotle, Plato, and Cicero, by your trauell in philosophie. Your father, with his great expenses and la∣bour, hauing procured & gotten to his hands the histories of Wales and Ireland (which countries for manie yeeres with great loue and commendation he gouerned) commit∣ted vnto me this of Wales, to be set foorth in print, with direction to proceed therein, and necessarie bookes for the dooing thereof. And although I was vnsufficient for dooing of it, yet I haue doone mine indeuour, and now doo present the same vnto your worship, as by good reason due to the sonne and heire of him that was the procurer and bringer of it to light: desiring you to accept it with as good will as the same is offered vnto you, and so fol∣lowing the godlie zeale, loue of the common wealth, and care to doo it good, of so noble
and worthie parents, to beare countenance and fauour to the countrie of Wales, which hartilie wisheth you honourable preferment in the feare of God. The Lord increase his gifts in you to his glorie, the benefit of the commonwealth, and your end∣lesse comfort. From my lod∣ging in London the 25. of March. 1584. Your worships readie at commandement, Dauid Powel.
CAradoc of Lancar∣uan (gentle Reader) col∣lected the successions & actes of the Brytish Prin∣ces after Cadwalader, to the yeare of Christ 1156. Of the which collections there were seuerall co∣pies afterward kept in ei∣ther of the Abbeis of Conwey and Stratflur, which were yearelie aug∣mented as things fell out, and conferred together or∣dinarilie euerie third yeare, when the Beirdh which did belong to those two Abbeis went from the one to the other in the time of their Clêra,Clêra is their ordina∣rie visitation which they vse euerie third yeare. wherein were contai∣ned besides, such notable occurrences hapning within this Ile of Brytaine, as they then thought worthie the writing: which order of registring and noting conti∣nued in those Abbeis vntill the yeare 1270. which was a little before the death of the last Lhewelyn who was slaine at Buelht. These collections were copied by diuers, so that there are at this daie of the same in Wales a hundred copies at the least, whereof the most part were written two hundred yeares ago. This booke Humffrey Lhoyd gentleman (a paineful and a worthie searcher of Brytish antiquities) translated into English,
and partlie augmented, chieflie out of Matthew Paris, and Nicholas Triuet: but before the booke was po∣lished (hauing yet manie imperfections, not onelie in the phrase, but also in the matter and substance of the historie) it pleased God to take him awaie in the floure of his time: who (if God had spared him life) would not onelie haue set out this historie absolute and perfect, but also haue opened vnto the world other antiquities of this land, which now lie hidden and vnknowen. The copie of his translation, the Right honorable Sir Hen∣ry Sidney Lord President of Wales (whose disposition is rather to seeke after the antiquities, and the weale pu∣blike of those countries which he gouerneth, than to obtaine lands and reuenewes within the same, for I know not one foote of land that hee hath either in VVales or Ireland) had lieng by him a great while, and being desirous to haue the same set out in print, sent for me in September last, requesting me to peruse and cor∣rect it, in such sort as it might be committed to the presse. But I (knowing my selfe to be far vnable to per∣forme and accomplish those things which are requisite to the publishing of such an historie, and being other∣wise called and imploied) was verie loath anie thing to medle therein, and so excused my selfe; yet he concei∣uing a better opinion of me than there was cause, would needs haue me to doo mine indeuour in that behalfe. VVhose request I was not of dutie to gainesaie or withstand, and therevpon I promised to doo my best, which trauell two things haue caused me to be the more willing to take it in hand. First, because I see the politike and martiall actes of all other inhabitants of this Iland, in the time of their gouernment to be set out to the vttermost, and that by diuers and sundrie writers: and the whole doings and
gouernment of the Brytaines the first inhabitants of the land, who continued their rule longer than anie o∣ther nation,Rob. Caenal. li. 2. Par. 2. to be nothing spoken of nor regarded of anie, especialie sithence the reigne of Cadwalader, ha∣uing so manie monuments of antiquitie to declare and testifie the same, if anie would take the paines to open and discouer them to the vew of the world. The second thing that mooued me therevnto, is the slanderous report of such writers, as in their bookes do inforce euerie thing that is done by the Welshmen to their discredit, leauing out all the causes and circum∣stances of the same: which doo most commonlie not onelie eleuate or dissemble all the iniuries and wrongs offered and done to the Welshmen, but also conceale or deface all the actes worthie of commendation at∣chieued by them. Search the common Chronicles touching the Welshmen, and commonlie thou shalt find that the King sendeth some noble man or other with an armie to Wales, to withstand the rebellious at∣tempts, the proud stomachs, the presumptuous pride, stirre, trouble and rebellion of the fierce, vnquiet, cra∣king, fickle and vnconstant Welshmen, and no open fact laid downe to charge them withall, why warre should be leuied against them, nor yet they swaruing a∣brod out of their owne countrie to trouble other men. Now this historie dooth shew the cause and circum∣stances of most of those warres, whereby the qualitie of the action may be iudged. And certeinlie no man is an indifferent witnesse against him whom he counteth his enimie or aduersarie, for euill will neuer speaketh well. The Welshmen were by the Saxons and Normans counted enimies, before the twelfth yeare of Edward the first, while they had a gouernour among them∣selues: and afterward, when king Edward had brought
the countrie to his subiection, he placed English offi∣cers to keepe them vnder, to whome most common∣lie he gaue the forfaits and possessions of such Welsh∣men as disobeied his lawes, and refused to be ruled by the said officers: the like did the other Kings that came after him. The said officers were thought oftentimes to be ouer-seuere and rigorous for their owne profit & commoditie: which things caused the people often to disobeie, & manie times like desperate men to seeke re∣uengement, hauing those for their iudges which were made by their ouerthrow, and also wanting indifferen∣cie in their causes and matters of griefes: for the Kings alwaies countenanced and beleeued their owne offi∣cers, by them preferred and put in trust, before their ac∣cusers, whom they liked not of. Wherevpon the in∣habitants of England fauoring their countriemen and freends, reported not the best of the Welshmen. This hatred and disliking was so increased by the stirre and rebellion of Owen Glyndoure, that it brought foorth such greeuous lawes, as few Christian kings euer gaue or published the like to their subiects. These things be∣ing so, anie man may easilie perceiue the verie occa∣sion of those parentheseis and briefe notes of rebellion and troubles obiected to the Welshmen, without ope∣ning of cause or declaration of circumstances. The Normans hauing conquered England, and got∣ten all the lands of the Saxon nobilitie, would faine haue had the lands of the Welshmen also, wherevpon diuers of them entred▪ VVales with an armie, so that the VVelshmen were driuen for their owne defense to put themselues in armour: for the which fact they are by some writers accused of rebellion, wheras by the law of Nature it is lawfull for all men to withstand force by force.Vim vi re∣pellere licet. They were in their owne countrie, the
land was theirs by inheritance and lawfull possession: might they not therefore defend themselues from vio∣lence and wrong, if they could? What right or lawfull title had the Earle of Chester to Ryuonioc & Tegengl? or the Earle of Salope to Dyuet, Caerdigan, & Powys? or Rob. Fitzhamon to Glamorgan? or Barnard New∣march to Brechnoke? or Ralph Mortimer to Eluel? or Hugh Lacy to the land of Ewyas? or anie other of them to anie countrie in VVales? By what reason was it more lawfull for those men to dispossesse them of these countries with violence and wrong, than for them to defend and keepe their owne? Shall a man be charged with disobedience, because he seeketh to keepe his purse from him that would robbe him? I meane not by this to charge those Noble men, which wan these countries by the sword: but I speake it to note the par∣cial dealing of the writers & setters foorth of those hi∣stories, that should haue reported things indifferentlie, as they were done, and laid downe the causes and cir∣cumstances of euerie action truelie, who being altogi∣ther parciall, fauoring the one side & hating the other, do pronounce of the fact according to their priuate af∣fections, condemning oftentimes the innocent, and iu∣stifieng the wrong doers. These considerations I saie, besides my bounden du∣ty, caused me to venture to take this thing in hand. The translation of H. Lhoyd I haue conferred with the Bry∣tish booke, whereof I had two ancient copies, and cor∣rected the same, when there was cause so to doo. And after that the most part of the booke was printed, I re∣ceiued another larger copie of the same translation, be∣ing better corrected, at the hands of Robert Glouer Somerset Herald, a learned and studious Gentleman in his profession, the which if I had had at the begin∣ning,
manie things had come foorth in better plight than they now be. Againe, I got all the authors that I could come by, which haue anie thing written of the affaires of VVales, as Gildas, Asser Meneuensis, Gal∣fride, William of Newborow, Matthew Paris, Mat∣thew Westminster, Thomas Walsingham, Ponticus Virunnius, Polydor Virgil, Io. Leyland, Io. Bale, I. Prise, Matthew Parker, Io. Caius, VVilliam Lambert, and all the English Chronicles printed. In written hand I had Gildas Sapiens alias Nennius, Henrie Huntington, VVilliam Malmsbury, Marianus Scotus, Ralph Cog∣shall, Io. Euersden, Nicholas Triuet, Florentius Vigor∣niensis, Simon of Durham, Roger Houedon, and other which remaine in the custodie of I. Stowe citizen of London, who deserueth cōmendation for getting togi∣ther the ancient writers of the histories of this land. I had also the Brytish books of petegrees. I. Castoreus, & Syluester Giral. Cambrensis, which with diuers other rare monuments of antiquitie, I receiued at the hands of the Right Honorable the Lord Burghley high trea∣surer of England: who also directed me by his letters to all the offices where the Records of this realme are kept, out of the which I haue gathered a great part of this historie, and more would haue done, if the time had permitted. The copie I haue conferred with the a∣forenamed authors, and where I found them to intreat of the matters therein contained, I haue noted them in the margine, and in such authors as are printed I haue most commonlie directed thee gentle Reader to the page or chapter of the booke where thou shalt find the same historie treated of. Againe, where I found anie thing of Wales worthie the noting in the said au∣thors being not conteined in the copie, I haue inserted
the same in a smaller letter with this marke * before it, whereby it may be discerned from the copie it selfe. Further, such things as were breefly set downe in the copie without signification of cause or declaration of circumstances, if I found the same in anie of mine au∣thors treated of and further opened, I haue likewise in∣serted it in his due place. In the possession and succes∣sion of families, I haue sought what I could for the time, and haue laid downe most of the noble families of England, which had lands in Wales, or descended out of that countrie. I was greatlie furthered in this worke by the painefull and studious trauell of the right worshipfull Sir Edward Stradling Knight, Thomas Powel of Whittington parke, and Richard Broughton Esquires. In the description I haue taken the lesse paines, loo∣king dailie for the comming foorth of the painefull and studious trauell of some other, who hath labored in that behalfe, and studied all the Romane and Brytish histories concerning the ancient names of nations and places within this Iland, so that my labour were super∣fluous in that behalfe. Herein if happilie I haue swar∣ued or omitted anie thing, which should haue beene laid downe in this historie, I neither did it wittinglie nor willinglie: and therefore being readie vpon better information to amend that which shalbe found to be amisse, if any so shalbe, I am the rather to be born with∣all, because I am the first setter out in print of this histo∣rie: for things can neuer be so well doone at the first when there is but few that doo trauell therein, as they maie in processe of time, when euerie man putteth to his helping hand, which curtesie I am to desire of thee gentle Reader for the perfecting of this worke. Concerning the alteration of the estate, there was
neuer anie thing so beneficiall to the common people of Wales, as the vniting of that countrie to the crowne and kingdome of England, whereby not onelie the ma∣ladie and hurt of the dissention that often hapned be∣tweene the Princes of the countrie, while they ruled, is now taken awaie, but also an vniformitie of gouern∣ment established; whereby all controuersies are exami∣ned, heard & decided within the countrie: so that now the countrie of Wales (I dare boldlie affirme it) is in as good order for quietnes and obedience as anie coun∣trie in Europe: for if the rulers and teachers be good and doo their duties, the people are willing to learne, readie to obeie, and loath to offend or displease. And if it please God once to send them the Bible in their owne language according to the godlie lawes alreadie established, the countrie of Wales (I doubt not) will be comparable to anie countrie in Eng∣land.
A description of Cambria now called Wales: Drawne first by Sir Iohn Prise knight, and afterward augmented and made perfect by Humfrey Lhoyd Gentleman. FOr as much as it is necessarie for the vnder∣standing of this historie, to knowe the perfect descrip∣tion of the countrie of Wales, to the end the acts atchiued and doone in the same may be the better knowne; I thought good somewhat to trauell there∣in, and so to laie downe the same as it was in those daies, and as it is now: that the reader by conference of both times may the better vnder∣stand this worke. Therefore after the three sonnes of Brutus had diuided the whole Ile of Brytaine into three parts; that part conteined within the French seas, with the riuers of Sea∣uerne (called in Brytish Hafren) Dee and Humber, fell to the eldest sonne Locrinus, which was after his name called Lhoyger, which name it hath in the Brytish toong to this daie, and in English now it is called England, and is augmented North∣ward
to the riuer Tweed. The second sonne Albanactus had all the land Northward from Humber to the sea Orkney, cal∣led in the Brytish toong Mor Werydh, and in Latine Mare Ca∣ledonicum. The third sonne Camber had to his part all that which remained vndiuided, lieng within the Spanish and Irish seas, and separated from England,Cambria. with the riuers Seauerne and Dee, and this part was after his name called Cambria, and the inhabitants thereof Cambry, and their language Camberaec, and so are at this daie. So that they haue kept the same countrie and language this 2690. and odde yeares, without commixti∣on with anie other nation, especiallie in Northwales, as it shall hereafter appeare. And bicause the name of this countrie is changed, or rather mistaken by the inhabitants of England, and not by them cal∣led Cambry, but Wales: I thinke it necessarie to declare the occasion thereof, which is, that where the Saxons a people of Germanie were the first that after the Brytaines inhabited and ruled the greatest part of this Ile, & droue the Brytains to that corner, which according to the maner of their countrie they called Wales, and the people Welshmen, and the toong Welsh, that is to saie Strange, or not of them vnderstanded. For at this daie the inhabitants of the lowe countries call their next neighbours language of Henegaw, or other that speake French, Walsh, as a language to them vnknowne. Likewise the dwellers of Tyroll & other the higher countries of Germa∣nie doo name the Italian their next neighbour a Welshman, and his language Walsh. And this is an euident proofe, that they which harped vpon a Queene Gwalaes, and of a Prince Wala (of whom neither Brytish, Latine, nor English historie maketh mention) were fowlie deceiued: and so likewise was a great historiographer of late daies, which saith, that it was called Walia, quasi Italia, bicause the rest of the Romans which remained in the Ile were driuen thither. Neither is this anie new inuention, although Polydore Virgil with an Italian brag dooth glorie himselfe to be the first that espied it out, for diuers ancient writers doo alledge the same cause of the name of
Wales, of whom Syluester Giraldus is one, who wrote in the time of Henrie the second after the conquest, before 380. yeares passed: which is an euident token, that the said Polydore did ei∣ther neuer see nor read the ancient histories of this realme, or dissembleth the same to the aduancement and praise of him∣selfe and his countrie: which to the learned and indifferent reader shall appeare to be the onelie occasion he tooke that worke in hand, for all his booke redoundeth onlie to the praise and honour of the Romans, as well spirituall as temporall, and to blase forth their acts and deeds within this realme: and vpon the other part dooth either openlie slaunder, or els priui∣lie extenuate, or shamefullie denie the martiall prowesse and noble acts, as well of Saxons, Danes, and Normans, as of the Brytains, all inhahiters of this Ile. Which thing he that list to prooue, let him read and conferre Caesars Commentaries, Cor∣nelius Tacitus, Herodianus, and other ancient writers, as well in Latine as in Greeke, with his worke. As for the ancient wri∣ters of the Brytish historie, as the Brytish chronicle, the histo∣rie of Gildas, Ponticus Verunnius, yea the golden worke of Mat∣thew Paris moonke of Saint Albon, which wrote from VVilliam Bastard, to the last yeares of Henrie the third; I dare well saie he neuer sawe them, they be in diuers places to be had, so that the truth may be easilie prooued. To make an end I saie, that he being first a straunger borne, and also ignorant as well in the histories of this realme, as of those toongs and languages wher∣in the same were written, could neuer set foorth the true and perfect Chronicle of the same. But he hauing a good grace and a pleasant stile in the Latine toong, and finding himselfe in a countrie where euerie man either lacked knowledge or spirit to set forth the historie of their owne countrie, tooke this enter∣prise in hand, to their great shame, and no lesse dispraise, bi∣cause he a blind leader shall drawe a great number of vndis∣creet and rash folowers, as well Geographers and Cosmogra∣phers, as Chroniclers and Historiographers, to the darke pit of ignorance, where I leaue them at this time, remitting the rea∣der to the apologie of Sir Iohn Pryse knight, and his Brytish hi∣storie,
written by him of purpose against the enuious reports and slaunderous taunts of the said Polydor, where he shall see a great number of his errors confuted at large. And to returne to my former matter of the name of Wales,Wales. which name to be giuen of late by a straunge nation may be otherwise prooued: for the Welshmen themselues doo not vnderstand what these words VVales and Welsh doo signifie, nor know anie other name of their countrie or themselues but Cambry, nor of their language but Cambraec, which is as much to saie as Cambers lan∣guage or speech. So likewise they know not what England or English meaneth, but commonlie they call the countrie Lhoy∣ger, the Englishmen Sayson,A Locrino. A Saxonib. and the English toong Saysonaec. Which is an euident token that this is the same language which the Brytaines spake at the beginning: for the works of Merdhyn and of Taliessin, who wrote aboue 1000. yeares past, are almost the same words which they vse at this daie, or at the least easie to be vnderstanded of euerie one which knoweth perfectlie the Welsh toong, especiallie in Northwales. Beside this, where at this daie, there doo remaine three rem∣nants of the Brytaines, diuided euerie one from other, with the seas which are in Wales, Cornewall (called in Brytish Cer∣niw) and little Brytaine, yet almost all the particular words of these three people are all one, although in pronunciation and writing of the sentences they differ somewhat, which is no maruell, seeing that the pronunciation in one realme is often so diuers, that the one can scant vnderstand the other. But it is rather a wonder, that the Welshmen being separated from the Cornish, well nigh these 900. yeares, and the Brytaines from either of them 290. yeares before that, and hauing small traf∣fike or concourse togither sithence that time, haue still kept their owne Brytish toong. They are not therefore to be credi∣ted which denie the Welsh to be the old Brytish toong. And here I cannot passe ouer what one of these fine Chroniclers wrote of late, of the name of Brytaine, affirming that it should be so called of Brytaine in France, as the elder of that name. But surelie he had either neuer seene Ptolomie nor Caesar, nor
anie other ancient writer, or read them with small iudgement and memorie. For there he might haue learned, that when this land was called Brytaine, the other was called Armorica, & how in Maximus time,Rob. Caenal. li. 2. Per. 2. Conan Meriadoc was the first that gaue it that name, & inhabited it with Brytaines out of this Ile▪ Other de∣riuations of these words Brytania, and Albion, out of Greeke & Latine, I am ashamed to rehearse; for vnto such errors doo they commonlie fall, that either puffed vp with vaine glorie of their owne wits, or pinched with despite and enuie at other mens works; or blinded with ignorance, do go about to write & set foorth anie historie or chronicle. But passing ouer this matter vntill an other time,The meares and bounds of Wales. I will returne to the description of Wales, which (as I said) was of old time compassed almost about with the Irish seas, & the riuers Dee and Seauerne, although after∣wards the Saxons wan by force from the Brytaines all the plaine and champion countrie ouer the riuers, and special∣lie Offa king of Mercia, who made a ditch of a great breadth and depth, to be a meare betwixt his kingdome and Wales, which ditch began at the riuer Dee, by Bassing werke betweene Chester and Ruthlan, and ran along the hils sides to the south sea a little from Bristowe, reaching aboue a hundreth miles in length, and is in manie places to be seene at this daie, bearing the name of Clawdh Offa, that is to saie, Offas ditch, and the coun∣trie betweene it and England is commonlie called in Welsh Y Mars, although the greatest part of it be now inhabited by Welshmen, namlie in Northwales, which yet keepeth the an∣cient limits to the riuer Dee, and in some places ouer it. Other (as Syluester Giraldus) make the riuer VVy, called in Welsh Gwy, to be the meare betweene England and Wales on the South part called Southwales; who measureth the breadth of Wales, from Salowe or Willoweford called Rhydyrhelig vpon VVy, to Saint Dauids in Meneuia 100. miles, and the length from Caer∣lheon vpon Vsce in Gwentland, to Holihead called Caergybi in Anglisey, in Welsh called Môn, aboue 100. miles, and these be the common meares at this daie, although the Welsh toong is commonlie vsed and spoken Englandward, beyond these old
meeres a great waie, as in Herefordshire, Glocestershire, and a great part of Shropshire. And thus for the generall description of Wales, which afterward about the yeare of Christ 870. Ro∣dericus Magnus, king of Wales, diuided it into three territories which they called kingdomes, which remained vntill of late daies. These three were, Gwynedh, in English Northwales, De∣heubarth, in English Southwales, and Powys land; in euerie of the which he ordeined a princelie seat or court for the Prince to remaine at most commonlie: as in Gwynedh (which some old writers call Venedotia for Gwynethia) Aberffraw in the Ile of Môn or Anglesey.Aberfraw. In Deheubarth called in Latine Demetia Caer∣mardhyn, from whence it was afterward remooued to Dineuowr,Dinevowr. eight miles thence. In Powys Pengwern, called Y Mwythic, and in English Sherewsburie, from whence it was remooued to Mathraual in Powys land.Mathraval. And bicause this historie dooth as well intreate of warres betwixt these three prouinces, as betwixt them and the Saxons, Normanes and Flemings: I thinke it good to set foorth the particular description of euerie part by it selfe. And first of Northwales as the cheefest part, which he gaue his eldest sonne, ordeining that either of the other two should paie him yearelie 200. pound of tribute,Northwales. as it appeareth in the lawes of Howel Dha, which are to be had in Welsh, and also in Latine. Therefore Gwyneth (called Northwales) had vpon the Northside the sea, from the riuer Dee at Basingwerke to Aberdyui, and vpon the West and South west the riuer Dyui which diuideth it from Southwales, and in some places from Powys land. And on the South and East it is diuided from Pow∣ys sometimes with mountaines, and sometimes with riuers, till it come to the riuer Dee againe. This land was of old time di∣uided to foure parts, of which the cheefest was Môn,Môn. in English called Anglesey, where the Princes cheefe house was at Aber∣fraw, which is an Iland separated from the maine land, with an arme of the sea called Maenai, & had in it selfe three Cantreds or hundreds, which were subdiuided to sixe comots, as Can∣tref Aberfraw, to comot Lhion, and comot Malhtraeth, Cantref
Cemais, to the comots Talebolion and Twr Celyn. Cantref Rossyr to the comots Tindaethwy and Maenai. And at this daie there is a trimme towne in that Ile called Beumarish, and a common passage to Ireland at Caergybi, called in English Holyhead. But here I cannot winke at that notable error of Polydor, which (after his accustomed fashion) denieth this Ile to be called Môna, but Anglesia, or Anglorum insula, bicause it is called in English Anglesey, and giueth this name Môna to Man, and so hath lost the names of both Iles: which ignorance and forget∣fulnes might be forgiuen him, if he had not drawne a great number to this error with him, which in their charters doo dai∣lie wrong name these Iles, which may be easilie prooued. First, bicause the inhabitants of the Ile doo know none other name but Môn: and it is called through all Wales, Tîr Môn, that is to saie, the land of Môn vnto this day. So that neither by memorie of man, neither by anie monument in writing in the Brytish ong can it appeare, that euer it had anie other name but Môn, yet there be manifest monuments for these 1000. yeares. It is also growne to a prouerbe through Wales, for the fertili∣tie of the ground, Môn mam Gymry, that is to saie, Môn mother of Wales. The ancient historie of Cornelius Tacitus (which belike age had beaten out of Polydors head) saith, that the soldiours of Paulinus Suetonius, and afterward of Iulius Agricola, after they had passed through Northwales, then came ouer against Môna, where they did swim ouer an arme of the sea of 200. pases, and so by force wanne the Ile. Now whether is it more reasonable thus to swimme ouer 200. pases, or 20. miles? I know there is no man that beleeueth Polydor in this point: let all men therefore by this iudge the rest. As for that which he saieth of the great woods, it is nothing: for both the Romanes, and after when the Christian faith tooke place in this realme, the Christians did fall and roote them out, for the idolatrie and absurd religi∣on which was vsed there: that the king of Man sent for tim∣ber to Môn: read the life of Hugh Earle of Chester; which al∣so is euident by the great beeches and other trees found in
the earth at these daies. His other reason is, bicause it is called Anglesey in the English toong: so is Lhoyger England, and Cambry Wales, are those therefore the old names? No surelie. And what if the inhabitants called it so? (as they did not) had it not a name before the Angles wanne it? Yes I warrant you, but he had forgotten that. Now to the name of Man, it was euer, or at the least these 1000. yeares named in Brytish Ma∣naw, of which commeth the English name Man. The inhabi∣tants thereof call it so, and no nation about it did euer call it Môn, no nor any writer but Polydor, which was too yong a god∣father to name so old a child. For Gildas who wrote aboue 900. yeares passed, whose writings Polydor neuer sawe, but vntrulie fathers vpon him his owne deuise; Giraldus in his description of Ireland to Henrie the second, & Henrie Huntington, doo plain∣lie call Man in Latine Eubonia, adding thereto either Manaw or Man, for the better vnderstanding of the name: will you beleeue them or Polydor? Other arguments there are which I will passe ouer, till I haue more leasure and occasion to write of this matter. Aruon.The second part of Northwales was called Aruon, which is as much to saie, as ouer against Môn: and had in it foure Cantreds, and ten comots. Cantref Aber had in it three comots, Y Lhechwedh vchaf, Y Lechwedhisaf, and Nanconwy. Cantref Aruon had two comots, Ywch Gwyruai, & Isgwyruai. Cantref Dunodic had two comots, Ardudwy and Euionyth. Cantref Lhyyn containeth three comots, Cymytmayn, Tin∣lhayn, and Canologion. This is now called Carnaruonshire, as Môn is called Anglesey shire, and haue the same diuision at this daie. In this shire are Snowdon hils, called Eryri, nei∣ther in height, fertilitie of the ground, wood, cattell, fish and foule, giuing place to the famous Alpes, and without contro∣uersie the strongest countrie within Brytaine. Here is the towne of Caernarnon, called in the old time Caer segonce: and there also is Conwey called Caergyffyn. And the see of Bangor, with diuers other ancient castels and
places of memorie, and was the last part of Wales, that came vnder the dominion of the kings of England. It hath on the North the sea and Maenai, vpon the East and Southeast the ri∣uer Conwey, which diuideth it from Denbighshire, although it now passe the riuer in one place by the sea shore. And on the Southwest and West, it is separated from Merionyth by high mountaines and riuers, and other meares. The third part of Gwyneth was Merionyth containing three Cantreds,Merionyth. and euerie Cantred three comots. As Cantref Meyreon hath three comots, Talybont, Pennal, and Ystumaner. Cantref Arustly had these, Vwchcoed, Iscoed, and Gwarthrenion. Cantref Penlhyn had these, Vwchmeloch, Ismeloch, and Mic∣naint, and this keepeth the said name till this daie, but not within the same meres, and is full of hils and rocks, and hath vpon the North the sea, notable at this daie for the great re∣sort and number of people that repaire thither to take her∣rings. It hath vpon the East Aruon, and Denbighland, vpon the South Powys, and vpon the West Dyui, and Caerdigan∣shire. In this countrie standeth the towne of Harlech,Tegyd. and a great lake called hyn Tegyd, through which the riuer Dee run∣neth, and mingleth not with the water of the lake, which is three miles long, and also the salmons, which are commonlie taken in the riuer hard by the lake, are neuer seene to enter the lake. Likewise a kind of fish called Gwyniaid, which are like to whitings, and are full in the lake, are neuer taken in the riuer. Not farre from this lake is a place called Caergay, which was the house of Gay, Arthurs foster brother. This shire as well as Aruon, is full of cattell, foule, and fish, with great number of read deere and roes: but there is great scarsitie of corne. The fourth part of Gwyneth,Y Bervedh∣wlad. was called Y Beruedhwlad, which may be Englished, the inland or middle countrie, which con∣teined fiue Cantreds and 13. comots, as Cantref Ryuonioc had in it these comots, Vwchalet and Isalet.
Cantref Ystrat, had Hiraethoc and Cynmeirch. Cantref Ros these, Vwchdulas, Isdulas, and Creuthyn, which all are in the lordship of Denbigh, sauing the Creuthyn which is in Carnaruonshire, wher∣in the castell of Dyganwy did stand, which was the Earles of Chester, and is commonlie called in the Latine and English chronicle Gannoc. Dyffryn Clwyd.The fourth Cantref was Dyffryn Clwyd, which may be Eng∣lished the vallie of Clwyd, and now is called the lordship of Ru∣thyn, and hath these comots, Coleigion, Lhannerch and Dogueilyn. The fift Cantref is Tegengl, and is now a part of Flyntshire, hauing these comots, Counsylht, Prestatyn, and Ruthlan. And in this part is one of the fairest vallies within this Ile, containing 18. miles in length, and 4.5.6. or 7. in breadth, as the hils ei∣ther drawe inward togither, or backward asunder, which high hils doo inclose it on the East, West, and South parts, and Northward the sea. It is plentifull of cattell, fish, and foule, corne, hey, grasse, and wood, and diuided along in the mid∣dest with the riuer Clwyd, to whom runneth Clywedoc, Ystrat, VVhilar, Elwy, and a great number of other riuers from the hils. In this vallie two miles from the sea, is the towne and castell of Ruthlan,An. 12. Ed. 1. where sometimes a parliament hath beene kept. And two miles aboue it is the see of Saint Asaph, betweene the riuers Clwyd and Elwy, called in the old time the bishops see of Lhan Elwy. Foure miles thence, and two miles from the riuer, is situate vpon a rocke the towne and castell of Denbigh, where is one of the greatest markets in the marches of Wales, and one of the fairest and strongest castels within this realme, which being the house of Dauid brother to Lhewelyn, the last Prince of the Welsh blood,See this hist. pag. 377. was enlarged and strengthned by Henrie Lacy Earle of Lincolne, to whom king Edward gaue the same lordship; it is also the shire towne of that Shire. Fiue miles aboue this, is the towne of Ruthyn with a faire castell, which sometimes belonged to the Lords Gray Earles of Kent. This part of Northwales hath vpon the North the riuer Dee, and the sea. Vpon the West Aruon, and the riuer Conwey. South and East, Merionyth, and the countrie then called
Powys. And these be the meeres and bounds of Gwyneth or Venedotia, for the name of Northwales conteineth beside this all Powys at these daies. So there was vnder the territorie of Aberfraw 15. Cantreds, and in them 38. comots. The second kingdome was Mathraual,Mathraval or Powys. which in right order was the third, as that which came to the third brother, yet for the better vnderstanding of the historie folowing, I haue pla∣ced it here. To this kingdome belonged the countrie of Powys, and the land betwixt Wy and Seauerne. Which part had vp∣on the South and West, Southwales, with the riuers Wy and Tywy, and other meeres. Vpon the North Gwyneth, and vpon the East the marches of England, from Chester to Wy, a little aboue Hereford: and therefore it was most troubled with wars, as well of the Saxons, as afterwards of the Normanes Lords marchers, who dailie wanne some part thereof, and by that meanes it was the first part that serued the kings of Eng∣land, and therefore lesse esteemed of all the rest. This part cal∣led Powys, was diuided againe into Powys Vadoc, and Powys Wenwynwyn. Powys Vadoc contained in it selfe fiue Cantreds and 15. comots. Cantref Y Barwn, which hath three comots, Dynmael, Edeyr∣neon, and Glyndourdwy, which be now in Merionithshire (sauing Dinmael which is in Denbighshire.) Cantref Y Rhiw, whose comots were these, Yal now in Den∣bighshire: Stratalyn and Hop now in Flyntshire. Cantref Vwchnant hath these comots, Merfforth in Flyntshire, Maelor Gymraeg, in English Bromfield, now in Denbighshire, and Maelor Saesneg in Flyntshire. Cantref Trefred containeth these comots, Croesvain, Tref Y VVayn, in English Chirke, and in Denbighshire. Croes of Wallt, English Oswestree and in Shropshire. Cantref Rayder with his comots Mochnant Israider, Cynlhaeth & Nanheudwy all in Chirke land, & in Denbighshire. Also the lordship of Whytington now in Shropshire, was in this part of Powys, which part at this daie hath lost the name of Powys, and is situate in diuerse shires, as it appeereth by the discourse before
passed. In this part is the castell of Holt in Bromefield, and the castell of Chirke in Chirkeland. Likewise the lordship and castell of Whytington, which came by mariage to Fulke Fitzwarren. There is beside these, the lordship of Oswesire, of the which the Fitzalans haue been lords these 300. and odde years, and of diuers other lordships in those marches, as Shrarden, the eleuen townes, Clun, and manie others, which be all now in Shropshire. The second part called Powys Wenwynwyn, had likewise fiue Cantreds, and twelue comots. Cantref Y Vyrnwy had these comots, Mochnant vwch Rayader, Mechain Iscoed, and Lhannerch Hudol. Cantref Ystlyc had these, Devthwr, Gorthwr Isaf, and Strat Marchelh. Cantref Lhyswynaf had these, Caereneon, and Mechain Vwch∣coed. Cantref Cydewen had comot Conan and comot Hauren. Cantref Conan had Cyueilioc and Mouthwy, which is now in Merionyth shire. Of all these, the three first Cantreds doo on∣lie at this daie beare the name of Powys, which are vpon the Northside of Seauerne, and are all fiue (sauing the comot of Mowthwy) in Mongomry shire. This is a countrie full of woods, hils, and riuers, and hath in it these townes, the Poole, Newtowne, and Machynlhaeth. Arustly was in old time in this part, but afterwards it came to the Princes of Gwyneth. These lordships came by iust descent from the Princes thereof, to a woman named Hawys, the daughter of Owen ap Gruffyth, as appeareth in the historie fol∣lowing, page 215. Arustly and Cyuelioc came to the Baron of Dudley, and afterwards it was sold to the king. The third part belonging to Mathraual, was the land be∣tweene Wy and Seauerne, containing foure Cantreds, and 13. comots. Cantref Melienyth hath these comots, Ceri, Swythygre, Riwa∣lalht, and Glyn Ieithon. Cantref Eluel hath these, Vwchmynydh, Ismynydh, and Lhech∣dhyfnog.
Cantref Yclawdh these, Dyffryn Teyueydiat, Swydhynogen, and Pennwelht. Cantref Buelht hath these, Swydhyvam, Dreulys, and Isyrwon. Of this part there is at this daie some in Mountgomerie shire, some in Radnorshire, and some in Brechnockeshire. In this part and in the lordships marching to it, which although at the time of this diuision, which was in the time of the last prince, were not in his subiection, yet to this daie speake Welsh, and are called Wales, and in these comots are these townes and castels. Mountgomerie called in Welsh Treualdwyn, a pretie towne and a faire castell. The castell of Clunn called Colunwy, which is the Earles of Arundell. The towne of Knighton, in Welsh Trefyclawd. The castell of Cymaron. Presteyn in Welsh Lhanandras. The towne and castell of Radnor, in Welsh Mae∣syuet, at this daie the shire towne. The towne of Kyngton and the castell of Huntingdon, called in Welsh Y castelh Mayn, which were the Bohunes Earles of Hereford, and after the dukes of Buckingham. Castell Payne, Haye, Lhanuair in Buelht. These lordships with Brechnock and Abergeuennie, were be∣longing to the Bruses lords of Brechnock, and after came di∣uers times, and by sundrie meanes to the Bohunes, Neuels, and Mortimers. And so (as I haue rehearsed) in this territorie or king∣dome were found 14. Cantreds, and 40. comots. Two of these parts, which are Powys and Gwyneth, are at this daie called Northwales, and diuided into sixe shires. Môn called Angle∣sey, Caernaruon, Merionyth, Denbigh, Flynt, and Mountgo∣merie shire, and are all on the Northside Seauerne, sauing a peece of Mountgomerie shire. And here I thinke it good to let the reader vnderstand what the Brytish chronicle saith of Northwales, which affirmeth that three times it came by inheritance to women. First to Stra∣dwen, daughter to Caduan ap Conan ap Endaf, and wife to Coel Godeboc, mother to Cenaw, Dyvyr and Gwawl. The second time to the same Gwawl wife to Edeyrn ap Padarn, and mother to Cu∣netha Wledic: which Cunetha inhabiting in the North parts of
England, about the yeare 540. after the incarnation of Christ, and hearing how the mingled nations of Irish Scots, and Pictes, had ouer runne the sea shore of Caerdigan, which was part of his inheritance, sent his sonnes thither to enioie their inheritance, of the which Tibiaon his eldest sonne died in Man, which land the said Irish Scots had wonne. For Gildas saith, that of the children of Glam Hector, which peopled a great part of Ireland, Yscroeth with his people inhabited Dalrienda, which is a part of Scotland: Builke with his people came to Man. But I thinke it good to put in Gildas words, which saith: Builke cum filijs suis inhabitauit Euboniam insulam vulgò Manaw, quae est in medi∣tullio maris inter Hyberniam & Brytaniam; that is to saie, Builke with his children inhabited the Ile Eubonia, commonlie Ma∣naw (for so it was and is named in Brytish) which lieth in the middle of the sea, betweene Ireland and Brytaine. This was not called Môna, as Polydor faineth. The children of Bethoun in∣habited Demetia, which is Southwales, with Gwyr and Cydweli, till they were chased thence by the children of Cunetha. Thus farre Gildas. Therefore the sonnes of Cunetha, being arri∣ued in Northwales (as well I thinke being driuen by the Saxons, as for their inheritance) diuided the countrie betwixt them. And first Meireaon the sonne of Tibiaon, the sonne of Cu∣netha, had Cantref Meireaon to his part. Arustel ap Cunetha, had Cantref Arustly. Caredic ap Cunetha, had Caerdigion, now Caerdi∣gan shire.Maelor the sonne of Gw∣ran, sonne to Cunedha had Maeloron, that is, the two Maelors, Maelor Gymbraeg, called Br. and Maelor Saes∣neg. Dunod had Cantref Dunodic. Edeyrn had Edeyrnion. Mael had Dynmael. Coel had Coleyon. Doguael had Dogueilyn. Ry∣vaon had Ryuonioc, now Denbighland. Eneon Yrch had Caereneon in Powys. Vssa had Maesvswalht now Oswestree. For surelie that they saie commonlie of Oswald king of Northumberland, to be slaine there, and of the Well that sproong where his arme was caried, is nothing so. For Beda and all other writers testifie that Peanda slew Oswald at Maserfelt, in the kingdome of Northumberland, and his bodie was buried in the abbey of Bardney, in the prouince of Lhyndesey. But to my former mat∣ter. These names giuen by the sonnes of Cunetha, remaine to this daie. After this the Irish Picts or Scots, which the Brytains
called YGwydhyl Phictiaid, which is to saie, The Irish Pictes, did ouerrunne the Ile of Môn, and were driuen thence by Caswalh∣on Lhawhîr, that is Caswalhon with the long hand, the sonne of Eneon Yrch ap Cunedha, who slew Serigi their king with his owne hands, at Lhany Gwydhyl which is the Irish church at Holihead. This Caswalhon was father to Maelgon Gwyneth, whom the La∣tines call Maglocunus, Prince and king of Brytaine. In his time was the famous clerke and great wiseman Tali∣essyn Ben Beirdh, that is to saie, the cheefest of the Beirdh or wise∣men: for this word Bardh in Caesars time, signified (as Lucan bea∣reth witnes) such as had knowledge of things to come, and so it signifieth at this daie. This Maelgon had a sonne called Run, in whose time the Saxons inuited Gurmond into Brytaine from Ireland,See after in the hist. pa. 6. who had come thither from Affrike, who with the Sax∣ons was the vtter destruction of the Brytaines, and slew all that professed Christ, and was the first that droue them ouer Seauerne. This Run was father to Beli, who was father to Iago, (for so the Brytaines call Iames) who was father to Caduan, and not Brochwel called Brecyual (as the English chronicle saith:) for this Brochwel Ysgithroc,See in the hist. pag. 22. that is; long toothed, was chosen leader of such as met with Adelred alias Ethelbertus Rex Cantiae, and o∣ther Angles and Saxons, whom Augustine had mooued to make warre against the christian Brytaines, and these put Brochwel twise to flight, not farre from Chester, and cruellie slew a 1000. preests and monkes of Bangor, with a great number of laie bretheren of the same house, which liued by the labour of their hands, and were come barefooted and woolward to craue mercie and peace at the Saxons hands. And heere you shall vnderstand that this was not Augustine bishop of Hippona the great clarke, but Augustine the moonke, called the apostle of England. Then this Brochwel retired ouer Dee, hard by Bangor, and de∣fended the Saxons the passage, till Caduan king of Northwales, Meredyth king of Southwales, and Bledrus or Bletius Prince of Cornewall, came to succour him, and gaue the Saxons a sore battell, and slew of them the number of a 1066. and put the
rest to flight. After the which battell, Caduan was chosen king of Brytaine, & was cheefe ruler within the Ile; after whom his son Cadwalhon, who was father to Cadwalader, the last of the Brytish blood, that bare the name of king of Brytaine, was king. See the histo∣rie folowing, pag. 24.The third time that Northwales came to a woman, was to Esylht the daughter of Conan Tindaythwy, the sonne of Edwal Ywrch, the sonne of Cadwalader. She was wife to Meruyn Vrych, and mother to Roderike the great, as shalbe hereafter declared. By this you may vnderstand, that Northwales hath beene a great while the cheefest seate of the last kings of Brytaine, bi∣cause it was and is the strongest countrie within this Ile, full of high mountaines, craggie rocks, great woods, and deepe val∣lies, strait and dangerous places, deepe and swift riuers, as Dyui which springeth in the hils of Merionyth, and runneth Northwest through Mowthwy, and by Machynlaeth, and so the sea at Aberdyui diuiding North and Southwales a sunder. Dee called in Welsh Dourdwy, springing also in the other side of the same hils, runneth East through Penlhyn and the lake Tegyd, downe to Corwen and Lhangolhen, betweene Chirkeland and Bromefield, where it boweth Northward toward Bangor, to the Holt, and to Chester, and thence Northwest to Flynt ca∣stell, and so to the sea. There is also Conwey, rising likewise in Merionyth shire, and diuiding Caernaruon from Denbigh shire, runneth vn∣der Snowdon Northeast, by the towne of Aberconwey to the sea. Also Clwyd, which rising in Denbigh land, runneth downe to Ruthyn, and plaine North, not farre from Denbigh to Saint Asaph, and so by Ruthlan and to the sea. There be manie o∣ther faire riuers, of which some runne to the sea, as Mawr at Traethmawr, and Auon y Saint at Caernaruon, and other that runne to Seauerne, as Murnwy in Powys, and to Murnwy Tanat; some other to Dee, as Ceirioc betwixt the lordships of Chirke and Whittington: Alyn through Yal and Moldes dale, and Hope dale, and so to Dee, a little aboue Chester. And this shall suf∣fice for the perfect description of that which in old time was
called Gwyneth and Powys, and at these daies the sixe shires of Northwales. Now remaineth the last kingdome of Wales, called Dine∣uowr,Dinevowr. which although it was the greatest, yet was it not the best, as Giraldus witnesseth, cheefelie bicause it was much molested with Flemings and Normans, and also that in diuers parts thereof, the lords would not obey their Prince, as in Gwent and in Morganwc, which was their owne confusion, as shall hereaf∣ter appeare.Caredigion. This was diuided into sixe parts, of the which Care∣digion was the first, and conteined foure Cantreds, and ten comots, as Cantref Penwedic had in it these comots, Geneurglyn, Perueth and Creuthyn. Cantref Canawl had these, Meuenyth, Anhunoc, and Pennarth. Cantref Castelh had these comots, Mabwynion and Caerwedros. Cantref Syrwen had these, Gwenionyth and Iscoed: and this part is at this daie called in English Caerdiganshire, and in Welsh Swydh Aberteiui. This is a champion countrie without much wood, and hath beene diuers times ouercome with Flemings and Normans, which builded manie castels in it, and at the last were beaten out of them all. It hath on the East Northwales, with the riuer Dyui and part of Powys, vpon the South Caer∣mardhynshire, vpon the West Penbroke shire, with the riuer Teiui, and vpon the North the Irish sea. In this part is the towne of Caerdigan vpon Teiui, not farre from the sea. The towne of Aberystwyth vpon the riuer Ystwyth, by the sea, and Lhanbadarn Vawr, which was a great sanctuarie, and a place of religious and learned men in times past. And in this shire were a great number of castels, as the castell of Stratmeyric, of Walter, of Lhanrysted, of Dynerth, of the sons of Wyneaon, of Aber Reidol, and a great number more, with the townes of Tregaron, Lhandhewibreui, as you shall vnderstand in the historie folow∣ing. The second part was called Dyuet,Dyuet. and at this daie Penbroke shire, and had in it eight Cantreds, and 23. comots, which were these. Cantref Emlyn that had these comots, Vwchkuch, Iskuch and Leuethyr.
Cantref Arberth had these, Penrhyn ar Elays, Esterolef, and Talacharn. Cantref Daugledhev had these, Amgoed, Pennant, and Euelfre. Cantref YCoed hath these, Lhanhayaden, and Castelh Gwys. Cantref Penvro hath these, Coedyr, haf. Maenor byrr, and Penvro. Cantref Ros hath these, Hulfforth, castelh Gwalchmai and Ygarn. Cantref Pubidioc hath these, Mynyw, Pencaer, and Pebidioc. Cantref Cemais hath these, Vwchneuer, Isneuer, and Trefdraeth. In this part are diuers townes and hauens at this daie, as Penbrooke Tenbie, in Welsh Dynbegh y pyscot, Herefordwest, in Welsh Hulfforth, with the faire hauen of Mylford, called in Welsh Aberdaugledheu. Saint Dauids or Menevia, called in Welsh Mynyw, the cheefest see in all Wales. Then Fiscard cal∣led Abergwayn, and Newport named Trefdraeth: these be alongst the sea coast, or not verie farre off. Besides these there be diuers castels, as Cilgerran, Arberth, Gwys, Lhanhayaden, Wal∣wyn, and diuers other. This part was wonne first by Mountgo∣merys Earles of Sherewsburie, and after giuen Marshalls, and so to Valence, and from thence were the Princes of Wales most troubled with the Normans and Flemings, who doo re∣maine and inhabit about Tenbie, Penbrooke, and in Ros to this daie, which can neither Welsh nor good English as yet. Dyuet (for so will I call it hereafter) hath on the West and North the Irish sea, vpon the South the Spanish sea, and vpon the East Caermardhynshire, & on the Northeast Caerdigan¦shire. The third part was Caermardynshire,Caermardhyn hauing foure Cantreds, and 15, comots, as Cantref Finioc with the comots of Harfryn, Deruedh, and Isgeneny. Cantref Eginoc with these, Gwyr, now in Glamorganshire, Cydweli, and Carnwilheon. Cantref Bachan with these, Malbaen, Caeo, and Maenor Deilo. Cantref Mawr with these, Cethineoc comot mab Elvyw, co∣mot mab Vchdryd and Wydigada. In this shire are the townes and castels of Caermardhyn, Dyneuowr, which was the Princes seat of the countrie, Newtowne, Lhandeilo, Lhanymdhyfry, Emlyn, Swansey, now in Glamorganshire, called in Welsh Abertawy
vpon the sea, the castell of the sonnes of Vchtryd, of Lhanstephan, and others. It hath vpon the West, Dyuet or Penbrooke shire, on the North Caerdiganshire, vpon the Southweast the sea, and vpon the Southeast Glamorgan, and vpon the East Brecknockshire. This is counted the strongest part of all Southwales, as that which is full of high mountaines, great woods, and faire riuers, speciallie Tywy. In this, and in the o∣ther two parts of Southwales, were the notablest acts that this historie intreateth of, atchiued and doone. The fourth called Morganwc,Morganwc. now Glamorganshire, contai∣ning foure Cantreds, with 15. comots. As Cantref Croneth, with these comots Rwngneth ac Avan, Tir yr Hwndrwd, and Maenor Glynogwr. Cantref Pennythen with these, Meyskyn, Glynrhodny, Maenor Ta∣lauan, and Maenor Ruthyn. Cantref Brenhinol, with these, Cibowr, Senghennyth, Vwchcaeth, and Iscaeth. Cantref Gwentlhwg, which is now in Monmouthshire, with these comots, Yrhardh Ganol, and Eithafdylygion. In this part are these townes and castels, Lhandaf the Bishops sea, Caerdyffe called Caerdhydh, Cowbridge called in Welsh Y bont vaen, which is as much to saie, as Stonebridge, Lantwyd, Caerffyli, and others, and hath diuers riuers which runne to the south sea, as Lay, Taf, Tawy, Neth, Avan, Ogwr, and Lhychwr: it hath on the south the sea of Seauerne, which diuideth it from Deuonshire and Cornewall; vpon the Weast & Northweast, Caermardhynshire; vpon the Northeast Brechnockshire, and vpon the East Monmouthshire.See the histo∣rie folowing, pag. 119. Of this you shall read verie little, for one Iestyn being cheefe of the countrie, and hauing warre with his neighbours, called one Robert Fitzhamon, with a great number of straungers to his succoures, which after they had atchiued, the enterprise liked so well the countrie, that they found occasion to fall out with Iestyn, and inhabited the countrie themselues and their heires to this daie. The fift part was called Gwent, and now in Monmouthshire, which had three Cantreds, and ten comots, as Cantref Gwent,
which had these comots, Y mynyth, Iscoed Lhefnydh, and Tref y grug. Cantref Iscoed these, Brynbuga, Vwchcoed, Y Teirtref, and Erging acewyas, now in Herefordshire. Cantref Coch was the seauenth Cantred of Morganwc, which is now in Glocestershire, and is called the Forrest of Deane. In this part is the ancient citie of Caerlhêon vpon Vsk, where was the Archbishops of Wales: here are also diuers townes and castels, as Chepstowe, Glyn Strigul, Ros, Tyn∣tern vpon the riuer Wy: there is also Newport, called Y castelh Newydh, Vysc called Brynbuga, Grosmont, Raglan, White ca∣stell, Abergeuenny, and manie other. This is a faire and a fer∣tile countrie, of which likewise the Gentlemen were neuer obedient to their Prince, which was the cause of their owne destruction. It hath on the West Glamorgan and Brech∣nockshires, vpon the North Herefordshire, vpon the East Glocestershire, with the riuer Wy, and vpon the South and Southeast Seauerne. Brecheinoc.Last of all commeth Brecheinoc, now Brechnockeshire, which hath three Cantreds, and eight comots. As Cantref Selef which hath these comots, Selef and Trahayern. Cantref Canol these, Talgarth Ystradyw and Brwynlhys or E∣glwys yail. Cantref Mawr these, Tir Raulff, Lhywel and Cerrig Howel. In this part is the towne of Brechnock vpon the meeting of Vsck and Hodni, and is called Aberhodni, and Hay called Y Gelhy, with Talgarth, Buelht, Lhangors: it hath West Caermardhynshire, with the riuer Tawy, vpon the North Radnorshire with Wy, vpon the East Herefordshire and Monmouth, vpon the South Glamorgan. This for the most part is full of mountaines, woods and riuers, especiallie Buelht. And the lords of this coun∣trie called Bruses with the Mortimers, most of all others lords Marchers, sometimes by might, but oftener by treason, haue molested and greeued the Princes of Wales, as you shall vn∣derstand by the historie folowing. This land came after the Bruses to the Bohunes Earles of Hereford, and so to the Staffords
dukes of Buckingham. These six shires being subiect to the territorie of Dynevowr with Radnorshire, which was belonging to Mathraual, are now commonlie called Southwales, which countrie is both great and large, with manie faire plaines and vallies for corne, high mountaines and rocks full of pasture for cattell; great and thicke woods, with forrests and parks for red deere and fallow; cleare and deepe riuers full of fish, of which Seauerne is the cheefest, which with Wy & Reidol spring out of a high moun∣taine called Pymlhymon, in the edge of Caerdiganshire, and are called commonlie the three sisters. Seauerne runneth full East through Cydewen by the poole and vnder the castell of Shraden to Shrewesburie, from whence it turneth Southward and run-to Bridgenorth, Bewdley, Worcester, Glocester, and so to the sea by Bristowe. The second sister is Gwy in English Wy, which tooke hir iourney Southeast by Rayader Gwy to Buelht, where Irwon meeteth hir, thence to Glasburie and so to Here∣ford and Monmouth, & to the sea of Seauerne at Chepstow: for so they call Môr Hafren the sea which seuereth Wales from Somersetshire, Deuonshire, and Cornwale. The third sister named Reidol, ranne Northward to the sea being not farre off, at Aberystwyth. There be other faire riuers as Vsk, which ri∣sing in a high mountaine called Y Mynydh duy in the South∣west part of Brechnockshire runneth to Brechnocke, and so through Monmouthshire to the towne of Vsk, Caerlhêon and Newport and so to the said South sea. Tywy also rising not farre from Wy runneth South to Lhanymdhyfri, and thence Southwest by Lhandeilo and Dinevowr to Abergwily and Ca∣ermardhyn, and so by Lhanstephan to the sea. Teivi likewise which riseth in the edge of Caermardhyn∣shire, & runneth Northwest by Emlyn Cilgerran,, Greeke. Fiber, Lat. Beauer, En. Auanc, Bryt. Giraldus in Itiner. Caerdigan, and so to the North sea. In Teiui aboue all the riuers in Wales, were in Giraldus time a great number of Castors, which may be englished Beuers, and are called in Welsh Auanc, which name onelie remaineth in Wales at this daie, but what it is very few can tell. It is a beast not much vnlike an Otter, but that it is
bigger, all hearie sauing the taile which is like a fish taile, as broad as a mans head. This beast vseth as well the water as the land, and hath verie sharpe teeth, and biteth cruellie, till he perceiue the bones cracke, his stones be of great efficacie in physicke. He that will learne what strong nests they make, which Giraldus calleth castels, which they build vpon the face of the water with great bowes, which they cut with their teeth and how some lie vpon their backs holding the wood with the forefeet, which the other draweth with a crosse sticke, the which he holdeth in his mouth to the water side, and other particu∣larities of their natures, let him read Giraldus in his Topogra∣phie of Wales. There be besides these a great number of ri∣uers, of which some run to the South, and some to the West and Northsea, as Tywy in Glamorganshire, Tafalso in Caermar∣dhynshire which runneth to Cledheu, two riuers either called Cledheu which doo giue Mylford the name of Aberdavgle∣dhev in Penbrookshire, Arth, Aeron, and Ystwyth in Caerdi∣gan. There be also diuers lordships which be added to other shires, and were taken heretofore for parts of Wales, and in most part of them at this daie the Welsh language is spoken, as Oswestre, Knocking, Whittington, Elsmer, Masbrocke, Chirburie, Caurs, Clynn, which are now in Shropshire, Ewy∣as Lacy, Ewyas Haroald, Clifford, Winsorton, Yardley, Hun∣tyngdon, Whytney, Loghardneys in Herefordshire. Also this countrie of Southwales as all the rest of Brytaine, was first in∣habited by the Brytains, which remaine there to this daie, sa∣uing that in diuers places, speciallie alongst the sea shore, they haue beene mingled with Saxons, Normans (which the Welsh historie calleth Frenchmen) and Flemings: so that the Princes of Wales, sith the conquest of the Normans, could neuer keepe quiet possession thereof, but what for strangers and what for disloyaltie of their owne people, vexation and war, were for the most part compelled to keepe themselues in Caermar∣dhynshire. This shall suffice for the description of the countrie, and therefore let vs now proceed to the Brytish copie.
Cadwalader. The beginning of the Princi∣palitie and gouernement of VVales. CADWALADER680 the last King of the Brytaines,Galfr. Mon. des∣cending from the noble race of the Troianes, by extreame plagues of death and famine, was driuen to forsake this his Realme and natiue Coun∣trie, and to soiourne with a greate number of his nobles and subiects with his cousen Alan, King of little Brytaine, which is called in the Brytish toong Lhydaw.
Little Brytaine is a countrie in France, called in Caesars time, Armorica, and after inhabited by Brytaines,Little Bry∣taine, or Brytaine Armorike. who a∣bout the yeare of Christ 384. vnder the conduct of Conan Lord of Meriadoc, now Denbighland, went out of this Ile with Maximus the tyrant, to his aid against the Emperour Gratianus,Galfr. Mon. and winning the said countrie of Armorica,I. Cast. (which Maximus gaue Conan & his people) slue and draue out all the old inhabitants thereof,Math. West. planting themselues in the same,Fabian. where they to this daie speake the Brytish toong, being the third remnant of the ancient Brytaines.Caxton. The names of the kings of little Brytaine. R. Caen. lib. 2. Per. 2.1 Conan. Meriadoc. 2 Gradlonus. 3 Salomon. 1. 4 Auldranus. 5 Budicus. 1. 6 Howelus Magnus. This Howel was with King Arthure in his warres. 7 Howelus. 2. 8 Alanus. 1. 9 Howelus. 3. 10 Gilquellus. 11 Salomon. 2. 12 Alanus. 2. Of whome, mention is made in this place, who descended of a daugh∣ter of Rune, the sonne of Mailgon Gwyneth, king of great Brytaine, which was married to the forenamed Howel the second, King of lit∣tle Brytaine. 13 Conobertus. 14 Budicus. 2. 15 Theodoricus. 16 Rualhonus. 17 Daniel Dremrost, id est, Ruhicunda facie. 18 Aregstanus. 19 Maconus. 20 Neomenius. 21 Haruspogius. 22 Salomon. 3. Who was slaine by his owne men, and then was that Kingdome turned to an Earle∣dom, wherof Alan was the first Earle, who valiantlie resisted the Normans, and vanquished them often∣times. Cadwalader being in Brytaine, was certified that a great number of strangers, as Saxons, Angles,
and Iuthes,Galfride. I. Castor. had arriued in Brytaine, and finding it desolate, and without inhabitants (sauing a few Saxons which had called them in, & certaine poore Brytaines that liued by rootes in rocks and woods) had ouerrunne a great part thereof, and diuiding it into diuers territories and kingdomes, inhabi∣ted that part which was then, and now at this daie is called Lhoyger in the Brytish or Welsh toong, and in English England, with all the cities, townes, castels, and villages, which the Brytaines had builded, ruled, and inhabited by the space of 1827. yeares, vnder diuers Kings and Princes of great renowme: wherevpon he purposed to re∣turne, and by strength of Brytish Knights to re∣couer his owne land againe. After he had prepared and made readie his na∣uie for the transporting of his owne men,A fable confirmed with blind prophesies. with such succours as he had found at Alans hand, an Angell appeared vnto him in a vision, and decla∣red that it was the will of God that he should not take his voyage towards Brytaine, but to Rome to Pope Sergius, where he should make an end of his life, and be afterwards numbred among the bles∣sed: for GOD had appointed that the Brytaines should haue no more the rule and gouernance of the whole Ile, vntill the prophesie of Merlin Am∣brose should be fulfilled. Which vision, after that Cadwalader had de∣clared to his friend Alan, he sent for all his bookes of prophesies, as the works of both Merdhines, or Merlines, to wit, Ambrose, and Syluester, surnamed Merdhin Wylht: and the words which the Eagle spake at the building of Caer Septon, now called Shaftsburie; and after long studie, found the time
to be now come whereof they had prophesied. Of this admonition giuen to Cadwalader there be diuers opinions. Some hold that this was signified to him in a dreame: of the which mind is Polydore Virgil, and diuers other. Some other doo thinke, that (if anie such vision were) it was some illusion of a wicked spirit, or a phantasticall conceite of Cadwalader himselfe, being a man of a milde and quiet nature, and wearied with troubles and miseries. Other reiect it altogether as a fable,Hol. pa. 183. not woorthie to be recorded in bookes: but howsoeuer it was, certeine it is, that after his going ouer to Alan, he neuer returned againe to Brytaine. Of these two Merlines thus writeth Girald. Camb. in suo Itinerario. Erant Merlini duo, vnus qui & Ambrosius dictus est, quia binomius fuerat, & sub rege Vortigerno prophe∣tauit, ab incubo genitus, & in vrbe ab ipso denominata Caervyrdhin. 1. vrbs Merlini, inuentus. Alter de Alba∣nia oriūdus, qui Calidonius dictus est, à Calidonia sylua, in qua prophetauit: & Syluester, quia cùm inter acies belli∣cas constitutus, horribile monstrum nimis in aera suspici∣endo prospiceret, dementire caepit: & ad syluam transfu∣giendo, syluestrem vs{que} ad obitum vitam perduxit. Hic autem Merlinus tempore Arthuri fuit, & longè pleniùs & apertiùs quàm alter prophetasse perhibetur. Haec Cam∣brensis. In English thus. There were two Merlines, the one named also Ambrose (for he had two names) begotten of a spirit, and found in the towne of Caermarthen, which tooke the name of him, and is therefore so called, who prophesied vnder King Vortigerne. The other borne in Albaine or Scotland, surnamed Calidonius of the forrest Calidon, wherein he prophesied, and was called also Syluestris, or of the wood, for that he be∣holding
some monstrous shape in the aire being in the bat∣tell fell mad, and flieng to the wood, liued there the rest of his life. This Merline was in the time of king Arthure, and prophesied fuller and plainer than the other. Concerning the words of the Eagle at the building of CaerGalf ride Septon in Mount Paladour in the time of Rudhudibras,Cast. in the yeare after the creation of the world, 3048. some thinke that an Eagle did then speake & prophesie. Other are of o∣pinion, that it was a Brytaine named Aquila that prophesi∣ed of these things, & of the recouerie of the whole Ile againe by the Brytaines, bringing with them the bones of Cadwa∣lader from Rome, as in the said prophesies is to be séene. By these toies and fables, men may learne what follie and vanitie the wit of man, being not staied and directed by the word of God, is prone and subiect vnto. And certaine it is, that the simple and ignorant haue bin in all ages de∣luded and brought to great errors and blindnes by the pra∣ctise of sathan, with these fained reuelations, false prophe∣sies, and superstitious dreames of hypocrites and lewd persons: whereof (as it is manifest in histories) much bloud∣shead & mischiefe hath ensued, and manie relieng vpon the same, haue bene vtterlie ouerthrowne and perished. Wise men therefore will neuer regard or estéeme such things. Alan therefore counselled Cadwalader to fulfill the will of God, who did so, and taking his iour∣nie to Rome, liued there eight yeares in the ser∣uice of God, and died in the yeare of Christ, 688. So that the Brytaines ruled this Ile, with the out Iles of Wight: Môn, in English called Anglesey: Manaw, in English Man: Orkney, and Ewyst, 1137. yeares before Christ, vntill the yeare of his incar∣nation, 688. And thus ended the rule of the Bry∣taines ouer the whole Ile. The Brytaines being sore troubled with the Scots and Picts and denied of aid at the hands of the Romanes, sent for the
Saxons to come to defend them against their enimies:450 who comming at the first as fréends to the Brytaines, liked the countrie so well, that they became their mortall enimies, and droue them out of the same. About the yeare of Christ, 590. Gurmundus an archpirate and capteine of the Norwegians,Galfrid. after that he had con∣quered Ireland,Cast. being called by the Saxons to their aid a∣gainst Careticus King of the Brytaines, ouercame the same Careticus in battell, and compelled him and his Brytaines to flée beyond the riuers of Seauerne and Dee to Cam∣bria, now called Wales, and to Cornewale, and some to Brytaine Armorike, where they remaine to this daie, and gaue Lhoegria, now England, to the Saxons. And albeit that Caduan, Cadwalhon, & Cadwalader were sithence in∣tituled Kings of all Brytaine, yet they could neuer recouer againe the quiet possession of the whole Iland afterwards. After the departure of Cadwalader out of the land, the Bry∣taines were gouerned within the countrie of Wales or Cambria by those men, whereof this historie following doth intreate, which were commonlie called Kings of such pro∣uinces and countries as they possessed, vntill the time of Owen Gwyneth,H. Lhoyd. who being in the daies of King Stephen, and Henrie the second, was the first that named himselfe Prince of Wales, and so the rest after him kept that title and stile: and yet neuertheles, they are sometimes called Princes before him, and Kings after him, as I haue obser∣ued by diuers charters and old records which I haue séene in the Tower of London, and else-where. Howbeit, this author calleth the chiefest of them Kings, till the time of the said Owen, and sithence, Princes.
IVOR. IVOR, the sonne of Alan. AFter that Cad∣walader had taken his iourneie to∣wards Rome,688 as before is declared, leauing his sonne named Edwal Ywrch, that is to saie, Edwal the Roo, & his people, with his cousen Alan,Galfrid. Io. Cast. which Alan taking courage to him, and not despairing of the con∣quest of Brytaine, manned his ships as well with a great number of his owne people, as with those which Cadwalader had brought with him, and ap∣pointed Iuor his sonne, and Ynyr his nephew to bee the leaders and chiefetaines of the same, who sailing ouer the narrowe seas, landed in the west parts of Brytaine, of whose arriuall, when
the Saxons were certified, they gathered a great armie, and gaue Iuor battell, where they were put to flight, and lost a great number of their people: and Iuor wan the countries of Cornewall, Deuon∣shire, and Somersetshire, and inhabited them with Brytaines. Wherevpon, Kentwinus King of Westsex ga∣thered a great number of Saxons and Angles together, and came against the Brytaines, which were readie to abide the battell: and as the ar∣mies were both in sight, they were not verie desi∣rous to fight, but fell to a composition and agree∣ment, that Iuor should take Ethelburga to wife, which was cousen to Kentwyn, and quietlie enioie all that he had, during the reigne of Iuor. H. Lhoyd.This Iuor is he whom the English Chronicles do call Iue or Iew King of West Saxons, that reig∣ned after Cedwall, and they saie that he was a Sa∣xon, for Kentwyn reigned but fiue yeares after I∣uors comming to England, and after him, his ne∣phew Cedwall, who after he had reigned ouer the West Saxons two yeares, went to Rome, and left his kingdome to Iue his cousen. This Iue or Iuor, (whome the Brytaines call the sonne of Alan, and the Saxons the sonne of Kenred) being King of the Saxons and Brytaines which inhabited the west partes of England, after manie victories atchie∣ued against the Kings of Kent, Southsex, and Mer∣tia, left his kingdome to Adelred, or as some call him Adelerdus his cousen, and tooke his iournie to Rome, where he made a godly end, about the yeare of our Lord, 720. Of Cadwalader, Cedwall, and Iuor, there be diuers opini∣ons. Some hold, that Cadwalader and Cedwall are the
selfesame man; and that the Saxon writers call him Ced∣wall whome the Brytaines do name Cadwalader: who (as the Brytish Chronicles do affirme) after his foresaid visi∣on, did resigne all his right, title, and interest in great Bry∣taine, to the said Alan king of Brytaine Armorike, and so de∣spairing that either he or his should euer haue anie thing to doo there, leauing his sonne Edwal Ywrch and his people to the ordering of his cousen Alan, went to Rome. But this opinion séemeth to varie from the assertion of Bernardus Guidonius. But certainelie in mine opinion it is more probable that this Cedwall was Edwal the sonne of Cad∣walader, for the name Edoal, which in the ancient Brytish copie is written Etoal, may well agrée with that which Guidonius writeth: and an easie matter it were especiallie in proper names for the C. capitall to créepe in, which is al∣most all one with that character which the Lawyers do call a paraph,¶ and is vsed commonlie in all old text hands at the beginning of periods or sections. Of this matter, thus writeth Guidonius, In suo pontificali Catalogo, sub Sergio primo. Per idem tempus Ethoal rex Brytonum,Rob. Caenal. cùm per decem an∣nos multis regulis obuiasset, & plura mala illis irrogas∣set, tandem ipsis in pacem deuenientibus, super occiden∣tales Saxones regnauit annis duobus. Videns autem Brytanniam multis miserijs contritam, regnum spreuit terrenum propter aeternum, & Romam veniens, paucis diebus transactis migrauit ad Christum. Et paulo post. Hic ex toto illud regnum antiquissimum Brytonum cor∣ruit, quod omnibus ferè regnis diuturnius fuit. A tem∣pore Heli Sacerdotis vsque ad hoc tempus, per annos 1825. Rob. Caenalis lib. 2. per. 2. That is. At the same time Ethoal King of the Brytaines, when he had by the space of ten yeares warred with diuers Kings, and often put them to the woorse, at length growing to an a∣gréement
with them, he reigned ouer the West Saxons two yeares, and then perceiuing Brytaine to be ouerworne with miseries, preferring the heauenlie kingdome before the earthlie, came to Rome, and within few daies died: and in him ended wholie that ancient kingdome of the Bry∣taines, which continued in a maner longer than anie other, from Helie the priest to this time, by the space of 1825. yeares. Further, it is not like that Iuor comming to the aid of Ed∣wal his cousen, would euer séeke the kingdome to him∣selfe and defeate the right heire: but verie well it may be (if this Iuor be that man whome the Saxon writers call Inas or Iue) after these Brytaines had arriued in the south part of this realme, and fought diuers times with the Saxon kings, and continued in Cornewall, Deuonshire, and So∣mersetshire by the space of two yeares, that they should af∣terwards méet Centwyn in the field, and so fall to an agrée∣ment, that Iuor taking Ethelburga the cousen of Centwyn to wife, should enioie the kingdome of the West Saxons af∣ter Centwyn, and that therevpon Edwal resigning his title and interest to Iuor, departed to Rome, and so died: as Guidonius saith. Beda.All this notwithstanding, it séemeth by the report of other writers of verie good account,H. Hunt. that Inas or Iue king of the West Saxons (whose lawes are extant in print, set out by maister) William Lamberd Esquier,Cast. a woorthie searcher and preseruer of the antiquities of this land) was not a Brytaine,W. Lamb. but a Saxon, who had warre against the Brytaines diuers times, and vanquished them. Matth. West. reporteth that Inas or Iue fought with Gerent King of the Brytaines. I haue an ancient booke written (as Iohn Leland thinketh) by Iohn Castoreus or Beuer, sometimes Monke of West∣minster, who liued in the time of Edward the third, which re∣porteth the historie of Inas in this sort. About the yeare of grace 689. Iuor and Henyr sonnes of the
daughter of Cadwalader sometime King of Brytaine,I. Cast. came ouer from Ireland, and taking to their aid the two Kings of Wales, destroied the prouince of Chester, and sent messengers to the Saxon Kings, commanding them to restore againe to the Brytaines the countrie of Lhoyger,The re∣quest of the Brytaines. out of the which they had wrongfullie expelled their pa∣rents and ancesters: adding, that if they would not so doo within fiftéene daies, they should not enioie it anie longer. The which message, Inas the noble King of Westsex, signifi∣ed vnto all the other Saxon Kings, who soone met together in Mount Campeden, to whom Sibertus King of Essex spake thus: Deare frends and companions,The orati∣on of Si∣bertus to the other Saxon Kings. let vs wey and consider not onlie what we are our selues, but also what our enimies are which come against vs: they are the verie Brytaines, whose fathers and ancesters, our fathers haue béereft of their inheritance, and expelled out of their owne land: and now they iustlie come against vs, to claime that which our ancesters by violence haue taken from theirs. Let vs therefore like other nations, choose vnto vs a head, to leade, direct, and gouerne vs, whome, as chiefe lord in time of peace and warre, we as members may obeie and sticke to, sith without a head, there is no victorie to be looked for. Haue not the Brytaines after two yeares of their dispersion set vpon the ancient Saxons (a more valiant people than we are) fiftéene times within seauen yeares? Did they not spoile their kingdomes, killed their people, and left such as remained aliue sore wounded and maimed at their de∣parture? The rest of the Saxon kings agréed vnto his mind, and with one assent chose that worthie Knight Inas King of Westsex to be their souereigne, who hauing taken their homage, ad∣uanced his standard, and marched forward against Iuor and Henyr, and set vpon them, so that they were faine to forsake their tents and flie into Wales. Thus Inas hauing obteined the victorie, with the other Saxon
Kings (sauing Sibertus, who by reason of his age and impo∣tencie had departed home before) returned to South hamp∣ton, where his cousen Adelard informed him that Iuor and Henyr had gathered and leauied a puissant armie afresh to set vpon the Saxons: where vpon, Inas foreslowed not the matter, but went against them, and laid séege to the Ca∣stell of Snowdon, compelling the Brytaines to flie to their ships▪ and while he was at Bangor with the other Sa∣xon Kings, and the nobles of Wales, he kept the feast of S. Dauid, and then dismissed the other Kings home to their countrie, vntill they should be called for againe: and de∣parted himselfe with Adelard his cousen, to Quéene E∣thelburga being then at Manchester, and continued there almost thrée moneths. In the meane while, Adelard minding to trauell about all Wales, met thrée spies, of whome (being by him taken and examined) he learned that Iuor and Henyr were returning againe with a huge armie, of such strength and force, as all the Saxon Kings were not able to resist. Then went he and shewed Inas what he had heard: wherefore Inas foorth∣with certified the other Saxon Kings of the same, comman∣ding them without delaie to be readie at Chester with horse and armour to go against their enimies, and to defend their countrie from violence. Who accordinglie met at Chester, and following the Kings standard, gaue the Bry∣taines battell, and put them to flight. Howbeit, the Bry∣taines eftsoones inuaded England, and made seauen roades in two yeares, destroieng townes and villages wheresoe∣uer they came, and neuer returning without great and rich booties. Inas after this victorie returned home, and reigned ouer the West Saxons 36. yeares, and then bequeathed his kingdome to his cousen Adelard. Thus much out of Ca∣storeus. This Iuor made the fratrie of Glastenburie, called in the Brytish toong Ynys Aualon. Ioseph of Aremathia being sent by Philip the Apostle, as
Gildas reporteth,Gildas. came into this Iland in the daies of Ar∣uiragus King of Brytaine,Polydore. about the yeare of Christ 53. and instructed the Brytaines in the doctrine of saluation, in the Ile of Aualon, where he builded a Church for the Christi∣ans: which Church, this Iuor (if it be he that gouerned the West Saxons) conuerted to an Abbey, and endowed the same with large possessions,Bale. which was the more famous, because the bodies of the said Ioseph of Aremathia and king Arthur were there buried. He gaue also great lands to the Church of Win∣chester. In the second yeare of Iuors reigne, Brythe a subiect to Egfride King of Northumberland, did ouerrun and destroie a great part of the countrie of Ireland. In the fourth yeare of his reigne there was a great earthquake in the Ile of Man: and the yeare following, it reigned bloud in Brytaine and in Ireland. The milke likewise and the butter turned to the colour of bloud.Math. West. The second yeare after that the Moone appeared all bloudie. After the departure of Iuor to Rome, Adelard or Adelred tooke the rule of the Saxons. And Rodericus, or Roderi Molwynoc the sonne of Edwal Ywrch, did take the rule of the Brytaines in the west part of England.
Roderike Molwynoc. Roderike or Rodri, the sonne of Edwal Ywrch. ROderike, ouer the Brytains began his reigne an. 720.720 against whom, A∣delred King of Westsex rai∣sed a great armie, and de∣stroieng the countrie of De∣uonshire, entred Cornewall, where Roderike with the Brytaines gaue him battell,This battel is called Gwaeth Heilyn. in the which, the Brytaines had the victorie. The yeare after, the Brytaines obteined two other victories against the Saxons: one in Northwales, at a place called Garth Mae∣lawc: and another in Southwales at Pencoet. At this time Belin the sonne of Elphin, a noble man amongst the Brytaines died. The yeare following, died Celredus King of Mertia,Ethelbald King of Mertia. and Ethelbaldus was made King after him, who being desirous to an∣nex
the fertile soile of the countrie lieng betweene Seuerne and Wye, to his Kingdome of Mertia, ga∣thered an armie, and entred into Wales, and de∣stroieng all before him, he came to the mountaine Carno, not farre from Abergeuenny, where a sore battell was fought betweene him and the Bry∣taines in the yeare 728. The yeare 733.733 died Beda priest, brought vp in the Abbey of Wyrnetham,Or Iatewe a great clearke that wrote manie works, among which, there is one intituled, The Ecclesiasticall historie of the English nation, dedicated vnto Cleolwolfe King of Nor∣thumberland. This yeare, Adelard King of West∣sex, and Ethelbald King of Mertia, ioined their po∣wers against the Brytaines, and gaue them bat∣tell, and after a long fight and great slaughter vp∣on either part, obteined a bloudie victorie. The yeare 735.735 Adelard King of Westsex died, and Cu∣dred reigned in his place. And the yeare following died Edwyn King of the Pictes. And in the yeare 746.Hol. pa. 193. there was a great battell fought at Here∣ford betwixt Cudred and Ethelbaldus, where after a long fight, Cudred had the victorie. Also the next yeare ensuing he gaue the Brytaines and ouerthrow and died shortlie after. H. Hunt. Hol. pag. 189. & 193. The Brytaines seeing they could little preuaile against the Saxons, ioined in league with Cuthred King of the West Saxons, who then was out with Ethelbald King of Mertia, wherevpon, the said Ethelbald entred into Wales with a strong armie, and the Brytaines met him, and were there discomfited. After that, Cuthred and Ethelbald met in the field, where Ethelbald was put to flight: but anon after they two were made friends, and ioined together their po∣wers against the Brytaines and ouercame them.
Math. West.After Cuthred, in the yeare 749. was Sigebert created King,749 who for his euill behauiour, was expelled by his nobles out of his Kingdome,Sigebert King of Westsex. Kenulph. and was miserablie slaine by a swineheard, after whome, Kenulph was made King of West Saxons, the yeare 750.750 About the same time died Theodor the sonne of Belin, a man of great estimation a∣mong the Brytaines. Not long after, there was a great battell fought betwixt the Brytaines and the Pictes at a place called Magedawc, where Dalargan King of the Pictes was slaine. Within a little af∣ter, Roderi or Roderike Molwynoc was driuen by the Saxons to forsake the west countrie, & to come to seeke his own inheritance in Northwales, where ruled at that time the children of Bletius or Blederi∣cus prince of Cornewal & Deuonshire (who was one of them that gaue Adelred and Ethelbert the ouer∣throw at Bangor vpon the riuer Dee) who enioied the gouernance of Northwales, euer sithence Cad∣uan was chosen King of Brytaine, vntill this time. By this historie it should séeme that the Brytaines continu∣ed their gouernement in the west part of Lhoegria vntill this time. But surelie, the consent (in a maner) of all wri∣ters is, that the Brytish kingdome ended in Cadwalader, after whom, the Brytaines had nothing to doo beyond Se∣uerne, being constrained to kéepe themselues within the countries of Cambria and Cornubia. It is also written by diuers, that Iuor and Ynyr at their first arriuing in Bry∣taine, were repelled by the Saxons, and driuen to Wales, where Iuor ruled as Prince manie yeares, whome this Roderi or Roderike the sonne of Edwal the sonne of Cad∣walader succéeded. When Roderike king of the Brytains had reigned about 30. yeares, he died, the yeare 750. leauing two sons after him, Conan Tindaythwy, & Howel.
Conan Tindaethwy. Conan Tindaethwy the sonne of Roderike. COnan Tindaeth∣wy did beginne his reigne ouer the Brytaines the yeere of our Lord 755.755 About two yeares after, there was a great battell fought at He∣reford betwixt the Brytaines and the Saxons, where Dy∣fnwal the sonne of Theodor was slaine. And this yeare died Athelbert King of Northumberland, and Os∣wold reigned in his stead. About this time, there was an order taken for the right keeping of the feast of Easter in Wales, by Elbodius a man both godlie and learned:I. Bale, Cen. 1. pag. 67. for the Brytaines euer before that time varied from the church of Rome, in ce∣lebrating the feast of Easter, and the variance
was this. The church of Rome by order of a gene∣rall Councell holden at Nice, had appointed, that euer the next sundaie after the 14. daie of the moone should be Easter daie, so that Easter should be euer either the 15.16.17.18.19.20. or 21. daie of the moone, and neuer the 14. daie it selfe, nor ne∣uer passe the 21. And the Brytaines did vse to keepe their Easter vpon the 14. daie, and so to the 20. as it fell, so that sometimes when it was Easter daie with the Brytaines, it was but Palmesunday with the Saxons: of which diuersitie grew a great con∣tention betwixt Colman and Hylda vpon the one part, defending the rites of the Brytaines; and Gil∣bert and Wilfride vpon the other part, about the yeare 660.660 wherein they seeme scant to call the Brytaines and Scots christians, bicause they keepe not Easter within the daies appointed. Leland. I. Bale, Cen. 1. pag. 81.I reade that this Hylda (which was the néece of Edwine King of Northumberland, brought vp by Pauline and Ae∣dan) in a publike synode did withstand Wilfride and o∣ther superstitious moonks in these toies and trifles, all ed∣ging for hir out of Polycrates the fact of Irenaeus, who withstood Victor Bishop of Rome in that behalfe, and the custome of the church of Asia obserued by S. Iohn the Euan∣gelist, Philip the Apostle, Polycarpus and Melito, and taught in this Iland of Brytaine by Ioseph of Arimathea, who first preached the Gospell in the same. 763In the yeare 763. was Offa made King of Mer∣cia, and Brichtrich King of West Saxons. In the which yeare died Fermael the sonne of Edwal: and the yeare following, Cemoyd the King of the Pictes. The yeare 776. the men of Southwales de∣stroied a great part of Mercia with fire and sword. And the summer following, all the Welshmen ga∣thered
themselues togither, and entred the King∣dome of Mercia, and did much hurt there. Io. Caest.The Saxons, which bordered vpon the countrie of Cambria or Wales, did dailie incroch so vpon the lands of the Welsh∣men beyond Seauerne, that they had gotten much of the same into their hands, especiallie toward the south part of the countrie. Wherefore the VVelshmen put themselues in armour, and set vpon the Saxons, and chased them ouer Seauerne againe, and then returned home with a great prey, and thus they did oftentimes, killing and destroieng all before them, and alwaies bringing home with them much cattell, which thing caused Offa to conclude a peace with the other Saxon Kings, and to bend his whole force a∣gainst the Welshmen. Wherevpon Offa King of Mercia caused a great ditch to be made,Io. Caestor: Matth. West. large and deepe from sea to sea, betwixt his kingdome and Wales, whereby hee might the better defend his countrie from the in∣cursions of the Welshmen. And this ditch is to be seene in manie places as yet, and is called Clawdh Offa,Clawdh Offa. which is, Offas ditch at this daie. King Offa, calling to his aid the other Saxon Kings, ga∣thered a huge armie, and came ouer Seauerne into Wales: vpon whose comming, the VVelshmen (being not able to encounter with such a multitude of armed souldiers) left the plaine and euen countrie by Seauerne side, and the land betwéene it and the riuer VVye, and withdrew themselues to the mountaines and rockes, where they might be most in safetie, vntill the enimies were auoided out of the coun∣trie; yet neuerthelesse, continuallie they made diuers in∣uasions by stealth into the land of Mercia, & alwaies retur∣ned with aduantage, so that the Saxons by keeping them∣selues encamped could doo no good, for they durst not pursue the VVelshmen to the mountaines and woods, for feare of intrapping, by such as kept the streights and passages.
When Offa perceiued that by open warre he could do no good, he expelled all the Welshmen out of the plaine and euen countrie betwéene Seauerne and Wye, and planted Sa∣xons in the same: and annexing it to his owne kingdome of Mercia, caused this great & famous ditch (whereof men∣tion is in this place) to be made, to saue his people from the inuasions of the Welshmen. Whervpon the seate of the Kings of Powys was translated from Pengwern, now cal∣led Salop, to Mathrual, where it continued long after. 795In the yeare 795. the Danes came first into England,Matt. West. pag. 289. and sixe yeares after they came againe, & destroied a great part of Lindsey and Northum∣berland, and ouerran the most part of Ireland, and destroied Rechreyn. Also about the same time there was a battell fought at Ruthlan, betweene the Saxons and the Welshmen, where Caradoc King of Northwales was slaine. This Caradoc was the son of Gwyn, the sonne of Colhoyn, the sonne of Ednowen, the sonne of Blethyn, the sonne of Blecius or Bledricus prince of Cornewall and Deuonshire. Also this yeare died Offa King of Mercia, and Egfert his sonne reigned in his stead. In the yeare of our Lord 800. Egbertus was made King of Westsex: and Kenulphus the yeare following treated King of Mercia. Arthen also the sonne of Sitsylht, the sonne of Clydawc King of Ca∣erdigan, died the same yeare. Likewise Run King of Dyuet, and Cadelh King of Powys died in the yeare 808.808 This was a troublesome time, and as yet no staied go∣uernement established in Wales, and therefore such as were cheefe lords in anie countrie, are heere called kings. Io. Bale.The next yeare after died Elbodius Archbishop
of Northwales, before whose death, the sunne was sore eclipsed. In the yeare 810.810 was the moone e∣clipsed vpon Christmas daie. The same yeare, S. Dauids was burnt by the West Saxons. There was also a generall morreine and death of cattell throughout all Wales. The next yeare insuing, Owen the sonne of Meredyth, the sonne of Terudos died: and the Castell of Degaunwy was destroied with thunder. Conan prince of Wales, and his brother Howel could not agree, insomuch that they tried the matter by battell, wherein Howel had the victorie. This Howel the brother of Conan, King or Prince of Northwales, did claime the Ile of Môn or Anglesey for part of his fathers inheritance, which Conan refused to giue him, and therevpon they fell at variance, and consequent∣lie to make warre the one against the other, which is vnna∣turall amongst brethren. Héere I thinke it fit to saie somewhat of the custome and te∣nure of Wales, whereof this mischiefe grew, that is, the di∣uision of the fathers inheritance amongst all the sonnes, commonlie called Gauel kinde. Gauel is a Brytishe tearme, signifieng a hold, because euerie one of the sonnes did hold some portion of his fathers lands, as his lawfull sonne and successour. This was the cause not onlie of the ouerthrow of all the ancient nobilitie of VVales (for by that meanes, the inheritance being continuallie diuided and subdiuided amongst the children, and the childrens children, &c. was at length brought to nothing) but also of much bloudshead and vnnaturall strife and contention a∣mongst brethren, as we haue héere an example, and manie other in this historie. This kind of partition is verie good to plant and settle anie nation in a large countrie not in∣habited, but in a populous countrie alreadie furnished with inhabitants, it is the verie decaie of great families, and (as I said before) the cause of strife and debate.
And the next yeare there was much hurt done by thunder, and in diuers places manie houses burnt to the earth. The same yeare died Gruffyth the sonne of Run, and Griffri the sonne of Kyngen was slaine by the treason of Elice his brother. Howel gaue his brother Conan another battell, and slew a great number of his people, wherevp∣pon, Conan leauied an armie, in the yeare 817. & chased his brother Howel out of the Ile of Môn or Anglesey, compelling him to flie into Man. And a little after died Conan, chiefe King of the Bry∣taines or Welshmen, leauing behind him a daugh∣ter called Esylht, which was married to a noble man, called Mervyn Vrych, the sonne of Gwyriad, or Vriet, the son of Elidur, & so forth in the right line to Belinus the brother of Brennus King of the Bry∣taines, and his mother was Nest, the daughter of Cadelh King of Powys, the sonne of Brochwel Ysci∣throc, (that fought with the Saxons at Bangor,) who was prince of Powys. Galfride. I. Cast. Matth. West.This Brochwel is called of the Latine writers Breciuallus and Brochmaelus, of whom I find thus written in Historia diuae Monacellae. Fuit olim in Powysia quidam princeps illustrissimus no∣mine Brochwel Yscithroc, Consul Legecestriae, qui in vrbe tunc temporis, Pengwern Powys, nunc verò Salo∣pia dicta est, habitabat: cuius domicilium seu habitacu∣lum ibi steterat, vbi collegiū diui Ceddae nunc situm est. That is. There was sometimes in Powys a noble Prince, named Brochwel Yscithroc, Consul or Earle of Chester, who dwelt in a towne then called Pengwerne Powys, and now Salope, whose dwelling house was in the verie same place
where the College of Saint Chad now standeth. This man with Caduan king of Brytaine,Galfrid. Cast. Morgan king of De∣metia, and Bledericus king of Cornewal, gaue an ouer∣throw to Ethelfred king of Northumberland, vpon the riuer of Dee, Anno gratiae 617. of whome, the ance∣stors of diuers in VVales liuing at this daie, are knowne (by ancient bookes and records) to haue des∣cended.
Mervyn Vrych, and Esylht. Mervyn Vrych, & Esylht the daughter of Conan. Matth West. Sim. Dunel. H. Hunt.THE first yeare of the reigne of Mervyn Vrych, and Esylht his wife, Eg∣bert King of Westsex entred into VVales with a great armie, and destroied the whole countrie vnto Snowden hilles, and seised to his hands the countrie of Rhyvonioc in Denbigh∣land. About this time, there was a sore battell
fought in Anglesey, called the battell of Lhanuaes. In the yeare of Christ 819.819 Kenulph King of Mertia destroied West Wales, and the summer fol∣lowing, he ouerranne Powys land, and did much hurt, and soone after died, and Kenelme reigned in his place. About the same time also Howel King of Man died. The yeare 825. Ceolwulph was made King of Mertia, and reigned two yeares. After whome, Bernulph was created king, who was o∣uerthrowne at Elledowne by Egbert king of the West Saxons, who also brought to his subiection the countries of Kent and West Angles. Not long after, about the yeare 828.828 Bernulph was slaine by the East Angles. After that, there was a great battell fought at a place called Gauelford, betwixt the Brytaines, and the West Saxons of Deuonshire, and manie thousands cruellie slaine vpon either side, and the victorie vncertaine. The yeare 829.829 Egbert ouerthrew Wyhtlafe King of Mertia, and made him subiect to his Kingdome. He also passed Humber,The King∣dome of England began. and wan the land, and so was the first Monarch of the Saxons, and brought the seauen kingdomes into one, and changed the name of Brytaine into England, and called the people Eng∣lishmen, and the language English: for the people that came into this Ile from Germanie, were Sa∣xons, Angles, and Iuthes. And of the Saxons came the people of Eastsex, Southsex, Middlesex, and West Saxons. Of the Angles came the East Angles, middle Angles or Mertians, and all on the North side of Humber. And of the Iuthes came the inhabi∣tants of Kent, and the Ile of Wight. And the sea∣uen Kingdomes were these:
The seauen Saxon kingdomes.1 The first Kent. 2 The second Southsex, containing Sussex and Southerie. 3 The third East Angles, containing Northfolke, Southfolke, and Cambridgeshire. 4 The fourth Westsex, containing Barkeshire, Deuonshire, Somersetshire, and Cornewall. 5 The fift Mertia, containing Glocestershire, He∣refordshire, Worcestershire, Shropshire, Stafford∣shire, Chesshire, Warwikeshire, Leycestershire, Dar∣bishire, Notinghamshire, Lincolneshire, Northamp∣tonshire, Oxfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Bedford∣shire, and halfe Hertfordshire. 6 The sixt was East Saxon, containing Essex, Middlesex, and the other halfe of Hertfordshire. 7 The seauenth Kingdome was all the lands vpon the North side of Humber, which was also diuided into two kingdomes, Deyra and Bernicia. Deyra was the land betwixt Humber and Tine, Bernicia from Tine, to the Scottish sea. All these were brought vnder subiection by Eg∣bert king of West Saxons, and this realme called England the yeare after the comming of Brutus to this Ile 1968. after the comming of Hen∣gist 383. and after the departure of Cadwalader 149. yeares. Which name, although it hath con∣tinued to this daie for the space of 755. yeares, yet was it not verie luckie or fortunate to the Sa∣xons inhabitours of this realme. For euen vpon this change of their name, and vnition of the kingdome, followed the terrible and cruell inua∣sion of the Danes: and after that, the conquest of the Normanes, of whome, the Kings of this time haue descended. But to returne to my matter a∣gaine.
The yeare 833.833 the Danes in great compa∣nies landed in diuers places of this realme, and fought diuers battels with Egbert, wherin some∣times they, and sometimes he had the victorie. Af∣terward in the yeare 836. they landed in West Wales, and so passed through Wales to England with manie of the Brytaines, which ioined with them against Egbert, but they were all ouer∣throwne by Egbert at Hengestdowne, who died the yeare following. Raunlph. Cest.This Egbert king of England wan the citie of Caer lhêon, ar Dhowrdwy, or Chester (which was the chiefe citie of Ve∣nedotia,) out of the hands of the Brytaines, in whose possessi∣on it remained vntill that time. He caused also (as some writers doo affirme) the brasen image of Cadwalhon king of Brytaine,Matth. West. Chron. Wig. to be throwne downe & defaced, commanding that no man vpon paine of death, should set vp anie such a∣gaine, forbidding this land to be called Brytain anie more, but England, and the people Englishmen. He also made proclamation (by the setting on of Redburga his wife, who bearing malice towards the Brytaines could not a∣bide any of that nation) that no Brytaine should remaine within the confines of England,Io. Castor. commanding that al & sin∣gular which were of the Brytish bloud, should within sixe moneths auoide with their wiues and children out of his kingdome, vpon paine of losing their heads. After the death of Egbert, his sonne Ethelwulph reigned in his place, who gaue his daughter in mariage to Berthred his tributarie, king of Mer∣tia. He had great warres and much adoo with the Danes, which destroied with fire and sword the sea coast of England. The yeare 841.841 died Idwalhon a noble man of Wales. And two yeares after was the battell of Kettell betwixt Burchred king of Mertia, and the Brytaines: wherein, as some doo
write, Mervyn Vrych king of the Brytaines was slaine, leauing behind him a sonne called Ro∣dri Mawr, that is to saie, Roderike the Great. Roderike the Great. Roderike the Great, sonne to Mer∣vyn and Esylht. ROderike the Great began his reigne o∣uer Wales, the yeare after Christ his incarnation 843. This prince diuided all Wales to the three territories, of Aberffraw, Dineuowr, and Mathraual. He had great warre with Bur∣chred King of Mertia,
which by the aide of Ethelwulph, entered North∣wales with a great power, and destroied Anglesey, and fought with the Welshmen diuers times, and slue Meyric a great prince among them. The yeare 846.846 the Danes did ouerrunne a great part of England,Matt. West. I. Castor. and fought with Athelstan king of Kent, brother to Ethelwulph, and remai∣ned that winter, and wintered in England. This yeare also was Ithel king of Gwent or Wentland slaine in fight by the men of Brechnock. This yeare 854.854 Kongen king of Powys died at Rome, be∣ing slaine of choaked (as some saie) by his owne men. And two yeares after died Cemoyth king of the Picts, & Ionathan Lord of Abergeley. About the yeare 856.856 Ethelwulph tooke his iourneie to Rome, and made his kingdome tributarie to the Pope, and paid the Peter pence to the church of Rome. The Old Saxons doo bring the genelogie of this Ethelwulph to Adam,Matt. West. after this maner. Ethel∣wulph the sonne of Egbert, the sonne of Alcmund, the sonne of Eaffa, the sonne of Eoppa, the sonne of Ingils, the brother of Inas, the sonne of Kenred, the sonne of Coelwalde, the sonne of Cudwine, the sonne of Ceawlin, the sonne of Kenrick, the sonne of Cerdicke, which was the first king of the West Saxons, the sonne of Esly, the sonne of Gewise, of whom the people were called Gwysses, the daugh∣ter of Gewyn, the sonne of Wingy, the sonne of Freawyn, the sonne of Fridagare, the sonne of Bren∣dy, the sonne of Beldegy, the sonne of VVoden, of whose issue came the kings of manie nations, the sonne of Frethewold, the sonne of Freolaffe,, the sonne of Frethewolfe, the sonne of Finny, the sonne of Godulph, the sonne of De quo Se∣dulius in. Paschali carmin. Geta, the sonne of Teath∣wy,
the sonne of Beane, the sonne of Sceldy, the sonne of Seafe, which reigned in a countrie called Anglia, lieng betwixt the Gothes and the Saxons, from whence the Angles came first to Brytaine, he was the sonne of Heremod, the sonne of Itermod, the sonne of Hadey, the sonne of VVale, the sonne of Bedwy, the sonne of Sem, the sonne of Noe, and so foorth to Adam. Matth. West. pag. 275.There is another petigrée laid downe by the same author, of Offa king of Mercia, ascending euen to Adam, not in all points agréeing with this; so that the author writing the latter, séemeth oftentimes to forget what he had written in the former. The like also I find in Iohn Castoreus,I. Castor. at the end of the historie of Edward the confessor. And an other in Matth. Paris,Matt. Paris. pag. 126. in the historie of King Henry .2. Anno. 1155. And these foure genelogies séeme to ascend by the same men, although the names doo sometimes varie. This genelogie haue I set here, that the reader may vnderstand thereby, that not onelie the Bry∣taines, or VVelshmen, but all other nations haue beene euer desirous to set foorth their antiquitie and progenie, which was not verie hard to such nations as were not mingled with other, and that had euer among them such as did onlie from time to time professe that art, and customablie did write the progenie, wiues, and children, of all such as were of any estimation in the countrie. In the which two things, VVales had euer passed all o∣ther countries, as they which haue not mingled with anie other nations, vntill of late years with Englishmen, and also haue euer had such as did professe the art of genelogie,Beirdh. who although they haue sometimes erred, or rather haue willinglie flattered in learuing false genelogies, yet surelie
are able by their bookes to bring anie Gentle∣mans genelogie of that countrie, to such as haue liued nine hundred yeares passed, and but few fur∣ther, except such as descended of the kings of Bry∣taine. The Italians, before they mingled with the Van∣dales, Gothes and Lumbards, brought their genelo∣gies to Aeneas. The Spaniards to Hesperus, before the Gothes and Mores ouerranne the land. The Saxons to VVoden, before they mingled with the Danes and Normans. Yea the Frenchmen & Turkes reioise at this daie, to bring themselues to the Thracians; and the Germanes to the children of Gwyston: and it is possible they may so doo, bicause they haue not mingled with anie other, and haue not beene ouerrun with anie other nation.H. Lhoyd. Ther∣fore let such disdainefull heads, as scant knowe their owne Grandfathers, leaue their scoffing and tawnting of VVelshmen, for that thing that all other nations in the world doo glorie in; and let them read the ancient writer Berosus, to whome the wise Graecians, for the knowledge they learned at his hands, made an image of copper, and set it vp in Athens in memorie of him, and there they shall find the beginning of the most part of all the nations in the world; and if they beleeue him, let them not denie ours; and if they credit him not, let them beleeue no more but what they see with their eies, or that pleaseth their fond fantasies. But to the matter. This yeare the Danes chased Burchred out of his kingdome,Io. Castor. who also went to Rome, and there died. The yeare 857. died Ethelwulph,857 and left behind him his sonnes, Athelbald King of
Westsex, and Athelbright king of Kent, and of the East Saxons. Iohn. Cast. Sim. Dunel. Matt. Park. A Kings sonne and heire Bi∣shop. 10. Cast.Of this Ethelwulph it is written, that he was so well lear∣ned and so deuout, that the clarkes of the church of Win∣chester did choose him in his youth, to be their Bishop, which function he tooke vpon him, & was Bishop of Winchester, for seauen yeares before he was king. It is reported also that he conquered the kingdom of Demetia or Southwales, and gaue the same with the kingdome of Southsex, to Al∣fred his sonne; and that the said Alfred should bring a thou∣sand soldiers out of Wales, to the aid of his brother Ethel∣bert to Winchester, and there put the Danes to flight, and destroie a great number of them. Athelbald the sonne of Ethelwulph, after the death of his father, kept his mother in lawe for his concubine, and afterward married hir in the citie of Chester. After Athelbald had reigned eight yeares, he di∣ed, and Athelbright his brother tooke the rule of his kingdome. And that yeare the Danes spoiled Winchester,Fabian. and after a great fight were driuen out of the land: but returning to Tenet, they re∣mained there for that winter, and spoiled by in∣cursions all the sea shore. This yeare also was the battell of Gweythen, betwixt the Brytaines and the Englishmen, and a great number slaine on either side. The yeare 865. died Conan Nant Niuer,865 a wor∣thy captaine,H. Hunt. and a noble warrior. And the yeare following, came Hungare and Hubba, with a great armie of Danes into England. In the yeare 867. died Athelbright,867 and Ethelred his brother reigned in his stead. The Danes the next yeare insuing, spoiled Yorke,H. Hunt. Fabian. Ran. Cest. and slew the two Kings of Nor∣thumberland, Osbright and Elba, and afterward they ouerran all the countrie vnto Notingham,
spoiling and destroieng all before them, and then returned to Yorke, and from thence to East Angle, where they slue Edmund the King. The sixt yeare of Ethelred came another host of Danes through VVestsex, and to Reding, with Basrecke and Alding, and fought fiue battels with Ethelred and Alfred his brother, in two of the which the Danes were ouercome at Henglefild & Estondowne, and in the three other the Englishmen were ouerthrowne at Reding, Basing, & Mereton. The yeare 871. King Ethelred died,871 & Alfred his brother reigned in his stead. Alfred assoone as he had taken the kingdome vpon him, considering with himselfe, what a heauie burthen he did sustaine, inquired after the wisest and the best learned men that he could heare of, that he might be directed by them, whome he worthilie intertained, vsing their aduise as well in the publike gouernment of the common welth, as in his priuate studies and conference of learning. He sent for two famous learned men out of Wales;Bale. Cent. 2. Cap. 24. the one named Iohn De Erigena sirnamed also Scotus, borne at Meneuia or S. Dauids, brought vp in that colledge, who hauing for lear∣ning sake trauelled to Athens, and bestowed there manie yéeres in the studie of the Gréeke, Hebrue, and Chaldie toongs, and the secret mysteries of Philosophie, came from thence to France, where he was well accepted with Caro∣lus Calnus and Ludouicus Balbus,1. Castor. and there translated the works of Dionysius Areopagita, De coelesti hierarchia, out of the Gréeke into the Latine toong; and at the last being re∣turned home to Wales, was sent for by this King Alfred, who then founded and erected the vniuersitie of Oxford, & was the first that professed learning,Polydor, lit. and read publikelie in the said Uniuersitie. The other was Asserius or Asser,Hol. pa 218. of whom I shall haue occasion to speake hereafter. He would not suffer anie to beare office in his court, but such as were
learned, exhorting all men generallie to embrace and ho∣nour learning and learned men. Alfred in the first yeare of his reigne, fought two battels with the Danes vpon the south side of Thames, and slue of them one King, and nine Earles. About this yeare, died Gwgan King of Caerdigan. This was that noble Gwgan ap Mevric ap Dunwal ap Ar∣then ap Sitsylht, King or prince of Caerdigan, who as some Brytish bookes haue, was at this time drowned by misfor∣tune. At this time the Danes destroied the towne of Alclyde, and wan London and Reding, and all the inland and kingdome of Mercia. And one King or leader of them tooke the countrie of Northumber∣land, and he and his people did much trouble the Pictes. Likewise the yeare following, three Kings of the Danes went from Cambridge to VVarham in Dorcetshire, and Alfred would haue giuen them battell, but the Danes desired peace, and foresware England, which they neuer did before, and the same night their horsemen tooke their iournie toward Excester, and their footemen which went to the sea were all drowned at Sandwitch. When the Danes had thus abiured England, they bent their force a∣gainst VVales, and entred the Ile of môn with a great armie, in the yeare of Christ 873.873 where Ro∣derike gaue them two battels, one at a place cal∣led Bangole,Matt. West. and another at a place called Menegid in Anglesey. S Dunelm. Matt. West.I find also that about this time Halden and Hungare, two Captaines of the Danes, arriued in Southwales, and ouer∣ran the whole countrie, destroieng all before them with fire and sword, neither sparing churches nor religious houses, but within a while after, they receiued their deserued re∣ward
at the hands of the West Saxons, who méeting with them on the coast of Deuonshire, slew both Halden and Hungare, with 1200. of their people. At this time, Eneon Bishop of Meneuia or S. Da∣uids died, and Hubert was installed in his place. And within two yeares after, Dungarth king of Cornewall was drowned by a mischance. In the yeare 876.876 the Englishmen entred into Anglesey, and fought with the VVelshmen a sore battell, who, in the yeare following, slue Roderike king or prince of VVales, and Gwyriad his brother, or as some saie, his son. This Roderike had by his wife Enghârad the daughter of Meyric the son of Dyfn∣wal or Dunwal the son of Arthen ap Sitsylht, diuers sonnes, as Anarawd his eldest sonne, to whome he gaue Aberfraw with Northwales; Cadelh the se∣cond son, who had Dinevwr with Southwales, and also tooke Mathraual and Powys land by force from his brethren, after the death of Mervyn the third sonne, to whome his father had giuen the same. Roderike the Great is counted of all writers to be the vn∣doubted owner and possessor of all Wales. Venedotia or Northwales descended vnto him from his mother Esylht, the daughter and sole heire of Conan Tindaethwy, as is euident by this historie. Demetia or Southwales (as some doo affirme) came to him by his wife, the daughter & heire of Meyricap Dyfnwal ap Arthen ap Sitsylht king of Caer∣digan: hir brethren (who are thought to be illegitimate) hol∣ding of hir husband. Powys he had by Nest, the sister and heire of Congen ap Cadelh King of Powys, which was his fathers mother. These thrée dominions he appointed vn∣der their meares and bounds, with a princelie house in eue∣rie of them, which he named Y tair Talaeth, and left the same vnto thrée of his sonnes, Anarawd, Cadelh, and Mer∣vyn, which were called Y tri twysoc Talaethioc, that is, The
thrée crowned princes, because euerie of them did weare vpon his bonet or helmet a coronet of gold, being a broade lace or headband indented vpward, set and wrought with pretious stones, which in the Brytish or Welsh speach is called Talaeth: and so to this daie nurses doo name that broade headband, wherewith a childs head is bound vpper∣most vpon some other linen cloathes, Talaeth. Aberffraw was the chiefe house of the prince of Gwyneth, whose domi∣nion was therfore called Talaeth Aberffraw: Dinevowr the princelie house of Dehevbarth, whereof that part is named Talaeth Dinevowr: and in like maner Talaeth Mathraval is so called, of the princelie seate of Powys, called Ma∣thraval. Girald. Cam.Giraldus Cambrensis in his booke intituled Descriptio Cambriae, is of opinion, that Mervyn was the eldest sonne of Roderike, to whome Venedotia was giuen, and was the father of Anandhrec, which was the father of Meyric, which was the father of Edwal, which was the father of Iago, &c: and that Anarawd had Powys, and died without issue. But the common opinion of all other writers is to the contra∣rie, agréeable to that which this Author affirmeth. Roderike had also Roderike, Meyric, Edwal or Tudwal, Gwyriad and Gathelic, of whome you shall heare in the historie following.
ANARAWD. Anarawd the sonne of Roderike. ANarawd the son of Roderike beganne his regiment ouer VVales the yeare of Christ 877.877 In whose time, Rollo with his Normans came to France, and wan the coun∣trie of Neustria, which of the Normans is called to this daie Normandie. At that time the Danes which had fled to Exce∣ster,Matt. West. hauing broken the truce whervnto they were sworne, were so pursued by Alfred, that they were glad to giue him pledges for performance of the articles agreed vpon betweene him and them; but the yeare following, they wan all the land vpon the Northside of Thames, and held it themselues, and after they passed the riuer to Chipenhame in
VVestsex, and the Englishmen fled before them, yet Alfred fought with a number of them, and slew their prince, and wan their standard, which they called Rauen.Matth. West. Io. Cast. Polychroni. Wil. Malm. After that, he ouerthrew them at E∣dendowne, where, after they had giuen him pled∣ges, their Captaine Godrun, alias Gurmond recei∣ued the christian faith, and then reigned in East Angle. The yeare 878.878 died Aedan the sonne of Melht, a noble man of VVales: and the second yeare following, there was a great battell fought by the Danes, and the Englishmen of Mercia, against the Welshmen vpon the riuer Conwy, where the Welshmen had the victorie, and this was called the reuenge of the death of Roderike.Dial Rodri. After that, about the yeare 882.882 the Danes that laie at Ful∣lenham by London passed the sea to France by the riuer Seyn,Si. Dunelm. H. Hunt. Matth. West. and spoiled the countrie about Paris, and ouerthrew the Frenchmen in battell, but af∣terward they were all slaine and drowned by the Brytaines of Armorica. Then Alfred gote London, and chased awaie the Danes that beseeged Roche∣ster, but at the same time he lost a great nauie of ships, which the Danes tooke, and drowned at Stur∣mutham. In the yeare 889.889 Submon Cubin the greatest clearke in Scotland died. And the yeare following the blacke nation (for so the Brytish booke calleth the Danes and Normanes) came to Northwales, and did much hurt. Heere I thinke it necessarie to let the reader vnderstand, from whence such a woonderfull number of Danes and Normanes came. The kingdome of Denmarke had vnder it not onelie Denmarke, which is a small countrie separated with the sea into Iles and halfe Iles, as that which ioineth to Saxonie and
Holesake, and runneth like an arme of the sea cal∣led Chersonesus Cymbrica, and the Ile of Sealand and Finnen, with a peece of the maine land ioining to Swethland; but also Norway, and the great coun∣trie of Suetia or Swethen land, which reacheth to Moscouia, and welnigh to the North pole. This countrie being scant knowne to the world at that time,Io. Cast. powred out of it selfe (as the Troian horse) di∣uers people, that at diuers times ouerran and spoiled all Europe, with a great part of Africa, like a sudden tempest or hideous storme, filling euerie countrie wherevnto they came. From thence came the Goths, which ouerran Germanie, France, Spaine, Afrike, and Italie. From thence came the Vandals of no lesse worthines. From thence came the Lombards, the Alans, the Switzers, the Burgun∣dians, the Danes, and the Normans, which came of Norway and the seashore of Eastland by Prussia, from whence the Vandales came. He that is desi∣rous to vnderstand the maruellous historie of Swethinland, let him reade the works of Olaus Go∣thus, and Ioannes Magnus. And from these coun∣tries (as I declared before) came the people which were called the Danes, and not onlie from Denmarke. The yeare 890.890 there came from these countries 250. sailes, and landed at Lymene in Kent,Matth. West. li. 1. pa. 345. hard by the great wood called Andreslege, and builded a Castell at Auldre or Apledor, as some bookes haue. The same time also came Hasting with 80. sailes to Thames mouth, and builded a Castell at Mydlton, and made an oth to Alfred, that he neuer would annoie him nor his subiects: but shortlie after he builded a Castell at Beamfleete, and inuaded the countrie about him. Wherefore
Alfred ouerthrew his Castell, and tooke his wife, and two sonnes, which he christened, and sent to their father againe. Matth. West. li. 1. pa. 342.Other kingdomes and countries of Europe were disquie∣ted with this persecution of the Danes as well as England. For of this Hasting it is written, that laieng séege to the citie of Limogis in France, and despairing of the spéedie winning of the same, hée deuised this traine to get it. He fained himselfe to be dangerouslie sicke, and sent to the Bishop, and the Consul of the same citie, desiring them most instantlie, that he might be admitted to the christian faith, and be baptised before his departure out of this world. The Bishop and the Consul (suspecting no guile) were verie glad, not onlie to be deliuered from the present trouble, but also to winne such a woorthie man to the con∣gregation of Christ. Wherevpon, firme peace being made betwéene both nations, Hasting is baptised, the Bi∣shop and the Consul being his Godfathers, which thing be∣ing done, he was caried by the souldiours to his ships in verie weake case, as he outwardlie pretended. About mid∣night he caused himselfe being armed in his complet har∣nesse, to be laid vpon a béere, commanding his souldiours to be armed, and to carie their weapons with them vnder their vpper garments, and so to be readie when he should giue them a signe. The daie following, all things being in a readines, he was brought solemnelie by his people with great clamor and counterfet moorning to be interred in the chiefe church of the citie, where the Bishop and the Consul accompanied with all the worship of the same citie came to honor the buriall: but as soone as the Bishop had made himselfe readie to burie the corpse (most of all the townes men being in the church) Hasting stepped vp all armed with his sword drawne, and first killed the Bishop and the Con∣sul, and then fell with his armed souldiours vpon the na∣ked people, and destroied them in a maner euerie one, put∣ting all to the sword, neither sparing age, sexe, or infir∣mitie.
And when he had sacked the towne, he sent messen∣gers to Charles the French King for peace, which he ob∣teined, and withall, the citie of Charters towards his char∣ges to be quiet. About this time Evneth the sonne of Bledryd a Baron of Wales died. And the yeare 893.893▪ Anarawd King or prince pf Northwales, came with a great number of Englishmen, and made war against his brother Cadelh, and spoiled the countries of Caer∣digan and Ystradgwy. In those daies the Danes be∣seeged Excester,Matth. West. against whome, when Alfred went, they which were at Auldre passed ouer to Essex, and builded a Castell at Scobrith, and from thence tooke their iournie to Budington vpon Seauerne. And when Alfred came to Excester, the Danes fled to the sea, and spoiled the seacoasts of Wales. And they which were in Budington, hearing of the kings comming, fled backe to their Castell in Es∣sex. Another companie of them came to Leycester, where Alfred did beseege them, till they were dri∣uen to eate their owne horsses. Afterwards the yeare 895.895▪ the Danes that were in Leycester, with all the rest of them which were in Northumber∣land, passed by the North seas to Meresige an Ile in Essex,H. Hunt. and the yeare following, they entred the riuer Lyne with the Thames, and there builded a Castell twentie miles from London: and as they came to spoile the countrie, they were ouer∣thrown, and lost foure of their princes, and fled to the Castell. Then Alfred diuided the riuer into three parts, so that the water was so diminished, that their ships could not returne to the sea, which thing when the Danes saw, they left their wiues and children in Essex,Matt. West. and passed spoiling
the land to Quadbryge vpon Seauerne, and so passed the riuer, and spoiled the countries of Brecknocke, Gwentland, & Gwentlhwg. Also this yeare went a great number of them to France by the riuer Seyn, and another companie of them spoiled the coastes of Deuonshire, where they lost sixe ships after a long conflict. The summer following, the countrie of Ireland was destroied with strange woormes hauing twoo teeth, which consumed all that was greene in the land. These seeme to be Locusts, a rare plague in these countries, but often seene in Afrike, Italie, and other hot regions. 900About the yeare 900. Igmond with a great number of souldiours came to Anglesey, and the Welshmen gaue him battell at Molerain. There be some Brytish copies of this historie, which affirme, that this battell betwéene Igmond captaine of the blacke nations and the Brytaines, wherein Mervyn was slaine, was fought at a place called Meilon, of the which it was called Maes Rhos Meilon. The same yeare died Alfred, which some call A∣lured, making (v) a vowell, which should be a con∣sonant. This prince translated the ancient lawes of Dyfnwal Moelmut king of Brytaine, and the laws of Marsia Queene of Brytaine, and wife to Cyhelin, out of Brytish into English, and called it Marsian law, which law was afterward called Westsaxon lex, and kept in a part of Mercia, and in all the countries on the south of Thames, for the other part of the land had another law called Dane lex, and these remained till Edward the Confessors time, who of these two lawes made one. Also this Alfred did diuide the daie in three parts by a taper which burnt continuallie in his chappell,Io. Cast. and en∣dured
iust 24. houres. The first part of that time he bestowed at his booke and in praier: the second in the affaires of the common wealth: and the third part to take his rest and refresh himselfe: after whose death,Asser Men∣ven. a certaine clearke made his E∣pitaph, as heere followeth. Nobilitas innata tibi probitatis honorem Armipotens Alfrede dedit, probitásque laborem, Perpetuúmque labor nomen, cui mixta dolori Gaudia semper erant, spes semper mixta timori. Si modò victor eras, ad crastina bella pauebas, Si modò victus eras, & crastina bella parabas, Cui vestes sudore iugi, cui sica cruore Tincta iugi, quantum sit onus regnare probarunt. Non fuit immensi quisquam per climata mundi, Cui tot in aduersis vel respirare liceret: Nec tamen aut ferro contritus ponere ferrum, Aut gladio potuit vitae finisse labores. I am post transactos regni vitaeque labores, Christus ei fit vera quies, sceptrúmque perenne. After Alfred reigned Edward his sonne, against whome, Adelwulph his brother made cruell war, who flieng to Northumberland, stirred the Danes a∣gainst him. He was chosen King as well of the Danes as of the Angles, which at that time had growne to be one people: and after he subdued the East Saxons, and with a great armie spoiled Mer∣cia, and passing ouer Thames at Crickland, destroi∣ed Brythend, and returned home with great spoile. At this time, Evneth was slaine in Arwystli. King Edward also pursued his brother,H. Hunt. and ouerran all the land betwixt Ouse, and the dike of S. Edmund, and returned backe with all his armie, sauing the
Kentishmen which taried to spoile,Matt. West. Io. Cast. against whom the Danes came and fought a sore battell, and slue a great number of them, and put the rest to flight. The Danes about the yeare 905.905 entred into Ire∣land and fought with the Irishmen, and slue Car∣mot King and Bishop of all Ireland, and the sonne of Cukeman, a man both godlie and religious, and Kyrnalt sonne of Murgan King of Lagines. About a yeare after died Asser Archbishop of Wales. Bale, Cent. 2. pag. 125. Giral. Camb.There were two of this name at the same time both coun∣triemen and kinsmen; the one being the vncle, was Arch∣bishop of S. Dauids, of whome mention is made in this place. The other Asser the nephew was a man of excellent learning and wisedome, and for that cause being Chan∣cellour to his vncle, was sent for by King Alfred to teach his children, who wrote the actes of the same Alfred, and was afterward Bishop of Shireburne, of whom mention is made in the English Chronicles. About this time, Edward sent a great armie to Northumberland, which spoiled the countrie, and then returned home: neuerthelesse, the Danes fo∣lowed them, and destroied a great part of Mercia. But within a while after, Edward gathered an ar∣mie, and giuing them battell, ouerthrew them, and slue their kings Alden and Edelwulph, and a great number of their nobles. This yeare, died Edelred Duke of Mercia,Matt. West. pag. 354. which had long been sicke, after whome, Elfleda his wife enioied the countrie of Mercia, sauing the cities of London and Oxford, which king Edward seised into his owne hands. The yeare 907.907 died Cadelh King or Prince of Southwales, second sonne of Roderike the great, lea∣uing behind him three sonnes, Howel Dha (that is to saie, Howel the good) who succeeded his father
in the kingdome of Southwales, Meyric and Cly∣dawc. About two yeares after, King Edward did build the Castell of Hartford betwixt the riuers Benefic,Matth. West. Minier, and Lige; and also the borough of Wytham in Essex, and laie at Wealdyne, where he subdued those countries. The yeare following, the Danes of Leycester and Hampton slew a great number of Englishmen at Hochnorton, and in their returne homeward, spoiled all Oxfordshire. The next yeare after that, there came a great na∣uie from Tydwike, with Vther and Rahald, and past by the westerne sea to VVales, and destroied S. Da∣uids, and there fought the battel of Dinerth, where Mayloc (the sonne of Peredur Gam) was slaine. And afterward they entred Herefordshire, where they were fought withall, and Rahald slaine, and the rest compelled to forsweare the Kings land. Then the King caused the southside of Seauerne to be kept with a great armie; yet did the Danes twise enter his land, once by the East at VVerd, and another time at Portogan, but they were at either time ouerthrowne by the Englishmen. And from thence they departed to the Ile of Stepen, frō whence they were driuen by hunger to South∣wales, where they were beaten, and constrained to depart into Ireland. The yeare insuing, there was a great battell fought betwixt the Kentishmen and the Danes at Holme, but who had the victorie, is not certainelie reported. In the yeare 913.913 Anarawd chiefe King of VVales died, and left behind him two sonnes, Edwal Voel, which reigned after him, and Elise.
Edwal Voel. Edwal Voel sonne of Anarawd. AFter that Ed∣wal Voel beganne his dominion ouer Northwales, Howel Dha being king or prince of Southwales and Powys land, a terrible comet appeared in the firmament. At which time, or the yeare following, Leycester was new built. Matt. West. pag. 354.I thinke that the name of Ley∣cester is héere mistaken for Legecestria, that is, Chester, called of the Romanes Legionum Cestria, which being de∣stroied by the Danes, was about this time by the procure∣ment of a Adelred Duke of Mercia, and Elflede his wife, re∣paired and reedified, as Matth. Westm. writeth, and as the ancient records of the citie of Chester doo testifie. Besides that, I find no mention of the reedifieng of Leycester at
this time, neither in the Brytish Chronicle, nor yet in anie ancient English writer. The next summer after, the men of Deuelyne did destroie the Ile of Môn or Anglesey. And the yeare 917.917 Clydawc the sonne of Cadelh was slaine by the hands of his brother Meyric, and about the same time,Io. Castor. the Englishmen did ouerthrowe the Danes after a great fight at Tottenhale. The yeare 919. Edelfled or Elfled Duches of Mercia,Edelfled. the wife of Edelred Duke of Mercia,Matt. West. pag. 357. and sister to King Edward, died, who builded the boroughes of Strengat and Bruge, by the forrest of Morph: Anno Domini. 913. The next yeare after the building of that, she builded Tamworth and Stafford; and the yeare after that, Edelburgh; and the winter following, Cherenburgh and Wadeburgh; then the next summer Runcofe or Runcorne, as some thinke. After that,Ran. Cest. Matth. West. Hol. pa. 222. she sent hir whole armie to Wales, and fought with the Welshmen, and wan Brecknocke, and tooke the Queene and 33. men. This was it which is called in Welsh Gweyth y Dinas Newydh,Gweyth y Dinas Ne∣wydh. that is to say, The battell of the new citie. Also she wan the towne of Derby, with all that countrie, from the Danes: neuerthelesse, she lost there foure of hir chiefest captaines. Io. Cast.Io. Castoreus reporteth this storie in this maner. Huganus Lord of Westwales, perceiuing King Edward to be occu∣pied in the Danish warre, farre enough from him, gathe∣red an armie of Brytaines, and entered the Kings land.
Wherevpon Elfled, Ladie of Mercia, the sister of King Ed∣ward, came to VVales with a strong armie, and fought with the Welshmen at Brechnocke, and putting Huganus to flight, tooke his wife and 34. men captiues, and lead them with hir to Mercia. Huganus thus discomfited, fled to Derbie, & there being peaceablie receiued of the countrie∣men with fiftéene men of war, and two hundred souldiors well appointed, ioined himselfe with the Kings aduersaries the Danes, of which thing when Elfled was certified by the men of Derby, shée folowed him with a great armie, and entred the gates of that towne, where Huganus resisted hir, and slue foure of hir chiefe officers. But Gwyane Lord of the Ile of Elie hir Steward, set the gates on fire, and fu∣riouslie running vpon the Brytaines, entred the towne. Then Huganus being ouermatched, and choosing rather to die by the sword, than to yéeld himselfe vnto a woman, was there slaine. Thus out of Castoreus. The yeare insuing, Elfled wan Leycester, and subdued to hir all the Danes that laie there. The Yorkeshiremen also did hir homage and seruice: she died at Tamworth, after that she had worthilie ruled Mercia eight yeares, and lieth buried at Glo∣cester by S. Peters porch, vpon whose toombe, this Epitaph was written.H. Hunt. O Elfleda potens, ô terror virgo virorum, O Elfleda potens, nomine digna viri. Te quoque splendidior fecit natura puellam, Te probitas fecit nomen habere viri. Te mutare decet sed solùm nomina sexus, Tu regina potens réxque trophea parans. I am nec Caesareos tantùm mirere triumphos, Caesare splendidior virgo, virago vale. After the death of Elfled,Matth. West. Edward disinherited hir
daughter Alfwyen, and seazed the land of Mercia to his owne hands. The cause why Edward disinherited this yoong Ladie his néece,Io. Cast.whose mother Elfled, being his owne sister, had done so much for him, was (as Castoreus writeth) for that Alf∣wyen not making the king hir vncle (whome hir mother had appointed gardian and ouerséer of hir) priuie to hir do∣ings, had promised and contracted mariage with Raynald king of the Danes: wherevpon, king Edward, to preuent his enimie, entred the land of Mercia, and seazed the same to his owne hands, and caried also the said Ladie with him into Westsex. The same Author also reporteth, that about this time, Leofred a Dane, and Gruffyth ap Madoc, brother in law to the prince of Westwales, came from Ireland with a great armie to Snowdon, and minding to bring all Wales and the marches thereof to their subiection, ouerran and subdued all the countrie to Chester, before King Ed∣ward was certified of their arriuall. Whereat he was ve∣rie sore offended, and being loath to trouble his subiects in that behalfe, made a vowe that he and his sonnes, with their owne people, would be reuenged vpon Leofred and Gruffyth, and therevpon came to Chester, and wan the ci∣tie from them. Then he diuided his armie into two batels, whereof he and his sonne Athelstan lead the first, and Ed∣mund and Edred the second, and so folowed them with as much celeritie as he could, and ouertooke them at the forest of Walewode, now Sherwode, where Leofred and Gruf∣fyth set vpon him fierselie, so that the king in the begin∣ning was in some distresse, vntill Athelstane stepped in be∣twéene his father and Leofred, and wounded the Dane in the arme, in such sort, that he being not able to hold his speare, was soone taken, and committed to the custodie of Athelstane. In the meane time, Edmund and Edred in∣countring with Gruffyth, slew him, and brought his head to their father. Then Athelstane caused Leofred to be hea∣ded, and so both their heads were set vp together on the top
of the towre of Chester, and Edward and his sonnes retur∣ned home with great triumph. Then Edward, after he had builded Glademu∣tham, died at Ferandyne, whose sonne named Alfred died also the same time at Oxford, and were buri∣ed both at Winchester, Anno 924.924 After whose death, Adelstane his base son reigned King of Eng∣land, which was the woorthiest prince of Saxon bloud that euer reigned. He did ouercome Cudfryd the father of Reynald King of the Danes, at Yorke. He gathered also the second yeare of his reigne, a great armie against Hawlaf King of Ireland,Io. Castor. who came with the whole power of the Scots and Danes against him, and gaue him battell at Brimestburie, where Adelstan gate the victorie, and slue the said king Hawlaf and the king of Scots, and fiue kings of the Danes and Normanes, and twelue Earles, so that he brought all the land of England and Scotland in subiection to him, which none of his predecessors had euer attempted. The yeare 933.933 Owen the sonne of Gruffyth was slaine by the men of Caerdigan. Then Adelstan did enter Wales with a great armie,Wil. Malms. Hol. pa. 225. Io. Cast. and brought the kings of the countrie to subiection, and receiued yearelie of tri∣bute 20. pound in gold, and 300. pound in siluer, and 200. head of cattell:Matth. West. Ran. Cest. yet the lawes of Howel Dha appointed to the king of Aberfraw to paie yearelie to the king of London no more but 66. pound for a tribute: and that the prince of Di∣nevwre and the prince of Powys should paie a like summe 66. pound yearelie to the king of Aber∣fraw. To this Adelstan, the kings of Norwaie and France did send great and rich gifts to winne his friendship and good will.936 In the yeare 936. died
Evneth the sonne of Clydawc, and Meyric the sonne of Cadelh. At this time also Adelstan did remooue the Brytaines that dwelt in Excester and therea∣boutes to Cornewale,Matt. West. Hol. pag. 226. and appointed the riuer Cambia to be the vtter mere towards England, as he had before appointed the riuer Wy to be the mere of England and Wales. In the yeare of Christ 939.939 the noble prince Adelstan died, and was bu∣ried at Malmesburie, and his brother Edmund borne in wedlocke reigned in his place, who in the first yeare of his reigne, wan fiue cities from the Danes,Io. Castor. Leycester, Darby, Stafford, Lincolne, and Notingham. Then Aulafe King of the Danes sent to Edmund to desire peace and baptisme, which Edmund granted vnto him, and so the Danes, which then were called Normanes, tooke first the christian faith, Edmund being their godfather, who making peace with them, returned to Westsex with much honor. This yeare died Abloic chiefe King of Ire∣land. The yeare following, Cadelh the sonne of Arthvael a noble Brytaine was imprisoned, and Ed∣wal Voel the sonne of Anarawd and Elise his bro∣ther were slaine in a battell, which they fought a∣gainst the Danes and Englishmen. This Edwal had sixe sonnes, Meyric, Ieuaf or Ieuan, Iago which is Iames, Conan, Edwal Vachan, and Roderike. After whose death, Howel Dha his coosen germane ru∣led all Wales for his life time. Elise also had issue, Conan, and a daughter named Trawst, which was mother to Conan ap Sitsylht, Gruffyth ap Sit∣sylht, and Blethyn ap Convyn, which two last were afterward princes of Wales.
Howel Dha. Howel Dha, cousen germane to Edwal Voel. THis Howel Dha king or Prince of Southwales and of Powys long be∣fore this time, after the death of Edwal Voel his coo∣sen, tooke vpon him the rule and gouernement of all Wales, about the yeare of Christ 940.940 who (notwithstanding the sonnes of Edwal did somewhat murmur against him) was for his godlie behauiour, discreet and iust rule be∣loued of men. This Howel constituted and made lawes to be kept through his dominions, which were vsed in Wales, till such time as the inhabi∣tants receiued the lawes of England, in the time of Edward the first, and in some places thereof long
after. These lawes are to be seene at this daie both in Latine and in Welsh. Howel Dha king or prince of all Wales, perceiuing the lawes and customes of his countrie to haue growne vnto great abuse, sent for the Archbishop of Meneuia, and all the other Bishops and chiefe of the cleargie, to the number of 140. prelates, and all the Barons and nobles of Wales, and caused sixe men of the wisest and best estéemed in eue∣rie Comote to be called before him, whome he commanded to méete all together at his house called Y Tuy gwyn ar Taf, that is, The white house vpon the riuer Taf. Thither he came himselfe, and there remained with those his nobles, prelates, and subiects all the Lent, in praier and fa∣sting, crauing the assistance and direction of Gods holy spi∣rit, that he might reforme the lawes and customes of the countrie of Wales, to the honor of God, and the quiet go∣uernement of the people. About the end of Lent he chose out of that companie twelue men of the wisest, grauest, and of the greatest experience: to whome he added one clearke or doctor of the lawes, named Blegored, a singular learned and perfect wise man. These had in charge to exa∣mine the old lawes and customes of Wales, and to gather out of those such as were méete for the gouernement of the countrie: which they did, reteining those that were whole∣some and profitable, expounding those that were doubtfull and ambiguous, and abrogating those that were superflu∣ous and hurtfull, and so ordeined thrée sorts of lawes. The first, of the ordering of the kings or princes houshold, and  his court. The second, of the affaires of the countrie and  common wealth. The third, of the speciall customes belon∣ging  to particular places and persons. Of all the which, being read, allowed, and proclamed, he caused thrée seuerall bookes to be written, one for his dailie vse to follow his court, another to lie in his palace at Aberffraw, and the third at Dinevowr, that all the thrée prouinces of Wales might haue the vse of the same when néede required. And
for the better obseruation of these lawes, he caused the Archbishop of S. Dauids to denounce sentence of excom∣munication against all such of his subiects, as refused to obeie the same. Within a while after, Howel (because he would omit nothing that could procure countenance and authoritie to his said lawes) went to Rome, taking with him the Archbishop of S. Dauids, the Bishops of Bangor and S. Asaph, and thirtéene other of the learnedst and wi∣sest men in Wales, where the said lawes being recited be∣fore the Pope, were by his authoritie confirmed: then ha∣uing finished his deuout pilgrimage, and emptied his purse, he returned home againe with his companie. 1 By these lawes they might not morgage their lands but to one of the same familie or kindred, which were De ea∣dem parentela. 2 Euerie tenant holding of anie other than of the prince or lord of the fée, paid a fine Pro defensione regia, which was called Arian ardhel, in Latine Aduocarij. 3 No legacie of goods by will was good, otherwise than those which were giuen to the church, to the lord of the fée, or for paiment of debts. 4 Euerie man might distraine as well for debts, as for rent of lands, anie goods, or cattell, sauing horsses, which were counted to serue for a mans necessarie defense, and were not distrainable without the prince his licence. 5 Causes of inheritance were not heard or determined but from the ninth of Nouember, till the ninth of Februa∣rie; or from the ninth of Maie, vntill the ninth of August. The rest of the yeare was counted a time of vacation, for sowing in the spring, and reaping in the haruest. 6 This also is to be obserued, that all matters of inhe∣ritance of land were determined and adiudged by the King or Prince in person, or his speciall deputie (if he were sicke or impotent) and that vpon view of the same land, cal∣ling vnto him the fréeholders of that place, two elders of his counsell, the Chiefe iustice attending alwaies in the court, the ordinarie iudge of the countrie where the land
laie, and the priest. The maner of their procéeding was thus. The king or prince sate in his Iudiciall seate higher than the rest, with an elder on his right hand, and another on his left, and the fréeholders on both sides next vnto them, which for this cause (as I thinke) were called Vchel∣wyr. Before him directlie a certaine distance off, and a little lower, sate his Chiefe iustice, hauing the priest on his right hand, and the ordinarie iudge of that countrie on the left. The court being set, the plaintife came in with his ad∣uocate, champion, and Ringylh or sergeant, and stood on the left side: then came in the defendant in like maner with his aduocate, champion and Ringylh, and stood on the right side: and last of all, the witnesses of both parties came, which stood directlie before the Chiefe iustice at the lower end of the hall, vntill they were called vp to testifie the truth of their knowledge in the matter in variance. The figure of the which I thought good héere to laie downe, as you sée, in the page next following.
After the hearing of the books read, the depositions of the wit∣nesses, and full pleading of the cause in open court, vpon warning giuen by the Rhinghylh, the Chiefe Iustice, the priest, and the ordinarie iudge, withdrew themselues for a while to consult of the matter, and then Secundum allegata & probata, brought their verdict, the court sitting. Whervp∣pon the king or prince after consultation had with the el∣ders or seniors which sate by him, gaue definitiue sentence; except the matter was so obscure and intricate, that right and truth appeared not: in the which case it was tried by the two champions, and so the cause ended. This shall be suffi∣cient for this time. Now therefore let vs go forward in the historie. At this time the foresaid kings Aulafe and Reg∣nald entered the land of Edmund, who gathering his strength together, folowed them into Nor∣thumberland, and ouercame them in plaine bat∣tell, and chased them out of the land, and so remai∣ned a whole yeare in those parts, setting things in order, and quieting of that countrie. And bi∣cause he could not by anie meanes bring the inha∣bitants of Cumberland to liue in anie honest or∣der, he spoiled that countrie, and committed it to the rule of Malcolme king of Scotland, vpon condi∣tion, that he should send him succours in all his warres both by sea and land. Matt. West. Hol. pag. 228.Some other write, that king Edmund being accompanied with Lhewelyn ap Sitsylht, which was after prince of Wales, entred Cumberland, and taking the two sonnes of Dummaile king of that prouince,Buchan. li. 6. fol. 53. put out their eies, and then gaue that countrie to Malcolme to be holden of him, with condition to kéepe the North part of the realme from incursion of enimies, the which condition was afterward but slenderlie perfourmed. This Malcolme was the sonne of Donald King of Scotland, and was the next king after Constantine the third, being in number the 76.
942In the yeare 942. died Hubert Bishop of S. Da∣uids: the yeare also following, Marclois Bishop of Bangor, and Vssa the sonne of Lhavyr died. The yeare 944.944 the Englishmen did enter Wales with a strong armie, and spoiled Strad Clwyd, and re∣turned home.Matt. West. Hol. pag. 222. At which time, Conan the sonne of Elise was put in danger of death by poison, and E∣verus Bishop of S. Dauids died. The yeare after, Edmund King of England was slaine by treason,Matt. West. as some writers saie, vpon S. Augustines daie, as he was at dinner. Other saie, that he espied an outlawe sitting in the hall, and as he drew him from the table, the outlaw slew the King with a knife. Io. Cast.And some be of opinion, that as the King would haue re∣scued a man of his from an officer who had arrested him, the same officer slue him, not knowing that he was the King: he lieth buried at Glastenburie. After whose death, Edred or Edfred his brother was crowned in his place, who made an expedi∣tion to Scotland and Northumberland, and subdued them both, and receiued fealtie and homage of the Northumbers and Scots by oth, which was not long kept. In the yeare 948. died Howel Dha the noble and worthie King or Prince of Wales,948 whose death was sore bewailed of all men, for he was a prince that loued peace and good order, & that fea∣red God. He left behind him foure sonnes, Owen, Run, Roderike, and Edwyn, betwixt whom, and the sonnes of Edwal, there was great warres, for the chiefe rule of Wales, as shall appeare in the historie fol∣lowing.
Ievaf and Iago. Ievaf and Iago the sonnes of Edwal Voel. AFter the death of Howel Dha, his sonnes did diuide Southwales and Powys betwixt them: and Ievaf and Iago the se∣cond and third sonnes of Edwal Voel ru∣led Northwales, (bicause their elder brother Mey∣ric was not a man worthie to rule) who comming
of the elder house, would haue had the chiefe rule of all Wales, which the sonnes of Howel Dha deni∣ed them. And therevpon Iago or Iames and Ievaf entred Southwales with a great power, against whome came Owen the sonne of Howel and his brethren, and fought together at the hils of Car∣no, where Iago and Ievaf had the victorie: and the yeare folowing, the same brethren did twise enter into Southwales, and spoiled Dyuet, and slue Dwn∣walhon the Lord thereof. And within a while af∣ter, died Roderike one of the sonnes of Howel Dha. In the yeare 952. the sonnes of Howel gathered their strength together against Ievaf and Iago,952 and entered their land to the riuer of Conwy, where they fought a cruell battell at a place called Gwr∣gustu, or Lhanrwst, as some thinke, where a great number were slaine vpon either side, as Anarawd the sonne of Gwyriad, or Vriet the sonne of Roderike the Great, and Edwyn the sonne of Howel Dha: in the which battell were ouerthrowne the sonnes of Howel, whome Ievaf and Iago pursued to Caer∣digan, and destroied their countrie with fire and sword. About this time Yarthyr the sonne of Mer∣vyn was drowned: and the yeare following, Con∣gelach King of Ireland was slaine. But to returne to Edred King of England. As soone as he was re∣turned to his owne land, Aulaf with a great ar∣mie landed in Northumberland, and was receiued of the people with much gladnes; but anon after, like fickle and vnconstant men, they banished him the land againe, and tooke to their king one Hirci∣us the sonne of Haroald, whome likewise after three yeares they expelled, and willinglie submit∣ted themselues to Edred, who after he had ruled
the whole land eight yeares, died, and was buri∣ed at Winchester. After him reigned Edwyn sonne of Edmund, in whose time chanced nothing woor∣thie to be put in writing, but that he married a∣nother mans wife, hir husband being aliue. This man, after he had gouerned the realme foure yeares, died, leauing his kingdome to his brother Edgar, who was crowned king of England in his stead. In the yeare 958.958 was a woonderfull hot summer, when Gwgan the sonne of Gwyriad the sonne of Roderike died. After the which heate, there followed a great plague in March follo∣wing. In those daies Iago and Ievaf by force and strength ruled all Wales as they thought good: and yet for all their power, Abloic king of Ireland landed in Môn, and hauing burnt Holyhed, spoiled the countrie of Lhyyn. In the yeare 961.961 the sonnes of Edwyn the son of Colhoyn were slaine, after they had destroied all the countrie to Towyn. About this time, Meyric the sonne of Cadvan, Ry∣therch Bishop of S. Dauids, and Cadwalhon ap O∣wen departed out of this transitorie world. Not long after, the countrie of Northwales was sore spoiled by the armie of Edgar king of England. Io. Cast.The cause of this warre was the non paiment of the tri∣bute that the King of Aberffraw, by the lawes of Howel Dha was to paie to the king of London.Hol. pag. 232. In the end, there was a peace concluded: for king Edgar vnderstanding what hurt the countries of England and Wales receiued dailie, by reason of the great multitude of Woolues that then abounded (especiallie in Wales) which destroied much shéepe and otherwise did great harme, released the tribute in monie appointed by the said lawes of Howel Dha, and bound the prince of Northwales to paie him yearelie cer∣taine Woolues for his tribute, and so to be released of that
other tribute in monie,Wolues destroid by the prince of Wales. which the said prince performed, vn∣till he had left neuer a Woolfe in Wales or England. In the yeare 966. Roderike the sonne of Edwal Voel was slaine by the Irishmen,966 by whome Aber∣fraw was destroied. The next yeare, there fell a great debate betwixt the two sonnes of Edwal, Iago, and Ievaf, which had ruled iointlie together from the death of Howel Dha, to that time: and shortlie after Iago, hauing taken his brother Ievaf by force, verie cruellie kept him in prison a long time: about the which time, Eneon the sonne of Owen prince of Southwales wan and seazed to himselfe the land of Gwyr. And in the yeare 969.969 Mactus the sonne of Haroald with an armie of Danes did enter the Ile of Anglesey, and spoiled Penmon. These Danes were suffered by Edgar to inhabite quietlie through all England, till they were as strong as the Englishmen, and then they fell to such riotousnes and drinking, that much mischiefe insued thereof: wherevpon Edgar made a law,A law a∣gainst im∣moderate drinking. that euerie man should drinke by measure, and caused a certaine marke to be set in euerie pot how deepe they should drinke, and so by these meanes he somewhat staied that immoderate in∣gurgitation. Not long after that, Godfryd the sonne of Haroald did subdue to himselfe the whole Ile of Anglesey, which he inioied not long. King Edgar likewise in the yeare 972.972 did send a great nauie to Caerlheon vpon Vsc, which shortlie tur∣ned backe,Ran. Cest. Fabia. without dooing anie notable act. The next yeare following, Howel the sonne of Ievaf raised a great power against his vncle Iago, for the deliuerance of his father out of prison, and o∣uercame his vncle in fight, whome he chased out
of the land, and tooke his eldest vncle Meyric the sonne of Edwal, and put out both his eies, and kept him in prison, where he died shortlie after, leauing behind him two sonnes, Edwal and Iona∣val, of the which Edwal came afterward the most woorthie princes of Wales. Howel notwithstan∣ding he had set his father at libertie, yet tooke vp∣pon himselfe the whole rule of the land for his life time. He had three brethren, all men of great estimation, Meyric, Ievaf, and Cadwalhon, whose liues shall insue heereafter.
Howel ap Ievaf. Howel the sonne of Ievaf. AFter that Howel the sonne of Ie∣vaf had ex∣pelled his vncle from the land, he tooke the rule of it himselfe. And at that time Dwnwal∣hon prince of Strad∣clwyd tooke his iour∣nie to Rome. Then di∣ed Edwalhon the sonne of Owen. Likewise Edgar king of England passed out of this transitorie world, after that he had builded manie monasteries. After him, Edward his sonne was king, who when he had reigned foure yeares, was traiterouslie slaine through the ma∣lice of his stepmother, that hir sonne Edred or E∣delred might enioie the kingdome; who after his
brothers death, was crowned king of the land. The yeare 976.976 Eneon the sonne of Owen king of Southwales destroied the land of Gwyr the second time. The yeare insuing, Howel the sonne of Ievaf with a great armie both of Welshmen and Eng∣lishmen, made war against such as succoured and defended his vncle Iago, and spoiled the countries of Lhyyn and Kelynnoc Vawr, whereby shortlie af∣ter Iago was taken by Howels men, who enioied his part of the land peaceablie. About the yeare 979.979 Edwal Vachan the sonne of Edwal Voel was slaine by his nephew Howel. At this time, Custe∣nyn Dhu, that is, Constantine the blacke, sonne to Iago (which then was prisoner) hired Godfryd the son of Haroald with his Danes, against his cousen, & they both together destroied Anglesey & Lhyyn: wherevpon, Howel gathered his armie together, & setting vpon them at a place called Gwayth Hir∣barth, ouerthrew them, where Constantine was slaine. About this time, the Danes landed with vij. ships at Southhampton, and spoiled the towne. Sim. Dunel. Hol. pa. 238. Io. Vowel in Catal. epist. Exon.They ouerranne also and spoiled the whole countrie of De∣uon and Cornewale, burned the towne of Bodman, and the cathedrall church of S. Petrokes, with the Bishops house. Wherevpon the Bishops sea was remooued from thence to S. Germans, where the same continued, vntill the remoo∣uing and vniting thereof vnto Crediton. About this time died S. Dunstane, who prophe∣sied of much mischiefe and great destruction of the land by the Danes. The yeare 981.981 Godfryd the sonne of Haroald did gather a great armie, and landed in Westwales, where spoiling all the land of Dyuet, with the church of S. Dauids, he fought the battell of Lhanwanoc. Likewise in the yeare
next ensuing, Duke Alfred with a great power of Englishmen spoiled and destroied Brechnock, and a great part of the lands of Owen prince of South∣wales, against whome, Eneon the sonne of the said Owen, and Howel king of Northwales did raise all their power, and ouerthrew them in battell, where the greatest part of Alfreds armie was slaine, and the rest put to flight. The yeare follo∣wing, the Gentlemen of Gwentsland rebelled a∣gainst their prince, and cruellie slue Eneon the son of Owen, which came thither to appease them. This Eneon was a woorthie and noble Gentle∣man, who did manie notable actes in his fathers time, and left behind him two sonnes, Edwyn and Theodor or Tewdor Mawr, of whome came after∣ward the kings or princes of Southwales. In the yeare 984.984 Howel the sonne of Ievaf king of Wales entred England with an armie, where he was fought withall, and slaine valiantlie figh∣ting. This Howel had no sonne, but his brethren reigned in his place.
Cadwalhon ap Ievaf. Cadwalhon the sonne of Ievaf. AFTER the death of Howel, his brother Cad∣walhon, the second sonne of Ievaf tooke in hand the gouernance of North∣wales, and first made war with Ionaval his coosen the sonne of Mey∣ric, and right heire to the land, and slue him, but Edwal the yongest brother escaped awaie pri∣uilie. The yeare following, Meredyth the sonne of Owen king or prince of Southwales, with all his po∣wer entred into Northwales, and in fight slue Cad∣walhon the sonne of Ievaf, and Meyric his brother,
and conquered the land to himselfe. Wherein a man may see how God punished the wrong, which Iago and Ievaf the sonnes of Edwal Voel did to their eldest brother Meyric, who was first disherited, and afterward his eies put out, and one of his sonnes slaine. For first Ievaf was imprisoned by Iago, then Iago with his sonne Constantine, by Howel the sonne of Ievaf: and afterward the said Howel, with his bretherne Cad∣walhon and Meyric, were slaine and spoiled of all their lands.
Meredyth ap Owen. Meredyth the sonne of Owen ap Howel Dha. THis Meredyth ap Owen, hauing slain Cadwalhon, obtained the rule and gouernment of North∣wales. In the yeare 986.986 Godfryd the sonne of Ha∣roald, the third time ente∣red the Ile of Anglesey, where hauing taken Lhywarch the sonne of Owen, with 2000. prisoners besides, he cruellie put out his eies. Wherevpon Meredyth the prince, with the rest scaped and fled to Caerdigan. And the same yeare there was a great mooren of cattell through all Wales. Then the Danes againe entered Eng∣land with diuerse armies, and at Westport and Wi∣test ouerthrew the Lords of England, Godan and Britchwould: so that the king was compelled to
hire the Danes with the paiment of 10000. pound to liue quietlie in the land:Dane gelt. Hol. pag. 239. and yet within a while after, the king himself brake the peace, and prepa∣red a great nauie to meete the Danes by sea, where he was ouercome, & lost all the ships, which were taken with Alfricke Earle of Mercia the cap∣taine of the same. After this the Danes spoiled Yorke, with Lyndsey, & went to Northumberland, where they were put to flight by Godwyn & Frid∣gist. About the same time Aulaffe & Swayn, sailing vp the Thames, with 94. sailes, beseeged London, which was valiantlie defended. Wherefore the Danes left their ships,H. Hunt. and entered the land, and cruellie with fire and sword destroied all Kent, Sus∣sex, Surreie, and Hampshire. Wherevpon king Edelred sent to them for peace, which he obteined with great summes of monie and victuall; so that they laie peaceablie at Hampton that winter. Then Aulaffe vpon composition came to Edelred, who receiued him worthilie, and did so entertaine him, that he promised to depart the land, and ne∣uer to returne, which promise he faithfullie kept. 987The yeare 987. died Ievaf the sonne of Edwal, which had liued manie yeares a priuate life. The same yeare also died Owen the son of Howel Dha, Prince of Southwales. This Owen had three sons, Eneon which died in his fathers time, Lhywarch which lost both his eies, and Meredyth which (as before is declared) had wonne Northwales, and af∣ter his fathers death tooke also to his possession all Southwales, hauing no respect to his brother Eneon his sonnes Edwyn and Theodor or Tewdor. About the same time the Danes sailed from Hamp∣ton alongst the coast, spoiling Deuonshire & Corne∣wale, and so at the last landed in Southwales, and
destroied S. Dauids, Lhanbadarn, Lhanrystyd, and Lhandydoch, (which were all places of religion) and did so much hurt in the countrie besides, that to be rid of them, Meredyth was faine to agree with them, & to giue them a penie for euerie man within his land, which was called The tribute of the blacke armie. At this time Elwmaen the son of Abloic king of Ireland was slain, & a great number of people died for hunger. The yeare 989.989 Owen the son of Dyfn∣wal was slaine. Within a yeare after Meredyth king of Wales destroied the towne of Radnor, at what time his nephew Edwyn the sonne of Eneon, hauing to his aid duke Adelf, and a great armie of Englishmen and Danes, spoiled all the land of Mere∣dyth in Southwales, as Caerdigan, Dyuet, Gwyr, Kyd∣weli, and S. Dauids: where Edwyn tooke pledges of the chiefe men of those countries. In the meane time, this Meredyth with his people did spoile Glamorgan, so that no place was free from sword and fire: but at the last Meredyth and Edwyn fell at an agreement, & were made freends. Soone af∣ter Cadwalhon the onelie sonne of Meredyth died. Meredyth being thus occupied, had so much to do in Southwales, that Northwales laie open for the eni∣mie: which thing when the Danes perceiued, they arriued in Anglesey, and destroied the whole Ile. Wherevpon the inhabitants of that countrie re∣ceiued Edwal the sonne of Meyric the right heire of Northwales,Matth. West. pag. 383. Io. Castor. for their prince, in the yeare 992.992 Af∣ter these great troubles, there followed within a yeare after such famine & scarsitie in Southwales, that manie perished for want of food.
Edwal ap Meyric Edwal ap Meyric the sonne of Meredyth. THis Edwal being in pos∣session of the principalitie of Northwales, studied to keepe and defend his people from iniu∣ries and wrongs. But Meredyth gathered to∣gither all his power, intending to recouer againe Northwales, with whome Edwal met at Lhangwm, and o∣uerthrew him in plaine battell, where Theodor of Tewdor Mawr, Meredyth his nephew was slaine, who left behind him two sonnes Rees & Rytherch, & a daughter called Elen.Matth. West. A litle after this Swayn the sonne of Haroald destroied the Ile of Man: and
entring to Northwales slew Edwal the prince ther∣of, who left behind him a sonne called Iago. In the yeare of Christ 998.998 the Danes came a∣gaine to S. Dauids, destroieng all before them, and there they slew Morgeney or rather Vrgeney Bi∣shop of that sea. The same yeare also died Mere∣dyth the sonne of Owen king or prince of Wales, leauing behind him one onlie daughter called An∣gharad, which was maried to Lhewelyn ap Sitsylht, and after his death to Conuyn Hirdref, or as other do thinke, to Conuyn ap Gwerystan, who had children by either of them, which was the cause of much warre & mischief in Wales, as shall appeare hereafter.
Aedan ap Blegored. Aedan the sonne of Blegored. THe death of both these princes (for so much as Meredyth had no issue male, & Edwal left behind him a child within yeares, not able to take the charge of a common wealth) did cause much trou∣ble to ensue: for in Northwales diuerse did aspire to the go∣uernment, and sought the rule of the land, as Co∣nan the sonne of Howel, and Aedan the sonne of Blegored, who tried the matter in open field, where Conan was slaine, the yeare 1003.1003 I doo not know, neither could I euer find, what colour or pretense of title, this Aedan ap Blegored had to the princi∣palitie of Northwales, nor yet of whom he descended, or who came of him: whereas all the other princes are notori∣ouslie
knowen, of what families they descended, and who came of them. Neither yet doo I read of anie Blegored, whose sonne he might be, except it be that doctor of Law, of whom mention is made in the lawes of Howel Dha, whose estate was too meane to challenge the principalitie. He is reported to haue gouerned about xij. yeares. Of this acts by him atchieued, there is verie litle written, sauing of those two battels, the one wherin he ouercame Conan ap Howel, and the other wherin he was ouercome himselfe, and slaine with his foure sonnes, by Lhewelyn ap Sitsylht. In the yeare 1004.1004 Gulfath and Vbiad Irish Lords, were taken by the Scots, and their eies put out, which Scots did also destroie the countrie and towne of Deuelyn. Likewise the Danes, which had destroied againe Westwales, went to England, and there spoiled and burned the land all before them, especiallie Somersetshire, Dorsetshire, and so through Hampshire and Sussex,Matt. West. they came to∣wards the riuer of Thames, without anie let or staie, and so sailed alongst the riuer, to the place where the riuer Mydwey entreth to the Thames, alongst which water, they came to Rochester, where they ouerthrew the Kentishmen that bade them battell. Edelred king of England was at this time in Cumberland the chiefe denne of the Danes, which land he brought to his subiection: but in the meane while, another armie of Danes fought againe with the men of Somersetshire, and got the victorie, and ruled the countrie at their pleasure. Then Edelred hearing of the great worthines of Richard Duke of Normandie, sent to him for his daughter Emma in mariage, thinking thereby to haue succour: but God intending to punish the great sinnes and enormities of the Saxons, did moue the king thereto, that like as they being in∣struments
of Gods wrath, vnder the colour of friends and hired soldiours, had traiterouslie and cruellie slaine the Brytaines, and driuen them out of their land, so should the Normanes by colour of this affinitie, first enter the land as friends, and bring succour against the Danes, and afterward come as foes, and be the vtter destruction of the Saxons and Angles: which was then foreseene and told the king by an Anachoret, who inspired with the spirit of God, sawe the plagues which he had certainelie appointed to fall vpon the Saxons. But the king puffed vp with pride, and hope of his affinitie, did priuilie write to all the english rulers through the realme,The Danes murthered. Matt. West. pag. 391. to kill the Danes in one night, which then liued peaceablie, which murther was cruellie executed vpon S. Brices daie at night. But yet the Danes would not giue ouer so with losse. Therefore the yeare following, there came an ar∣mie of them to Deuonshire, and ouerran the land with fire and sword, sparing nothing that had life, that they might reuenge the murther of their coo∣sens.Matt. West. pag. 393. H. Hunt. Sim. Dunel. They rased the citie of Excester, and slue Hugh the Normane, whome the Queene had ap∣pointed gouernour there. Then Almarus Earle of Deuon gathered a great armie of Hampshire, Wilshire, and all the countrie about, and met the Danes: but he and his were put to flight, and the Danes pursued them to Wilton and destroied it and Salisburie, and returned to their ships with rich spoiles and great triumphes. Io. Cast. Si. Dunelm. Hol. pag. 243. Io. Vowel.Some are of another opinion, which affirme, that the said Hugh the Norman entised and procured the Danes to come and beséege the citie of Excester, which they did burne, and vsed the people with great crueltie, vntill in the end the
said Almarus Earle of Deuon, and the Gentlemen of the countrie submitted themselues, and so obteined peace. And the yeare folowing, being 1004.1004 Swayne a mightie prince of Denmarke, to whom God prede∣stinated the crowne of England, came with a great number of sailes, and laid siege to Norwich, and spoiled it,Hol. pag. 243. with whom Wolfkettel duke of the land made peace: yet the Danes, after they had rested a while, went to Thetford, which they also spoiled, and returned to their ships with their praie, and ouerthrewe duke Wolfkettel (who had gathered and prepared an armie to fight with them) and so failed to their countrie, and two yeares after re∣turned againe with their companions, fire, sword and spoile,Hol. pag. 244. and landed at Sandwich and burned it, and made England quake as a reed in the wind, and thence sailed to Wight, where they wintered till Christmas, and then entred Hampshire, and passed in diuerse bands alongst the land to Reding, Wal∣lingford and Colsey, deuouring such victuales as they found in the houses, paieng therefore with sword and fire at their departing.Io. Cast. And at their re∣turne they met neere Essington, the armie of the Westsaxons, which did nothing but trouble them with killing, & laded them with spoile, and so pas∣sed the gates of Winchester, with much triumph to Wight; and all this while was king Edelred at his manour in Shropshire full of cares and trou∣bles. And then the nobilitie of England bought peace of the Danes for 30000. pound. In the which time of peace Edelred tooke an order, that of euerie 300. hides of land through the realme,H. Hunt. there should be a ship made and furnished, and of euery 8. hides, a corselet and a helmet. An hide containeth as
much ground as a plough maie eare by the yeare. Besides these the king had a nauie from Norman∣die, which being all togither at Sandwich, was one of the greatest that euer was seene in Brytaine. But it hapned so,Io. Cast. Matt. West. that where the king had bani∣shed one Wilnot a noble man of Sussex, he fell a ro∣uing vpon the sea, and troubled all passages and victualers.1008 Then Brightrych brother to the trai∣tor Edric Erle of Mercia, promised the king to bring before him Wilnot either aliue or dead, but it hap∣ned otherwise: for there fell such a tempest, that he was driuen of force to the shore, where manie of his ships were lost, and the reast Wilnot and his companie did set on fire, and burned them. Then Brightrych, being abashed of this infortunate be∣ginning, returned againe alongst the Thames to London. Shortlie after there landed a nauie of Danes at Sandwich,Io. Castor. and so passed by the land to Canturburie, minding to destroie the citie: but the citizens bought peace for 30000. pound. And the Danes passed first through Kent, Sussex, Hampshire, and Barkshire, where king Edelred with all the power of England met them: notwithstanding being per∣suaded by the traitor Edric, he would not fight with them, so that they returning backe by Lon∣don, (which citie defended it selfe manfullie) went to their ships. But in the yeare folowing they lan∣ded againe at Ipswich vpon the Ascension daie, & there ouercame and put to flight Duke Wolfket∣tel who fought with them. Then passsing from thence to Cambridge, they met the kings sisters sonne with his armie, whom they slew, and with him Duke Oswyn, with Edwyn & Wolfrike Earles,
and after tooke their waie by Essex towards Thames,1010 leauing no part of crueltie vnpractised by the waie. And alongst the riuer-side they went to Oxford,Hol. pag. 245. Io. Cast. which they had burned the yeere before, and so to the three castels vpon Ouze, Buckingham, Bedford and Huntingdon, and destroied Godman∣chester, which was then a faire towne, and burned Northampton, and at Christmas returned to their ships. The next yeare folowing, when they had spoiled all the land from Trent southward, they laid siege to the citie of Canterburie,1011 and wan it by treason of one Almarike (whom Alfege the Archbi∣shop had deliuered from death) and left nothing behind them,Io. Cast. Hol. pag. 246. but bloud and ashes, carieng the Archbishop with other to their ships,Matt. Park. page. 68. whom they cruellie slew afterward. Within a while after, Swayne king of Denmarke came alongst Humber to Gainesbourgh: to whom Vitred Duke of Northum∣berland with all his people and all Lynsey with the countries North of Watlingstreete became sub∣iects, and gaue him hostages. Whervpon Swayne finding his enterprises fortunate and luckie, com∣mitted his nauie to Cnute his sonne, and went him selfe to Oxford and Winchester, which cities with all the countries about aknowledged him for their king. Then he came to London, where king Edelred was, but the citizens defended the citie so manfullie and valiantlie, that Swayne returned to Walingford, and so to Bath, and receiued homage of all Westsaxon, and afterward comming to Lon∣don, receiued the citie to mercie, and was called king throughtout the land.Hol. pag. 249. Io. Castor. Then Edelred percei∣uing all things to fall against him, fled to Norman∣die, to his wife and his two sonnes, Edward and Al∣fred,
whom he had sent thither before. And Swayne, as soone as he had brought the whole land to his obeisance,Sim. Dunel. died suddenlie, after whose death, the Danes chose Cnute his sonne for their king; but the Englishmen sent for Edelred home againe, who comming with a great armie, destroied Lynsey, bicause that prouince was become subiect to Cnute.Hol. pag. 248. Which thing when Cnute vnderstood be∣ing at Ipswich, he cut off the hands and noses of all the pledges that he had, and returned to Den∣marke. About this time, Brian king of Ireland, and Murcath his sonne, and other kings of that land to him subiect, did gather a great power against Su∣tric the sonne of Abloic king of Dyuelyn, and Mail∣morda king of Lagenes, which Sutric hired a num∣ber of strangers, all armed men, and rouers vpon the seas, to his succour, and gaue Brian battell, where the said Brian and his sonne weer slaine, and on the other side Mailmorda and Broderike cap∣taine of the strangers. In the yeare 1013.1013 Cnute came againe from Denmarke, and landed in West∣sex, and spoiled all the countrie.Io. Cast. Then Edric with Edmund king Edelreds bastard sonne, gathered an armie, but yet they durst not giue him battell. Then went Edmund to Vitred duke of Northum∣berland, & together they spoiled Staffordshire, Leyce∣stershire, and Shropshire. Cnute likewise, vpon the other side, came downe through Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, Hutingdonshire, and so by Stafford passed toward Yorke, to whome Vitred came and yeelded himselfe, yet he lost his life, whose possessi∣ons Cnute gaue to one Egricke, and made him duke in his stead, wherevpon Edmund went to his father which laie sicke at London. Then Cnute re∣turned
to his ships, and sailed to Thames mouth, and vp the riuer towards London: but before he came thither, Edelred was departed, after he had reigned with much trouble & miserie 37. yeares. After whose death, the Englishmen chose his base sonne Edmund, surnamed Ironside for strength and tolerance in war, to be their king. This Edmund went to Westsex, and brought all that countrie to his subiection. Then the Danes laid siege to Lon∣don, & made a great trench about it, that no man could escape out, and gaue Edmund battell (who came to raise the siege) at Proman by Gillingham, where Edmund had the vpper hand. The second  battell they fought at Caerstane,Io. Castor. Matth. West. pag. 498. in the which E∣dric, Almar and Algar vsed themselues traitorously against Edmund, where after long fight, the night departed both the armies. The third battell was at London, where Edmund pursued the Danes to  their ships, and entered the citie triumphantlie: & two daies after they fought the fourth battell at  Brenford, from whence Edmund bare the honor a∣waie, and went to gather a new armie, whiles Cnute did besiege London by water and land, but it was manfullie defended. Then Edmund with his armie passed the Thames at Brenford, and en∣tred into Kent, and fought the fift battell, where the Danes fled as sheepe before him, but he staied  the pursute by the wicked read of the traitor E∣dric, whome he had receiued to mercie and made steward of the land, the which battell was fought at Essedowne in Essex with all the whole power of the Danes and Englishmen, where Edmund shewed his prowes,Matth. West. pag. 399. and forsaking his place, which was betwixt the Dragon & the Standard, he entred
the armie of his enimies, and brake the thickest rankes of them, and compelled the prowdest of them to turne their backes. Which when Edric saw, fearing the ouerthrow of the Danes, cried a∣lowd Fledd Engle, Fledd Engle, Dead is Edmund: & therevpon fled with his people, whome all the ar∣mie folowed to the great murther of Englishmen,Hol. pag. 255. Matth. West. page. 399. and there were slaine Edmund, Alfric, Godwyn, and Vlfkettel, all Dukes, & all the cheualrie of England. After which victorie, Cnute entred London, & was crowned king of the land. And Edmund gathered his armie togither, and they met in Glocestershire, but either armie fearing other, were loth to fight, but moued the kings to make an end of this cruell bloudshed by combat,Hol. pag. 256. Matt. West. page. 400. Io. Castor. wherevnto either prince a∣greed, and the place being appointed, fought togi∣ther manfullie, and either of them were found so valiant and worthie men, as few the like. But Cnute fearing the incomparable strength of Ed∣mund mooued him to accord, wherevnto he agreed. Therevpon peace was concluded with much ioie, that Edmund should reigne in Westsex, and Cnute in Mercia: and so they departed, Cnute to London, and Edmund to Oxford,Sm. Dunel. Fabian. Matth. West. pag. 401. where he was traitorously murthered by a sonne of Edric with a sharp knife, as he was at the priuie. Edric being quicklie cer∣tified of the deed, came to Cnute (with much ioie) and greeted him as onelie king of England, decla∣ring how Edmund was slaine at Oxford. To whom Cnute replied, that for his good seruice he would reward him as his deserts required,Matt. West. page. 402. and set him aboue all the nobles of England. Therevp∣pon forthwith he caused his head to be cut off, and to be set vpon a pole, on the highest towre in Lon∣don,
and then he caused execution to be done vpon all the other, that were consenting to the mur∣ther. In the yeare 1015. Lhewelyn the son of Sit∣sylht did raise a great power against Aedan,1015 who by force had taken vpon him the rule of North∣wales, and slue him with his foure sonnes in bat∣tell, and (hauing no respect to Iago or Iames the sonne of Edwal the right heire) tooke vpon him the name and authoritie of king of Wales. This Lhewelyn was descended from the kings of Wales by his mother side, whose name was Trawst, daughter to Elise second sonne to Anarawd, which was the eldest sonne of Roderike the great: who also had to wife Angharat, the onlie daugh∣ter of Meredyth prince of Southwales, and so by these meanes he claimed and enioied the right of either countrie, as hereafter shalbe declared.
Lhewelyn ap Sitsylht. Lhewelyn the sonne of Sitsylht: and Angharad the daughter of Meredyth. AFTER that Lhewelyn son of Sitsylht had taken into his hands the gouernance of Wales, all things did prosper in the land: for the earth brought foorth double to the time before passed, the people prospered in all their affaires, and multi∣plied woonderfullie, the cattell increased in great number, so that there was neither begger nor poore man from the South to the North sea, but euerie man had plentie, euerie house a dweller, and euerie towne inhabitants. Now in this time Cnute married Emme sometimes wife to Edelred, and mother to Alfred and Edward, and sent Ed∣mund and Edward the sonnes of Edmund Ironside to
Hungarie to be slaine,Rn. Cest. lib. 6. cap. 18. howheit, the king of Hunga∣rie cherished them as his owne children. King Cnute also seazed vpon the land a great subsidie of 72000. pounds, besides 11000. li. which the ci∣tizens of London paid.1019 In the yeare 1019. Meyric the sonne of Arthpoel did raise a great armie a∣gainst Lhewelyn king or prince of Wales, which met with him in the field, and manfullie slue him, and discomsited his people.Ran. Cest. ibi. Also this yeare Cnute with a great nauie sailed to Denmarke, and made war against the Vandales, which had a great ar∣mie in the field, whome Cnute ouerthrew by the prowes of Earle Godwyn, and the Englishmen, wherefore he loved them the better euer after. In the yeare 1020. a certaine Scot of lowe birth came to Southwales,1020 and named himselfe Run the sonne of Meredyth their late king, whome the nobilitie, which loued not Lhewelyn, exalted to the regall throne, and tooke him for their king, which thing when Lhewelyn heard, he gathered his po∣wer in Northwales, and came towards Run, who had gotten all the strength of Southwales toge∣ther at Abergwili, where with great pride he a∣bode the comming of Lhewelyn. But when both armies were readie to ioine, Run full of brags and crakes incouraged his people to fight, promising them the victorie: yet he himselfe (following the prouerbe, which biddeth a man to set on his dog, and not to run after him) set on his people to fight it to the vttermost, and withdrew himselfe priuilie out of the waie: wheras vpon the contrarie part Lhewelyn, like a bold and couragious prince, came before his people, calling for the vile Scot Run, that durst so beelie a princes bloud, and so both the ar∣mies
ioined together with much malice and ha∣tred, for the one partie were not so couragious to defend the quarell of so woorthie a prince of their owne bloud, as the other were obstinate in the cause of a stranger: in the end, after great slaughter vpon either part, the Northwales men remembring their old victories, and incouraged by the prowes of their prince, put their enimies to flight, and pursued Run so narrowlie, that all his Scottish shifts could not saue his life, and so re∣turned home with great spoile and prey. Then Lhewelyn ruled all the land quietlie, but the yeare following he was slaine by Howel and Meredyth the sonnes of Edwyn, leauing behind him a sonne named Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn.
Iago ap Edwal. Iago the sonne of Edwal ap Meyric ap Edwal Voel. AFter the death of Lhewelyn, Iago or Iames the sonne of Edwal tooke vppon him the rule of Northwales as right heire thereof. And Ry∣therch the sonne of Iestyn, go∣uerned Southwales by strong hand.Ran. Cest. lib. 6. Cnute king of England about this time made a viage to Denmarke and Swethen, a∣gainst Vlf and Alaf, who had stirred the Findlanders against him, with whom he had a cruell fight, and lost a great number of his armie, aswell English∣men as Danes, and after his returne to England, he made his iournie to Rome with much pompe and glorie,Io. Cast. not because he thought by that iournie to be clensed from his sinnes, but that his ambi∣tious
mind might haue the praise and fame of the world, for his rich gifts and princely behauior, and what holines he learned there, it appeared at his returne. For forthwith he entred Scotland with a great armie, against Malcolme the prince thereof, who desired peace, and became his subiect, with two other kings of the Orkneys, & Ewist, Molbeath and Iermare. 1031About the yeare 1031. the Irish-scots entred Southwales, by the meanes of Howel and Meredyth, the sonnes of Edwyn ap Eneon ap Owen ap Howel Dha, who hired them against Rytherch ap Iestyn, whom they discomfited and slew, & by that means attained vnto the gouernement of Southwales, which they two ruled iointly, but yet with small quietnesse, for the sonnes of Rytherch gathered a number of such as were their fathers friends to reuenge his death, with whom Howel and Mere∣dyth met at Hyarthwy, & after long fight put them to flight. But in the yeare folowing, Meredyth was slaine by the sons of Conan the sonne of Sit∣sylht, brother to the worthie prince Lhewelyn to re∣uenge their fathers death, whome Meredyth and his brother had slaine. The yeare next ensuing, certaine Englishmen entred the land of Gwent, with whom, Rytherch ap Iestyn fought, and was by them slaine. Not long after died Cnute the most famous and mightiest prince in the West parts of the world, as he that had vnder his dominion the great countrie of Swethen, from Germanie to the Northpole,H. Hunt. Io. Castor. Matth. West. Ran. Cest. li. 6 Al. Crantz. with Norway and Denmarke, and all the noble Ile of Brytaine. After whom Haroald Harfote his son begotten vpon Alwyn the daugh∣ter of Duke Alfelyn, was created king. For Hardie
Cnute his other sonne by Emma was then in Den∣marke. This Haroald in the first yeare of his reigne banished Emma his stepmother out of the realme. In the yeare 1037.1037 Gruffyth the son of Lhewelyn ap Sitsylth sometimes king of Wales, raised a great number of people against Iago then enioieng the principalitie or kingdome of Northwales, whome Iago likewise prouided for, as well as he could: but the more part and the better souldiours were of Gruffyths side, for the loue they bare to his father, which afterward well appeared: for after the ar∣mies once met, Iago was soone ouerthrowne and slaine. This Iago left behind him a sonne called Conan, by his wife Auandred daughter to Gweir the sonne of Pylh.
Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn. Gruffyth the sonne of Lhewelyn ap Sitsylht and Angharat. GRuffyth ap Lhewelyn, af∣ter hee had slaine Iago, gouerned Northwales worthily in all things, following his fathers steps, who ouercame both the Danes and the Englishmen diuerse times, & defended his countrie and people manfullie all his reigne. In the first yeare of his gouernment he fought with the Englishmen and Danes at Crosford vpon Seauerne, and put them to flight, and from thence he lead his armie to Lhan∣padarn vawr in Caerdiganshire, and destroied it vt∣terlie, & from thence passed all Southwales through
out, and receiued the people to his subiection. For Howel ap Edwyn their king fled before his face, and forlooke the land. Hol. pag. 272.This Howel procured Edwyn the brother of Leofrike Earle of Chester or Mercia, to come with an armie of Englishmen and Danes to his aide against prince Gruf∣fyth, who met his enimies in the field, and ouercame them, and slue the said Edwyn,Matt. West. but Howel escaped by flight. After the which victorie, Gruffyth made sundrie inuasions vpon the marches towards Hereford, and alwaies returned with great spoiles. When Gruffyth had brought all Wales vnder his dominion, he returned to Northwales againe. The yeare insuing, 1038.1038 Hernun Archbishop of Meneuia or S. Dauids died, a man both learned and godlie. The yeare next following, Howel king of Southwales gathered a great power of his friends and strangers, and entred the land, intending to recouer it againe. Wherefore Gruffyth like a wor∣thie prince came with all speed to succour his peo∣ple, and meeting with Howel at Pencadair, after he had incouraged his souldiours, gaue him battell, and ouerthrew him, and pursued him so narrow∣lie, that hee tooke Howels wife, whome hee had brought to the field to see the ouerthrow of Gruf∣fyth (which chanced otherwise) whome Gruffyth liked so well, that he kept hir for his concubine. About this time, Haroald king of England died, and his brother Hardycnute reigned in his stead, a noble and a liberall prince, who (as it is reported) caused his tables to be couered and furnished four times euerie daie,H. Hunt for strangers and all commers, and after he had reigned two yeares,Matt. West. Sim. Dunel. he died at Lambeth in the floure of his age. After whose
death, the Englishmen sent for Alfred the eldest son of Edelred from Normandy, but that message plea∣sed not Earle Godwyn, which was the mightiest man in the land, because he knew the yoong prince to be couragious and stout, and therefore one that would not suffer him to rule the land as he inten∣ded to doo. Therefore he persuaded the people that Alfred, who had come well accompanied with Nor∣manes, had promised them the whole rule of the land, and therevpon they tooke all the Normanes, and bound them, and afterward tithed them, put∣ting euerie tenth man to death. And yet they thought there were too manie, wherefore they ti∣thed them the second time: and lead Alfred from Gilford (where this crueltie was committed) to Gillingham, and there put out his eies, and remo∣ued him thence to Ely, where he was pitifullie murthered. Afterward they sent for Edward the yonger sonne, whome they receiued as king the yeare folowing, after that he had maried God∣wynes daughter, who in the first yeere of his reigne banished Earle Swayne, sonne to the said Earle Godwyn, who was receiued of the Earle of Flan∣ders. In the yeare 1041. Howel came againe to Southwales,1041 and remained there awhile: and short∣lie after a number of strangers landed in West∣wales & spoiled the countrie, against whom Howel gathered a number of people, and fought with them, and droue them to their ships with much losse. At this time Conan the sonne of Iago (who had fled to Ireland to saue his life) with the power of Alfred king of Deuelyn, whose daughter Ranulph he had maried, entred Northwales, and by treason had
taken Gruffyth the king, and caried him towards the ships: but when it was knowen, the countrie vpon the sudden folowed the Irishmen, and ouerta∣king them rescued their prince, requiting their foes with much slaughter to their ships, who re∣turned streight with Conan to Ireland. The yeare folowing, Howel the sonne of Owen Lord of Gla∣morgan died, being a man full of yeares. Then Howel ap Edwyn called to his succour Danes and Englishmen, with all the power he could make in Southwales. Whereof Gruffyth being certified, ga∣thered his power togither in Northwales, & came couragiouslie to meete his enimies, (whom he had twise before discomfited) and ouercame them, and chased them, as farre as the spring of the riuer Towy, where after a long and dangerous battell Howel was slaine, and his armie discomfited, and so narrowlie pursued that few escaped aliue. Af∣ter whose death Rytherch and Rees the sonnes of Rytherch ap Iestyn aspiring againe to the rule and gouernment of Southwales,Hol. pag. 270. Matt. West. which their father had once obtained, gathered a great armie, aswell of strangers as out of Gwentland, and Glamorgan, and met with Gruffyth king of Wales, who after his accustomed maner detracting no time, but couragiouslie animating his men with the re∣membrance of their former fortune and diuerse vi∣ctories vnder his standard, ioined battell with his enimies, whom he found disposed to abide, & to win againt the honor which before they had lost: wher∣fore when they met, the fight was cruell & bloudie, & continued till night, which easilie departed both armies being werie with fighting, and either fea∣ring other, returned to their countries, to gather
more strength. This yeare Ioseph bishop of Teilo or Landaf died at Rome. The land being thus quie∣ted, Gruffyth ruled al Wales without any trouble: till about two yeares after, the Gentlemen of Y∣strad Towy did by treason kill 140. of the Prince his best soldiors, to reuenge whose death the king Gruffyth destroied all Dyuet and Ystrad Towy. Heere is also to be noted, that such snow fell this yeare, that it laie vpon the earth from the kalends of Ianuarie, to the 14. of March. About this time, Lothen and Hyrling landed at Sandwich with a great number of Danes, and after they had spoiled the towne, they returned to their ships, and sailed to Flanders, and sold their booties, and so sailed to their countrie. At this time also Earle Swayne re∣turned to England, and came to his fathers house at Pevenese, and humblie besought his father, and his brethren Haroald & Tostie, to procure him the kings fauour. So Earle Beorned promised to in∣treate the king for him, and went with Swayne to his ships, where he was traitorouslie murthe∣red, and his bodie left vpon the shore, vntill his friends, being certified of the same, fetched him a∣waie, and buried him at Winchester, where his vncle king Cnute had beene buried before. Swayne hauing committed this wicked fact, sailed againe to Flanders, and continued there, till his father made peace with the king, and brought him in fauour againe about a yeare after. 1050In the yeare 1050. Conan the sonne of Iago did gather an armie of his friends in Ireland, min∣ding to recouer his inheritance againe, and as he sailed towards Wales, there arose such a tempest, that it scattered his nauie abroade, and drowned
the most part of his ships, so that he was disap∣pointed of his purpose, & lost his labour. Short∣lie after, Robert Archbishop of Canturburie accu∣sed Earle Godwyn and his sonnes Swayne and Ha∣roald of treason, and the Queene of adulterie, who bicause they refused to appeare, being called be∣fore the king, were banished the land, and the Queene put awaie from the king, wherevpon, Godwyn with Swayne fled to Flanders, and Haroald to Ireland. Wil. Malms. Hol. pag. 270. and 271.Eustace Earle of Bologne, the father of Godfrey, hauing married Goda king Edwards sister, the widow of Walter de Maunt, came to England to his brother in lawe, and as he was returning home againe, one of his seruants kild a man at Canturburie (or at Douer as Matt. Westm. hath) whereof grew a great inconuenience and slaughter on both sides:Matt. West. page. 419. wherevpon Eustace returning againe; made a gréeuous complaint to king Edward vpon the Kentish∣men, whose part Earle Godwyn tooke, bicause they were of his countie. But Eustace by the suggestion of Robert Arch∣bishop of Canturburie (who hated Godwyn and his sonnes) so incensed king Edward against him and the Kentish∣men,Matt. Park. that Godwyn and his sonnes were sent for, to answer the matter before the king at Glocester. Wherevpon God∣wyn fearing the kings displeasure (who could neuer brooke him sithence the death of his brother Alfred) gathered an ar∣mie out of Kent and other countries where his sonnes ru∣led, and so came towards Glocester, reporting abroade, that all this preparation was made to resist Gruffyth prince of Wales, who (as they affirmed) was readie with an armie to inuade the marches. But king Edward being certified by the Welshmen, that there was no such things in hand, commanded Godwyn to send backe his armie, and to come himselfe to answer, according to the order of law. Which when he refused to doo, the king by the aduise of Earle Leofrike appointed a Parliament and meeting at
London, to take order in these matters, where the king came with a great armie out of Mercia and other westerne countries. Then Godwyn remaining with his armie in Southwerke, and perceiuing how that diuers of his friends disappointed him, and other dailie forsooke him, and went to the kings part, despairing to be able to withstand the kings procéedings against him, conueied himselfe awaie priuilie with his sonnes, and fled out of the land. Wherevpon king Edward proclamed him and his sonnes outlawes, confis∣cated their goods, and gaue their lands to other of his no∣bilitie. Then the king gaue to Adonan the earldome of Deuonshire and Dorsetshire, and to Algar sonne of Earle Leofrick the earldome of Haroald. Neuer∣thelesse Godwyn and Swayne got men and ships in Flanders, and sailed to the ile of Wight, which they spoiled, and so they did Portland. At the same time Haroald cōming from Ireland, and wafting alongst the shoare, spoiling the countrie as he went, at length met with his father & brother, who being together, burned Peuenesey, Romney, Heath, Folk∣ston, Douer, and Sandwich, & entring the Thames destroied Sheppey, and burned the kings houses at Mydltowne, and afterward sailed vp towards London, where by the way they met with the king and so sailed with him, & when they were readie to fight, an accord was made by meanes of Bishop Stigand, in such sort that the king restored them their lands and goodes, tooke home the Queene, and banished the Archbishop with all the French∣men, which had put that suspicion in the kings head. Mat. Westm. writeth, that about this time, to wit, An. 1053. Rees the brother of Gruffyth king of Wales was slaine in a
place called Bulendune,Matt. West. page. 420. whose head was presented to king Edward, the daie before the Epiphanie, the king being then at Glocester. A litle after that, Oswald Earle of Northumber∣land, when he heard that his sonne was slaine in Scotland, whither his father had sent him to con∣quere it, asked whether his deaths wound was in his brest or in his backe; and they said in his brest: and he answered, I am right glad thereof, for I would not wish me nor my sonne to die o∣therwise. Then king Edward entred Scotland, and ouercame the king in battell, & subdued the whole land to him selfe. The yeare folowing, Earle God∣wyn died at the kings table, choked with a peece of bread, whose Earldome Haroald his sonne had, and Algar Earle of Chester had the Earldome of Haroald. Hector Boet. lib. 12. cap. 5.About this time Makbeth king of Scotland caused a noble man of his named Bancho, to be cruellie murthered, where∣vpon Fleance the sonne of the said Bancho escaping the hands of Makbeth,Buchan. li. 7. page. 62. fled to Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn prince of Wales, where being ioifullie receiued and entertained cour∣teouslie, he grew into such fauor with the said Prince, that he thought nothing too good for him. But in processe of time Fleance forgetting the curtesie to him shewed,Hol. pag. 247. fell in loue with the princes daughter, and gat hir with child. Which thing the prince tooke in so ill part, that he in a rage caused Fleance to be kild, holding his daughter in most vile estate of seruitude, for so suffering hir selfe to be defloured by a stranger. At length she was deliuered of a sonne, which was named Walter, who in few yeares prooued a man of great courage and valiancie, in whome from his childhood appeared a certeine noblenes of mind, readie to attempt a∣nie great enterprise. This VValter on a time fell out with one of his companions, who in that heat of contention ob∣iected
vnto him, that he was but a bastard begotten in vn∣lawfull bed. Which reproch so gréeued VValter, that he fell vpon the other, and slew him; wherevpon fearing the pu∣nishment of the law, he fled into Scotland, where he fell in∣to the companie of those Englishmen which were come thi∣ther with Quéene Margaret the sister of Edgar Edeling, a∣mongst whom he shewed himself so discréet and sober in all his demcanor, that he was highlie estéemed of all men: and so attaining to higher reputation and credit, was af∣terward emploied in the affaires of the common wealth, and at length made Lord Steward of Scotland, receiuing the kings reuenewes of the whole realme. Of the which of∣fice he and his posteritie reteined that sirname of Steward euer after, from whom descended the most noble kings of Scotland of the familie of Stewards, besides manie other Dukes, Marquesses, Earles, and Barones of great fame and renowme. Also at this time, Siward that worthie Earle of Northumberland, being brought to the point of death with the bloudie fluxe, bewailed his mis∣chance, that he had escaped in manie a dangerous battell, and now should die such a filthie and co∣wardlie death, and calling his friends and his men about him, commanded them to set him in his chaire, and to arme him at all points, and put his shield in the left hand, and so made an end of his worthie life. Whose Earldome, because his sonne was within yeares, was giuen to Tosty Godwyns sonne. 1054In the yeare 1054. Gruffyth the son of Rytherch ap Iestyn, did gather a great number, aswell stran∣gers as others, against Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn king or prince of Wales, but commonlie called king of Northwales; who detracting no time, meeting him, fought with him, & slew him. Shortlie after,
Algar Earle of Chester,Matt. West. page. 421. being conuicted of treason against the king, fled to Gruffyth king or prince of Wales, who gathered his power to reuenge the often wrongs, which he had receiued at the Eng∣lishmens hands, who euer succoured his enimies against him.Hol. pag. 272 276. & 277. Therefore he together with Algar entred Herefordshire, and spoiled all the waie with fire and sword, to the citie, whither all the people had fled,Matt. West. page. 422. Io. Castor. and they boldlie issued forth (Earle Ran∣dulph being their leader) and gaue him battell, which Gruffyth wished for aboue anie other thing,This Ran∣dulphe was K. Edwards nephew, by his sister Goda, the wife of wal∣ter De Maunt. as he that had wonne fiue set fields; and couragi∣ouslie receiuing his enimies, fought with them. Which fight was long & doubtfull, till such time as Gruffyth incouraged his people with the re∣membrance of the prowesse & worthie actes of the ancient Brytaines their forfathers, saieng that they were the same enimies, whose backes they had so oftentimes seene before: which doubled their strength and force, and so they pressed forwards, that their foes were compelled to forsake the field and trust to their feete, where their hands preuai∣led not, and thought to haue taken the towne for their defense. But Gruffyth and his men pursued them so hard, that they entred with them, and af∣ter a great slaughter returned home with manie worthie prisoners, great triumph, & rich spoiles, leauing nothing in the towne, but bloud & ashes, and the walles rased to the ground. Hol. pag. 276. Io. Castor.There be some which affirme, that king Edward by euill counsell (as it is thought) banished Algar the sonne of Earle Leofrike, wherevpon he gat him into Ireland, and there prouiding xviij. ships of rouers, returned and ioined himself with Gruffyth king or prince of Wales, who both to∣gether
inuaded the countrie of Mercia,Matt. West. page. 423. Si. Dunelm. about Hereford, where Ranulph Earle of that countrie (who was sonne to king Edwards sister named Goda, by hir first husband VValter de Maunt) came against them with a great ar∣mie, and met them about two miles from Hereford, where after a sore fight by the space of thrée houres, Ranulph and his armie were discomfited, and about 500. of them slaine, and the rest put to flight, whome Gruffyth & Algar pursued to Hereford, and entring the towne, set the cathedrall church on fire, and slue the Bishop named Leogar, with sea∣uen of the canons, spoiled and burnt the towne misera∣blie. Wherevpon, king Edward being aduertised héereof, gathered an armie, and sent Haroald the sonne of Earle Godwyn against them, who pursuing the enimies to Northwales, passed through Stradclwyd to Snowdon: but Gruffyth and Algar being afraid to méete Haroald, gote them againe to Southwales, whereof Haroald being aduer∣tised, left one part of his armie in Northwales, to resist the enimies there, and returning with the residue to Hereford, caused a great trench to be cast round about the towne, with a high rampire stronglie fortifieng the gates of the same. After this, by meanes of a parle had with Gruffyth & Algar, at a place called Biligelhag, a peace was conclu∣ded, wherevpon Algar being pardoned by the king, and re∣stored againe to his Earledome, returned home to Che∣ster. About two yeares after, Algar was accused againe of treason, so that he was the second time exiled the land, and repaired to his old friend Gruffyth prince of Northwales,Io. Cast. Hol. pa. 277. by whome he was receiued ioifullie, and restored againe to his Earledome by the aid of certaine strangers, which came by chance frō Norwaie. Whervpon king Edward be∣ing sore offended with Gruffyth, sent Haroald againe with power to Northwales, to be reuenged vpon him, who com∣ming to Ruthlan, burned the palace of Gruffyth, and his ships, and then returned backe to the king at Glocester. About this time, Edward the sonne of Edmund
Ironside, came to England with his wife and chil∣dren, Edgar Edeling (which signifieth in the Bry∣tish toong, a yong Lord or a Prince) and Margaret which was afterwards Queene of Scots, and mo∣ther to Mawd, wife to Henrie the first king of Eng∣land. About two yeares after came Roderike, sonne to Haroald king of Denmarke,Matt. West. with a great armie to Wales, and there being freendlie receiued of king Gruffyth, ioining his power to Gruffyths, en∣tred England, and cruellie spoiled and burned a great part of the land. But shortlie after, Roderike was compelled to returne to his ships, and to saile to Denmarke, and Gruffyth returned with spoiles. This yeare,Matt. Park. Matt. West. as Haroald Godwyns sonne would haue sailed to Flanders, he was driuen by force of a tempest to land in Poytiers, where he was taken, and conueied to William Bastard, duke of Norman∣die: to whom Haroald declared his iournie thither, to be onelie to offer him his seruice in the affaires of England, and tooke a solemne oth, first to marrie the Dukes daughter, and after the death of Ed∣ward to reserue the crowne to the dukes vse. Then shortlie after receiuing rich gifts, with much ho∣nor he returned to England. This yeare died Owen the sonne of Gruffyth ap Rytherch. Also Haroald and his brother Tosty,Matt. West. page. 427. by the procurement of Caradoc ap Gruffyth ap Rytherch, and others, gathered a great power, and entred Southwales, and subdued a great part thereof, and wrought so with those that were about Gruffyth the king, that assoone as he had gathered his people in Northwales, & tooke his iournie to meete with Haroald, he was cruellie and traitorouslie slaine by his owne men, and his head brought to Haroald: who appointed and pla∣ced
Meredyth the sonne of Owen ap Edwyn, prince and ruler in Southwales, and he with his brother Tosty returned home. Hol. pag. 277. Matt. West. page. 427.Some doo report, that Haroald, about the rogation wéeke by the kings commandement, went against the Welshmen, and taking the sea, sailed by Bristowe, round about the coast, compassing in maner all Wales. His brother Tosty, that was Earle of Northumberland, met him by appoint∣ment with an host of horsemen, and so ioining together, they destroied the countrie of Southwales, in such sort, that the Welshmen were compelled to submit themselues to deliuer hostages, and conditioned to paie the ancient tri∣bute, which before time they had paied. The people of that countrie, bicause Gruffyth their prince fled at the com∣ming of Haroald, and left them to be a prey for the eni∣mie, hated him fore, whome, as soone as he returned to them againe, they slue, and sent his head to Haroald, which he sent to the king. After whose death, king Edward gran∣ted the principalitie of Northwales to Blethyn and Rywal∣hon the sonnes of Convyn, brethren to Gruffyth by the mo∣thers side, who did homage vnto him for the same. This Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn gouerned Wales 34. yeares valiantlie and woorthilie, he neuer fought but he bare awaie the victorie, he was gentle to his subiects, and cruell to his foes, looued of the one, and feared of the other: liberall to strangers, costlie in apparell, and princelie in all his dooings, and vnwoorthie of that cruell death, that the am∣bitious desire of rule did prouoke his vnkind subiects, and vnnaturall coosens, to prepare for so noble a prince, and so gentle a maister as hee was.
Blethyn and Rywalhon. Blethyn and Rywalhon the sonnes fo Convyn. AFter the decease of king or prince Gruffyth, Meredyth the sonne of Owen ap Edwyn (which Edwyn as some writers saie was the sonne of Howel Dha) did take vpon him the gouernment of Southwales, and Blethyn and Rywalhon the sonnes of Convyn, and halfe brethren to king Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn (as they which were borne of Angharat daughter to
Meredyth king of Wales) did gouerne Northwales, Conan the sonne of Iago being all this time with his father in lawe in Ireland. About this time it fortuned, that as Haroald serued the king with drinke at Windsor, his brother Tofty mooued with enuie that his yonger brother should be preferred before him,Matth. West. pulled him by the haire of the head, and ouerthrewe him. Then departing thence, full of rancor and malice, to Hereford, where Haroald had prepared great cheere for the king, he slue all Ha∣roalds seruants, and cut off their heads, armes, legs, noses, feet, and hands, and filled all the ves∣sels of wine, meath, beere, and ale therwith: and sent the King word, that he should want no pow∣dred and sowsed meats, when he came thither; as for other things, let him make prouision himselfe. For which heinous offense the king banished him the land for euer. Caradoc ap Gruffyth ap Rytherch was the first that procu∣red Haroald for to come to Wales against Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn, hoping by him to atteine vnto the gouerne∣ment of Southwales. But it fell out otherwise, for when Ha∣roald vnderstood that he should not get that at the hands of Caradoc which he looked for, which was a certaine lord∣ship within Wales nigh vnto Hereford, and knowing also Caradoc to be subtile and deceiptfull man, compounding with Meredyth ap Owen for that lordship, he made him king or prince of Southwales, and banished Caradoc out of the countrie.Matt. West. page. 429. Mar. Scotus. Afterward Haroald hauing obteined that lordship, builded there a princelie and sumptuous house at a place called Portaslyth, and diuers times earnestlie inui∣ted the king to come to sée the same, & at the length the king being then at Glocester not far off, granted him his re∣quest: wherevpon, Haroald made such preparation as is be∣fore mentioned for him▪ which was thus most horribly abu∣sed
by Tosty. Soone after this wicked act, the said Caradoc ap Gruffyth came to the same house, and to be reuenged vpon Haroald, killed all the workemen and laborers that were there at worke, and all the seruants and people of Haroald that he could find, and defacing the worke, carri∣ed awaie those things that with great labour and expen∣ses had béene brought thither, to set out and beautifie the building. Haroald and his brother were cheefe Iusticers of the land,Matt. West. page. 430. and they vsed, when they saw any ma∣nor house or farme that pleased them, to cause the owner to be murthered by night, with all his chil∣dren and houshold, and then to seise the land into their owne hands. Now when the people of Nor∣thumberland heard the exile of Tosty, which was their Earle, they reioised much; for they hated him to the death. Wherfore cōming to Yorke, they slue all his familie, aswell Englishmen as Danes. Then ioining to them the men of Lincolneshire, Noting∣ham, and Derbyshire, they made Marcher sonne of Earle Algar their captaine, and to them came his brother Edwyn with his people, and a great num∣ber of Welshmen, and they went burning & spoi∣ling to Hampton; where Haroald met with them, sent from the king to know their willes; and they said, they would haue Marcher Earle ouer them, which the king granted & confirmed. Whervpon they returned,Matt. West. the one to the North, the other to Wales, spoiling and burning all the countrie, and lead with them manie thousand prisoners. The yeare following being 1066.1066 king Edward died, and was buried at Westminster. This was the last King of Saxon or English bloud, that reigned in this land, which from Cerdicke king of
Westsaxons had continued 544. and from Egbert the first Monarch 171. yeares. After the death of Edward, some would haue preferred Edgar Edeling as right heire to the crowne: but Haroald being of great power, more rich, and better freended, ob∣tained it: nothing weieng his oth and promise to William Duke of Normandie, which Duke calling all his nobles together, declared them the wrongs he had receiued at Haroalds hands. First the death of his coosen Alfred, then the banishment of the Archbishop Robert, and Earle Odan, with all the Normanes; and thirdlie, his oth and promise bro∣ken: declaring also the titles he had to England, aswell by the former promise of Edward made to him in Normandie; that if euer he enioied the crowne of England,Verie weak titles of them∣selues. William should be his heire; as also by cosinage, and by the oth and promise of Ha∣roald. Which matter considered by the nobilitie of Normandie, with all the dangers and difficulties of this expedition, brought them to such perplexi∣tie, that the more part feared the end. Then Wil∣liam Fitzosbert the Dukes sewer, seing how they were bent, dissuaded them from that viage: wher∣fore they agreed all, that he should declare their minds to the duke. Then he came to him and said, I with all my men and power am readie to liue and die with thee in this iournie: which when the other heard vpon their promise, they were readie to follow, & so made readie a great nauie. In the meane while Tosty entred Humber with 40. saile, but Earle Edwyn met with him, and put him to flight, who, as he failed toward Scotland, met with Haroald king of Norwaie with 300. saile comming towards England, and ioining with him they both
entred Humber, and hauing landed their armie, they came to Yorke, where both Earles Edwyn & Marcher gaue them battell, vpon the south part of the towne: but Haroald and Tosty bare awaie the victorie, and spoiled the citie, & then marched for∣wards, toward Stamfordbridge, where Haroald king of England and all his power did meete with them. And after a long fight & manie valiant acts atchieued on both sides, euen from morning till noone,Wil. Malms. H. Hunt. Matt. West. page. 434. at what time the Norwaies began to retire backe ouer the water, one of them, worthie not to be forgotten, kept the passage vpon the bridge, with his axe, against all the armie of Eng∣land, till three of the clock, and slew 40. men; but at the last one got vnder the bridge, and with his speare gaue him his deaths wound through the bridge. Then the armie passed ouer the bridge, and put the Norwaies to flight, and slew Haroald their king, and Tosty, where not one man escaped of all the number, that was not either killed or burned. Then Haroald entred Yorke with great ioie and triumph, & as he sate at dinner, there came a post, who told him how Duke William was landed at Suwerhide, and had fortified himself with a trench at Hastings. With which tidings Haroald being nothing dismaied, made expedition thitherward. Where William diuiding his armie into fiue bat∣tels,The exhor∣tation of W. Con∣queror to his Soldi∣ours. made a long oration vnto his soldiours: wherein he declared the worthinesse of their fore∣fathers the Danes and Norwaies, aswell against the Englishmen (which were neuer able to abide their force) as against the Frenchmen and other nations, and how they were accustomed to ouer∣come at all times, & being well horssed, well armed,
and good archers, had now to doo with a nation onelie taught to trust to their feete, euill horssed, vnarmed, and such as knew not how to occupie their bowes. Then he brought his people to the field, but Haroald couched all his armie in one bat∣tell, as nigh togither as they could well stand, and so set vpon his enimies. And after long fight Wil∣liam caused his men to retire, as if they fled; then the Englishmen folowed apase, and brake their a∣raie: which when William perceiued, he brought in a battell of fresh Normanes, who entred Haro∣alds battell, and fought so sore, that Haroald was hurt with an arrow, and afterward slaine: and so the Englishmen left the Normanes both the field and the victorie. Then W. Conquerour went streight to Lon∣don,William Conque∣rour. where he was re∣ceiued peaceablie, and crowned at Westmin∣ster king of the lande. This last battell and vt∣ter destruction of Eng∣lishmen was fought the 14. day of October, in the yeare 1066.1066 Which change was before de∣clared by a Comet that appeared in the begin∣ning of this yeare, of the which one made these verses: Anno milleno sexageno quoque seno, Anglorum metae flammas censere Cometae. Matt. Paris. page. 7.The yeare folowing, VVilliam passed the sea to Normandie, then Edgar Edeling came out of Scot∣land
to Yorke, for the people of the countrie had slaine Robert, to whome VVilliam had giuen that Earldome, and 900. men with him, and had recei∣ued Edgar for their king. But VVilliam returning from Normandie destroied all the North countrie, and chased Edgar to Scotland againe. Matt. West. lib. 2. pag. 1. Hol. pag. 297.Also Edrike Syluaticus, the sonne of Alfrike Earle of Mer∣cia, refusing to submit himselfe as other had done, when he saw that the king was departed to Normandie, rose a∣gainst such as were left in his absence to kéepe the land in obedience; wherevpon, those that laie in the castell of Here∣ford, Richard fitz Scrope, and others, oftentimes inuaded his lands, and wasted the goods of his tenants; but as often as they came against him, they alwaies lost some of their owne men: at length, he calling to his aid the kings of Wales, Blethyn and Rywalhon, wasted the countrie of Hereford, euen to Wye bridge, and then returned with a maruelous great spoile. This yeare also,1068 being 1068. Meredyth and I∣thel, the sonnes of Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn, raised a great power against Blethyn and Rywalhon kings of Northwales, and met with them at a place cal∣led Mechain, where after long fight, there were slaine vpon the one part Ithel, and vpon the other part Rywalhon, and Meredyth put to flight, whome Blethyn pursued so straightlie, that he starued for cold and hunger vpon the mountaines, and so Ble∣thyn the sonne of Convyn remained the onlie king of Powys and Northwales. About this time,Swayne king of Denmarke, and Osburne his brother,Matt. Paris. page. 8. Matt. West. lib. 2. pag. 3. came to Humber with 300. sailes, and to them came Edgar Edeling, and Earle VValtelfe, who all together came to Yorke, and wan the castell, and laie that winter betwixt Ouse
and Trent, till the king came thither, and chased the Danes to their ships, and destroied the inhabi∣tants of the countrie, but Earle VValtheof he re∣ceiued to mercie. At this time Caradoc sonne to Gruffyth ap Ry∣therch ap Iestyn caused a great number of French∣men (for so the Brytish booke calleth the Normanes) to enter Southwales, to whom he ioined his power of Gwentland, and gaue Meredyth the king of that countrie an ouerthrow, and slue him vpon the ri∣uer of Rympyn. At the same time also, Dermot Maken Anel, the worthiest and noblest prince that euer ruled in Ireland, was murthered. The two Earles Edwyn and Marcher with Hereward gathe∣red an armie against the king,Matt. Paris. but Edwyn was slaine of his owne people, and the other tooke the Ile of Elie; which the king so sore besieged, that he shortlie tooke Marcher and his complices, but Here∣ward escaped his hands manfully,Matth. West. lib. 2. pag. 4. whom the king folowed to Scotland, & made Malcolme king of the land his subiect and vassall. Then after the king passed to Normandie, and receiued Edgar Edeling to his mercie. And about this time the Normanes did lead a great power to VVestwales by sea, and de∣stroied Dyuet, and the countrie of Caerdigan, and caried awaie much spoile, and did so likewise the yeare folowing. Bleythyd Bishop of Meneuia or S. Dauids died at this time, and Sulien was Bishop in his place.Matt. West. li. 2. pag. 6. Matt. Park. page. 11. Not long after this time, Radulph Earle of Eastangles conspired against the king, with Roger Earle of Hereford, & Earle VValtheof, & at the mariage of the said Radulph with Rogers sister in Essex, the matter was opened, but it plea∣sed not the rest. Therefore Radulph tooke shipping
in Norwich, & fled to Denmarke, and the king sud∣denlie comming, ouertooke VValtheof and Roger, of whom VValtheof was beheaded, & Roger commit∣ted to prison, & the people all slaine, among whom there were a great number of VVelshmen. Matt. Paris. page. 11. Matt. West. lib. 2. pag. 6.This Radulphs mother came out of VVales, which was the cause of the Welshmens being there: for Radulph sent for manie of his mothers friends and kinsmen to come to this marriage, meaning, through their aid and procure∣ment, to get the princes and people of VVales to ioine with him in this enterprise. He also and his complices sent to Cnute king of Denmarke, promising him the kingdome of England, to aid him against VVilliam the bastard. But William being aduertised of all these things, ouerthrew all their deuises: for by his sudden comming vppon them out of Normandie, he tooke Roger his coosen, and VValtheof, whome he committed to prison, and caused to be executed afterward, but Radulph escaped and departed the realme. Of the VVelshmen, which were at this marriage, VVilli∣am hanged some, put out the eies of others, and banished the rest. After that, in the yeare 1073.1073 Blethyn ap Con∣vyn king of VVales was traitorouslie and coward∣lie murthered by Rees ap Owen ap Edwyn, and the gentlemen of Ystrad Tywy, after he had worthilie gouerned VVales 13. yeares. This man was verie liberall and mercifull, and loued iustice and equitie in all his reigne. This Blethyn had by diuerse wo∣men manie children; first Meredyth by Haer daughter to Gylhyn, Lhywarch and Ca∣dogan by another woman, Madoc and Riryd by the third, and Ior∣werth by the fourth.
Trahaern ap Caradoc. Trahaern the sonne of Caradoc. AFter the death of Blethyn, Tra∣haern ap Caradoc his coosen ger∣mane tooke vpon him the rule of Northwales, & Rees ap Owen with Rytherch ap Caradoc did iointlie rule Southwales. Then Gruffyth sonne to Conan sonne to Iago or Iames right inhe∣ritour of Northwales came from Ireland, with suc∣cor which his brethren Encumalhon king of Vlto∣nia and Ranalht and Mathawn had deliuered him, and he landed in the Ile of Môn or Anglesey, and brought it to his subiection. At this time Kynwric ap Rywalhon a noble man of Maelor, or Bromefield, was slaine in Northwales. This yeare also, Gronow and Lhewelyn the sons
of Cadogan ap Blethyn did ioine their powers with Caradoc ap Gruffyth ap Rytherch, against Rees ap Owen, and Rytherch ap Caradoc, to reuenge their grandfathers death; and then fought at a place called Camdhwr, where the sonnes of Cadogan ob∣teined the victorie. Shortlie after, Gruffyth ap Co∣nan passed ouer the water from Môn to the maine land, and Trahaern ap Caradoc met with him at Bronyrerw, where Gruffyth was put to flight, and retired backe to the Ile. In the yeare 1074.1074 Ry∣therch ap Caradoc was slaine by treason of his coo∣sen germane Meyrchaon ap Rees ap Rytherch, and Rees ap Owen ruled Southwales alone. Neuerthe∣lesse, the sonnes of Cadogan gathered their po∣wers and came against him, and fought with him the second time at Gwaynyttyd, where he was put to flight: but yet he gathered a new power, & kept the land still. Then Trahaern ap Caradoc king of Northwales mooued his power against Rees, who boldlie met him with all the power of Southwales, at a place called Pwlhgwttic, where after long fighting, Rees was put to flight, and after great slaughter of his men, he fled from place to place, fearing all things, like a stag that had beene late∣lie chased, which mistrusteth euerie noise: but at the last, he with his brother Howel fell into the hands of Caradoc ap Gruffyth, who slue them both in reuenge of the death of the wise and noble prince Blethyn ap Convyn. At this time, Sulien Archbishop of S. Dauids did forsake his Bishop∣ricke, and Abraham was chosen Bishop in his place. In the yeare 1077.1077 Rees the soone of Theo∣dor, the sonne of Eneon, the sonne of Owen, the sonne of Howel Dha, as right inheritour to the
kingdome of Southwales claimed the same, and the people receiued him with much ioie, & made him their prince. The next yeare after, Meneuia was all spoiled and destroied by strangers, and Abra∣ham the Bishop died, after whose death Sulien was compelled to take the Bishopricke againe. In the yeare folowing, Gruffyth the sonne of Co∣nan did bring a great armie of Irishmen and Scots into Wales, and ioined with Rees ap Theodor, as two right heires of the whole countrie: Gruffyth of Northwales, and Rees of Southwales; descending both linealie fró Roderike the great, against whom came Trahaern ap Caradoc, and Caradoc Gruffyth and Mailyr, the sons of Rywalhon ap Gwyn his coo∣sen germanes (for Gwyn ap Blethyn was their grandfather) who in those daies were the chiefe rulers of all Wales. And after they had met at the mountains of Carno, they fought a cruell battell, and were the more eger, bicause vpon that daies worke laie the liues & honor of either partie. But at the length the victorie fell to Gruffyth and Rees, and Trahaern with his coosens were all slaine, and the most part of their people: then the kingdomes of Wales came vnder the rule of the right heires againe. At this time also a noble man of Wales called Vrgeney ap Sitsylht was slaine by the sons of Rees Sais, which is to saie Rees the Englishman; for so they vsed to name all such as had serued in England, & could speake the English toong.
Gruffyth ap Conan. Gruffyth the sonne of Conan. AFTER the death of Traha∣ern, Gruffyth ap Conan did quiet∣lie rule Northwales, & Rees ap Theodor Southwales. A∣bout this time, Malcolme king of Scots spoiled Nor∣thumberland, and caried a great number of prisoners with him, and the peo∣ple of Northumberland slew Walter Bishop of Dur∣ham, and 100. men with him, as he sat keeping of court. Robert Curthoys also the sonne of VVilliam Bastard ouerthrew his father in battell.1079 In the yeare following,Io. Castor. Matt. West. Matt. Paris. VVilliam entred Wales with a great armie, till he came as farre as S. Dauids, where he offered and tooke homage of the kings and princes of the land. About this time, Thrustan
Abbot of Glastenburie did cause three of his moonkes to be slaine beside the high altar. Io. Castor.This Thrustan comming from Rome, brought with him a new kind of note for the ordinarie seruice of the church, which he would haue had his moonks to vse in their dailie seruice: but they not willing to change their old Mumpsi∣mus for his new Sumpsimus (as the priest said to the Bi∣shop of his masse) did stoutlie withstand their Abbot, and thereof came this moonkish brall, wherein these thrée moonks were slaine, and eightéene more hurt. Matt. Paris. page. 17.About this time, or not long after, the sepulchre of Wal∣wey, king Arthurs sisters sonne, was found vpon the sea shore in the countrie of Ros: the bodie by estimation, vpon viewing of the bones, was thought to be xiiij. foote in length.Io. Castor. Walwey in his life time was a right noble and va∣liant warriour, of verie good reputation, who ruled that countrie, which to this daie of him is called Walwethay. And this yeare Sulien forsooke his Bishoprike the second time, and Wylfred was stalled in his place. At this time also the towne of Caerdyff was built. In the yeare 1087.1087 William Bastard king of all Brytaine and Duke of Normandie died, when he had left neuer a noble man of English bloud within England, but had robbed, spoiled and slaine or banished them all,Io. Castor. and giuen their lands to his owne men: for God had brought in the Normanes to reuenge his anger vpon the Angles and Saxons, which Normanes were counted the cruellest peo∣ple in the world: for euer when they had brought their enimies to subiection, that they were not a∣ble to rebell against them, they commonlie destroi∣ed one another, and so euer exercised their crueltie vpon themselues; as it appeared in England, Nor∣mandie, Apulia, Calabria, Sicilia, & Antiochia, which countries they brought to their subiection.
Iohn Rous. Io. Cast.It is noted also by Iohn Rous and Castoreus, that no En∣glishman bare office of anie credit or countenance in the Conquerours daies: and that it was counted a great re∣proch and shame for a noble man or gentleman to be called an Englishman, or to ioine in affinitie by mariage with the English nation, they hated them so sore; whereby it appée∣reth, that all the ancient noble men, and gentlemen within this land, are descended either from the Normans and French, or from the Brytaines. When William had obtained full possession of the realme,Iohn Rous. he appointed & ordeined such officers as spoiled the whole land by colour of iustice:Matt. Paris. H. Hunt. yet he brought the land in such awe of him, that a child might haue caried gold openlie through all Eng∣land without danger of theeues,Matt. West. lib. 2. pag. 9. for all such often∣ders lost their hands: and if anie man forced anie woman, he should lose his stones. This William left England to William Rufus his sonne, and Nor∣mandie to his eldest sonne Robert, and his treasure he gaue to Henrie his third sonne. The same yeare all the sons of Blethyn ap Con∣vyn sometimes king of VVales, gathered their strength together against Rees ap Tewdor, who not being able to meete with them, fled to Ireland, and there he purchased himselfe great freends, and got an armie of Irishmen and Scots, to whom he promised great towards, when he should obtaine his kingdome, and so landed in Southwales with these strangers. Which when his freends hard of, they drew to him, & the other came in all hast, thin∣king to fight with him before his power should increase, and at Lhechryd they gaue him battell, where they were discomfited, and two of the bre∣thren slaine, to wit Madoc and Riryd, and the other
fled, and forsooke the countrie. As soone as Rees was in quiet possession of his kingdome, he sent home his strangers with great rewards. About this time, the shrine of S. Dauid was stolne out of the church, and when all the iewels and trea∣sures were taken away, the shrine was left where it might be found againe. The Normanes rebelled against the king in diuers places at one time: for Odo Bishop of Bayon,Matt. Paris. pag. 18. chiefe gouernour of Eng∣land, began the rebellion in Kent, and burned the kings townes: so did Roger lord Mortimer at Peue∣nest. Bishop Galfride destroied Bath and Berklay, Roger did his indeuour in Northfolke and South∣folke, Hugh in Leycester and Northamptonshires, and the Bishop of Durham was not behind in his quarter. Likewise the Earles of Hereford and Shrewesburie,Matt. Paris. page. 19. with the Welshmen, burned all VVorcestershire and Glocestershire, to the gates of VVorcester. Then the king gathered his strength together, and promising the people their ancient liberties, proceeded towards his enimies, and first wanne the castell of Tynbridge, and after besieged Odo, and Roger Mortimer in the castell of Peuenest vj. weekes, at which time his brother Robert came with an armie from Normandie, and would haue landed, but he was driuen backe by such as kept the sea coastes. Then Odo yeelded Peuenest to the king, & promised to depart the land, & so did. After∣wards the king wan the castell of Rochester, and lead his armie to Durham, & tooke it, and banished all his enimies the land. In the yeare 1088 there was a terrible earthquake through all the land: & the yeare folowing died Sulien, the godliest & wi∣sest man, and the greatest clerke in all VVales, be∣ing
80. yeares old. About this time certeine stran∣gers, which were rouers vpon the seas, landed at S. Dauids, and robbed it, and burned the towne. At which time also Cadiuor the sonne of Calhoyn lord of Dyuet died: whose sonnes Lhewelyn and Eneon mooued Gruffyth the sonne of Meredyth to make warre against their lord & prince Rees ap Theodor, and so ioining all their strength togither, came a∣gainst him to Lhandydoch, where Rees was, who gaue them battell, and putting them to flight, pursued them so sore, that he tooke Gruffyth ap Me∣redyth and put him to death. But Eneon sonne to Cadiuor ap Colhoyn, fled to Iestyn lord of Morgan∣nwc, (who likewise rebelled against Rees ap Theo∣dor) and promised vpon condition to haue Iestyns daughter in mariage, and certaine other coue∣nants then agreed vpon betweene them, to bring to their succours an armie of Normanes, for he had serued in England before, and was well knowen & acquainted with all the English nobilitie; which things being thus concluded, they were fully min∣ded to be reuenged vpon Rees.1090 And so Eneon went to England,Robert Fitz∣hamon. & wrought such means, that he procu∣red Robert Fitzhamon, with twelue other knights, to gather a great armie of Frenchmen or Nor∣manes to come to their aid, who shortlie after lan∣ded in Glamorganshire, where Iestyn ap Gurgant lord of the land receiued them with much honor, and ioining his power to theirs, burned & spoiled prince Rees his land, & destroied his people. Which thing being declared to Rees, grieued him sore, wherevpon he suddenlie gathered his power and met them,Ran. Cest. lib. 7. cap. 7. Marianu Scotus. not far from Brechnock, where after a terrible fight he was slaine, with whome fell and
decaied the kingdome of Southwales. This Rees had by his wife the daughter of Rywalhon ap Con∣vyn, a sonne called Gruffyth, who at his fathers death was but a verie child, and one Grono that was in the kings prison. These Normanes, after they had receiued their promised salarie and great rewards of Iestyn, returned to their ships. When Eneon burthened Iestyn with the promise of his daughter in mariage, Iestyn laughed him to scorne, and told him that he would bestow his daughter otherwise: wherevpon Eneon full of anger and despite folowed the Normanes. And when he came to the shoare, they were all a shipboard; then he shouted to them, and made a signe with his cloake to call them backe, and they turned againe to know his meaning. Then he went to the chiefest of them, and shewed of his abuse at Iestyns hands: declaring withall, how easie it was for them to winne that faire and pleasant countrie from Ie∣styn, whome for his treason to Rees none other prince of Wales would succour: wherevnto they were easilie persuaded, and so vngratefullie tur∣ned all their power against him, for whose defense they had come thither, and at whose hands they had beene well intertained, and recompensed with rich gifts and great rewards. And first they spoi∣led him of his countrie, who mistrusted them not, and tooke all the fertile and valey ground to them∣selues, and left the barren and rough moun∣taines to Eneon for his part. The names of those twelue knights that came and accompanied Robert Fitzhamon, were these: Londres or London, as the Brytish booke nameth him; Stradlyng, S. Iohn, Turberuile, Grenuile, Humffreuile, S. Quintine,
Soore, Sully, Berkeroll, Syward, and Fleming. These men and their heires haue enioied that countrie to this daie, who were the first strangers that e∣uer inhabited Wales, since the time of Camber. The historie of the winning of Glamorgan, in maner a∣gréeing with this author, is particularlie set in writing by some skilfull and studious Gentleman of that countrie, wherein he continueth not onelie the vse and possession of the same Lordship in the heires of those noble men, which wan it; but also sheweth their progenie and issues euen to our time. The copie whereof being deliue∣red vnto me by the right worshipfull Mistres Blanch Parry, (one of the Gentlewomen of the Quéenes Maiesties priuie cham∣ber, a singular well willer and fur∣therer of the weale publike of that countrie,) I thought good héere to insert, as followeth.
The winning of the Lordship of Glamorgan or Morgannwc out of the VVelshmens hands, and first of the description of the same Lordship. IN primis, the said Lordship in length from Rymny bridge on the east side, to Pwlh Conan on the west side, is 27. miles. The breadth thereof from the hauen of Aburthaw alias Aberdaon, on the southside, to the confines of Brechnock shire, aboue Morleys ca∣stell, is 22. miles. Item the same Lordship, being a Lordship Marcher, or a Lordship roiall, and holden of no other Lordship, the Lords e∣uer sithence the winning of the same, owing their obedience onelie to the crowne, haue vsed therein Iura regalia: that is, the triall of all actions, as well reall as personall, with plées of the crowne, and authoritie to pardon all offenses, treason onelie excepted. Item there were xj. Lordships, to wit, Senghennyth, Mys∣kyn, Ruthin, Lhanblethian, Tir Iarlh, Glyn Rothney, Auan, Neth, Coyty, Talauan and Lhantuit, alias, Bouiarton, that were members of the said Lordship of Glamorgan. In euerie of the members were the like Iura regalia vsed in all things, sauing that if anie wrong iudgement were giuen in anie of the courts of the said members, it should be reuersed by a writ of false iudgement in the countie court of Glamorgan, as su∣periour court to the same members. Also all matters of con∣science happening in debate in anie of the said members, should be heard and determined in the chancerie of Glamor∣gan,
before the Chancellor thereof. Item, the bodie of the said Lordship of Glamorgan, was (be∣fore  the alteration of the lawes in Wales) a countie of it selfe: wherein the Lord had two castels, and thrée market townes, to wit, the castell and towne of Kynfigs alias Kefnffigen, in the west part thereof, and Cowbridge towne, alias Pont vaen, in the middest. And the towne and castell of Cardyff, or Caer-Dhydh in the east part, in which castell of Cardyff, the Lord did most inhabit; and therein he had his Chancerie and Exche∣quer, and a faire court house, wherein the Countie court was monthlie kept on the mondaie for all the suters of the Sherffée, that is, of the bodie of the said Lordship it selfe, without the said members. Item, within the said Sherffée, or bodie of the said Lord∣ship, were 18. castels, and 36. knights fées and an halfe, that held of the said Lordship of Glamorgan by knights seruice, besides a great number of fréeholders. Item, in eight of the said members were ten castels, and  foure borough townes. Item, the annuall reuenewes of the said Lordship, with the  members,The value of the Seg∣niorie, be∣fore the purchase thereof. was one thousand markes, whereof was allowed in fées 400. markes; of the which members aforesaid, maister Iohn Gamage Esquier occupieth one at this daie, descended vnto him from the Turberuiles his ancestors, that is to wit, the Lordship of Coytie: and the heire of Iohn Basset enioieth an other, to wit, the Lordship of Talauan, by purchase from king Edward the sixt. The other nine members, with foure of the foresaid knights fées, & all the castels, market townes, and borough townes, with the demeanes of the same; and all the lands that were in the Lords hands, parcell of the said Lord∣ship, and members,The value of the Seg∣niorie now. the Earle of Penbroke hath purchased. So that there remaineth now to the segniorie of the said Lordship of Glamorgan (being in the Quéenes Maiesties hands) but the moitie onelie of the manour of Dynaspowys, of the va∣lue of xxvj. pounds by the yeare.
The maner of the winning of the said Lordship. 1091IN the yeare of our Lord 1091. and in the fourth yeare of the reigne of King William Rufus, one Iestyn the sonne of Gungant, being Lord of the said Lordship of Glamorgan, Rees ap Theodoc Prince of Southwales, that is, of Caermarthyne shire, and Caerdigan shire, made warre vpon him, Wherevp∣on the said Iestyn, vnderstanding himselfe vnable to with∣stand the said Rees without some aid otherwise, sent one E∣neon, a Gentleman of his, to England, to one Robertus Fitz∣hamon, a worthie man, and knight of the priuie chamber with the said King, to retaine him for his succor. The which Robert, being desirous to exercise himselfe in the feates of warre, a∣gréed soone with him thereto for a salarie to him granted for the same. Wherevpon the said Robert Fitzhamon retained to his seruice for the said iorney, twelue knights, and a compe∣tent number of soldiours, and went into Wales, and ioining there with the power of the said Iestyn, fought with the said Rees ap Tewdor, and killed him, and one Conan his sonne. After which victorie, the said Robert Fitzhamon, minding to returne home againe with his companie, demanded his sa∣larie to him due of the said Iestyn, according to the couenants and promises agréed vpon betwéene him and the aforesaid Eneon, on the behalfe of the said Iestyn his maister. The which to performe in all points, the said Iestyn denied: and therevp∣on they fell out, so that it came to be tried by battell. And for∣somuch as the said Eneon sawe his maister go from diuers articles and promises, that he had willed him to conclude with the said Robert Fitzhamon, on his behalfe, he forsooke his maister, and tooke part, he & his fréends, with the said Robert Fitzhamon. In the which conflict, the said Iestyn with a great number of his men were slaine: whereby the said Robert Fitzhamon wan the peaceable possession of the whole Lord∣ship of Glamorgan, with the members, of the which he gaue
certaine castels and manours, in reward of seruice, to the said twelue knights, and to other his Gentlemen. ¶ The Names and Sirnames of the said twelue Knights were these. 1 WIlliam de Londres, alias London. 2 Richardus de Grana villa, alias Greenfeeld. 3 Paganus de Turberuile. 4 Robertus de S. Quintino, alias S. Quintine. 5 Richardus de Syward. 6 Gilbertus de Humfreuile. 7 Rogerus de Berkrolles. 8 Reginaldus de Sully. 9 Peter le Soore. 10 Iohannes le Fleming. 11 Oliuerus de S. Iohn, a yoonger brother of the Lord S. Iohn of Basing. 12 William le Esterling, whose ancestors came out of Danske to England with the Danes, and is now by shortnesse of spèech called Stradling. ¶ The parcels giuen by the said Robert Fitzhamon, to the said twelue Knights and others, in reward of seruice. IN primis, to the said William de Londres, the said Robert Fitzhamon gaue the castell and ma∣nour of Ogmor,Ogmor. being foure knights fées; now par∣cell of the possessions of the dutchie of Lancaster. Item to the forenamed sir Richard Greenfeeld, he gaue the  castell and lordship of Neth,Neth. being one of the members afore∣said; and now parcell of the possessions of the Kight honora∣ble
the Earle of Penbroke. Item to sir Paine Turberuile, he gaue the castell and lord∣ship of Coyty,Coyty. being another of the said members: and now parcell of the possessions of M. Iohn Gamage esquire. Item to sir Robert S. Quintine, he gaue the castell and lord∣ship of Lhan Blethyan,Lhan Ble∣thyan. being another of the said members: and now parcell of the possessions of S. William Herbert of Swansey knight. Item to sir Richard Syward, he gaue the castell and lord∣ship of Talauan,Talauan. being another of the said members: and now parcell of the possessions of Anthonie Maunsell esquire. Item to sir Gilbert Humfreuile, he gaue the castell and ma∣nour of Penmarke,Penmarke. being thrée knights fées: now parcell of the possessions of the Right honorable Lord saint Iohn of Bledso. Item to sir Reginald de Sully, he gaue the castell and ma∣nor of Sully,Sully. so since called after his name, being two knights fées: now diuided betwixt the Earle of Penbroke, and the lord S. Iohn of Bledso. Item to sir Roger Berkrolles, he gaue the manour of East Orchard,East Or∣chard. being one knights fée: now parcell of the possessions of S. William Herbert of Swansey. Item to sir Peter le Soore, he gaue the castell and ma∣nour of Peterton,Peterton. so now called after his name, being one knights fée: now parcell of the possessions of the Earle of Penbroke. Item to sir Iohn Fleming he gaue the castell and manour of S. George,S. George. being one knights fée: and holden of his poste∣ritie the Flemings to this daie. Item to sir Iohn S. Iohn he gaue the castell and manour of Fonmon or Fenuon,Fonmon. being one knights fée: and now parcell of the possessions of the Lord S. Iohn of Bledso. Item to sir William le Esterling alias Stradling, he gaue the castell and manour of S. Donats,S. Donats. or S. Denwit, being one knights fée: now parcell of the possessions of sir Edward Stradling knight that now is.
Sum. Foure Lordships Members, and xiiij. Knights fees. ITem he gaue to the aforesaid, Eneon that  tooke his part, the Lordship of Senghennyth, being an other of the said members. Item he gaue the castell and Lordship of Auan, an other  of the said members, to Caradoc Fitz Iestyn, the eldest sonne of the said Iestyn. Item he gaue the Lordship of Ruthyn, an other of the said  members, to another sonne of the said Iestyn. Item the rest of the foresaid Knights fées being 22. and an  halfe, he distributed part to Gentlemen that serued him, and part to the Welshmen right owners of the same. ¶ The Portion that the Lord kept for himselfe and his Heires. THe castell of Cardyff and Kenfigg, with the foresaid thrée market townes of Cardyff, Ken∣figg and Cowbrige, and the Sherfée, being the bodie of the said Lordship of Glamorgan, and all the demeanes of the same, with the rest of the said members; to wit, Miskyn, Glynrothney, Tyr Iarl, and Boviarton, alias Lentwit: and the chéefe seigniorie of the whole, the said Robert Fitzhamon kept to himselfe. And in the said Lord∣ship of Boviarton he had a large graunge or house of husban∣drie, with lands to the same belonging, that serued him for the prouision of corne to his house. He dwelt himselfe most in the said castell or towne of Cardyff, being a faire hauen towne. And bicause he would haue the aforesaid twelue Knights and their heires giue attendance vpon him euerie Countie daie, (which was alwaies kept by the Sherife in the vtter ward of the said castell on the Mondaie monethlie as is before said) he gaue euerie one of them a lodging within the said vtter ward, the which their heires, or those that purchased the same of
their heires, doo enioie at this daie. Also the morow after the Countie daie, being the tuesdaie, the Lord his Chancellor sate alwaies in the Chancerie there, for the determining of matters of conscience in strife, happe∣ning as well in the said Sherfée as in the members: the which daie also, the said Knights vsed to giue attendance vpon the Lord: and the wednesdaie euerie man drew homeward, and then began the courts of the members to be kept in order, one after another. ¶ The Petegree of Robert Fitz∣hamon, and of his heires, Lords of Glamorgan. Some doo affirme that he was lord of Astreuile in Nor∣mandie.THe said Robert Fitzhamon, was sonne to Hamon a great Lord and kinseman of William the Conquerour, who came into the realme with him. This Robert (as is before said) was knight of the priuie chamber with king William Rufus: who (as it appeareth in the Chronicles) dreamed the night before the king was killed,Matt. West. lib. 2. pag. 21. I. Castor Matt. Paris. page. 72. that he saw the king torne in péeces by Woolues: and therefore, by his per∣suasion he willed the king, to forbeare to go abroade that forenoone. But the king, when he had dined, there was no man able to staie him, but that he would ride foorth a hun∣ting into the new Forrest, where he was slaine by Walter Tyrrell, by the glansing of his arrow shooting at a red déere. Mawd the onelie daughter and heire of the said Ro∣bert, was married to Robert Earle of Glocester, base son to king Henrie the first. William Earle of Glocester sonne to the said Robert and Mawd, died without issue male, leauing behind him thrée daughters: of the which Isabel the eldest was married to king Iohn, then Earle of Oxenford and Lancaster, (as some Chronicles doo declare) who so soone as he was
made king was diuorced from hir. And then she was ma∣ried to Geffrey Mandeuile Earle of Essex, and died with∣out issue, as far as I can find. The second daughter named Amicia, was married to Sir Gilbart de Clare, then Earle of Clare, by whome he had the Earledome of Glocester. And Mabil the third daughter was maried to the Earle of Eureux. Sir Gilbart de Clare, sonne to the said Gilbart, was the fourth Earle of Glocester. Sir Richard de Clare his sonne was the fift Earle. Sir Gilbart his sonne was the sixt Earle. Sir Gilbart his sonne, who married Iane de Acres, daughter to king Edward the first, was the seuenth Earle. Sir Gilbart de Clare their sonne was the eight Earle, and he was slaine by the Scots, in king Edward the se∣conds time: and then the Earldome fell betwéene his thrée sisters. Of the which Elianor the eldest was married to Hugh Spencer the sonne, in hir right Earle of Glocester. Margaret the second was married to Peires Gaueston, and after to the Lord Awdeley. Elizabeth the third was married first to William Lord Burgh Earle of Vlster, and after to Ralph Roch Baron of Armoy in Ireland: she was married the third time to Theobald L. Verdoun, and last∣lie to Sir Roger Damory, and had issue by euerie one of them. Sir Hugh Spencer had to his wiues purpartée the said Lordship of Glamorgan. Sir Hugh Lord Spencer their sonne enioied the same, and died without issue. Edward Lord Spencer sonne to Edward, brother to the said Hugh, succéeded the said Hugh therein. Thomas Lord Spencer his sonne succéeded him. Richard Lord Spencer his sonne, succéeded him and di∣ed inward. Isabell sister to Richard succéeded him, and married with Richard Beauchamp Earle of Worcester, and Lord
Burgauenny, who had issue by hir a daughter onelie, and died. The which daughter was married to Edward the sonne of Dawraby, Ralph Neuel Earle of Westmereland. And after the death of the said Earle of VVorcester, she said Isabell married with Richard Beauchamp, Earle of VVarwick. Henrie Beauchamp Earle of VVarwick, & after Duke of VVarwick, their sonne died without issue. Anne his sister of whole bloud succéeded him, and mar∣ried with Richard Neuel after Earle of Salisburie, and in hir right Earle of VVarwick: and had issue two daugh∣ters, Marie married to the Duke of Clarence, and Anne married first to Prince Edward slaine at Teuxburie, and after his death with Richard Duke of Glocester, who was afterward king of England. The said Anne and king Richard (being then Duke of Glocester) had the said lordship giuen vnto them by the said Anne, Countesse of VVarwick hir mother. King Henrie the seuenth enioied the same after the death of king Richard. Iasper Duke of Bedford enioied the same by the gift of king Henrie the seuenth, and died without issue: and by reason thereof it remained to the king againe. King Henrie the eight enioied the same after his Fa∣ther. King Edward the sixt succéeded him therein, and sold al∣most all the lands thereof. Quéene Marie succéeded him in the Segniorie. Queene Elizabeth our most dread souereigne Ladie that now is, doth succéed hir in the same Segniorie, and hath sold the Lordship of Neth from it: so that now there remaine no more lands appertaining to the Segniorie, but the moitie of the manour of Deinaspowys onelie.
¶The Petegree of Londres, Lord of Ogmore, one of the said twelue. WIlliam Londres Lord of the castell and manour of Ogmore, (as is before said) wan afterwards the lordships of Kyd∣welhey and Carnewilhion in Caermarthen shire, from the Welshmen: and gaue to sir Arnold Butler his seruant the castell and manour of Dunreeven in the lordship of Ogmore aforesaid. The which euer sithence hath continued in the heirs male of the said Arnold Butler, vntill within these few yeares, that it fell to Walter Vaghan, sisters sonne to Arnold Butler, the last of the Butlers that was owner thereof. Simon de Londres his sonne succéeded him. William de Londres succéeded his father Simon, and had issue one sonne. Moris de Londres his sonne succéeded him, and had is∣sue one onelie daughter. The said daughter married with one Seward, a man of great possessions. They had issue a daughter onelie, married to Henrie Earle of Lancaster, brother to Thomas Earle of Lancaster. Henrie their sonne, made afterwards Duke of Lanca∣ster did succéed them: and so the said thrée Lordships, Og∣more, Kydwelhey and Carnewilhion, became parcels of the duchie of Lancaster euer after. ¶ The Petegree of Greenefeeld. SIr Richard Greenefeeld before said (to whom the lordship of Neth was giuen in reward) was lord of the castell and manour of Bydyford in Deuonshire; at the time he came into Wales with the said Robert Fitzhamon, and founded an abbaie of
white moonkes in Neth, and gaue the whole lordship to the maintenance of the same; and then returned backe againe to Bydyford, whereas the issue male of his bodie doth yet re∣maine, and enioieth the same. The Petegree of Turberuile, Lord of Coyty. SIr Paine Turberuile, Lord of Coyty, as is before said. Sir Symon Turberuile, succéeded him, and died with∣out issue. Sir Gilbart Turberuile, succéeded his brother. Sir Paine Turberuile his sonne, succéeded him, and married Mawd, daughter and sole heire to Morgan Gam, one of the nephewes of the aforesaid Iestyn. Sir Gilbart their sonne, quartered Iestyn his armes with Turberuiles. Sir Gilbart his sonne succéeded him. Sir Richard his sonne succéeded him. Sir Paine his sonne succéeded him, who married with VVenlhian, daughter to Sir Richard Talbot knight, and had issue by hir, two sonnes, that is to wit, Gilbart and Richard; and foure daughters, namelie, Catharine, Mar∣garet, Agnes, and Sara. Sir Gilbart succéeded Sir Paine his father. Sir Gilbart his sonne succéeded him, and died without issue. Sir Richard his fathers brother succéeded him, and ha∣uing no issue, entailed the Lordship of Coity to the heires male of Sir Roger Berkerolles, knight. Sir Roger Berkerolles knight, sonne to Sir VVilliam Berkerolles knight, and Phelice his wife, one of the daughters of Veere Earle of Oxenford, which said Sir Roger had married Catharine, the eldest sister of the said Sir Richard. And for default of such issue, the remainder to the heires male of Sir Richard Stakpoole knight, who
married with Margaret, second sister of the said Richard.  And for default of such issue, the remainder to the heires of Sir Iohn de la Beare, knight, and Agnes his wife, the  third sister to the said Richard. And for lacke of such issue male, the remainder to the heires male of William Ga∣mage, and of Sara his wife, the fourth sister to the said Sir Richard Turberuile. The said Berkrolles, Stakepoole and De la Beare, died without issue male, by reason whereof, after the death of sir Laurence Berkerolles, knight, sonne to the said sir Roger, and Catharine, his wife; the said Lordship fell to sir William Gamage, sonne to Gilbert, sonne to the fore∣said William Gamage, and Sara. The said William, was sonne to sir Robert Gamage knight, sonne to Paine Gamage, Lord of the manour of Rogiade, in the coun∣tie of Monmowth. The foresaid sir William had issue Thomas, Thomas had issue Iohn, Iohn had issue Morgan, Morgan had issue sir Thomas Gamage knight; and Mar∣garet, wife to Ienkin Thomas; and Anne, wife to Robert Raglan; and Catharine, wife to Reginald ap Howel; and Wenlhian, wife to Thomas ap Meyric. The said sir Thomas Gamage had issue, Robert Ga∣mage, that late was; Catharine his eldest daughter, wife to sir Thomas Stradling knight; Marie the second daugh∣ter, wife to Matthew Herebert; Margaret the third daugh∣ter, wife to the Lord William Howard; and Elizabeth the fourth daughter, wife to Richard Hogan, of Penbrooke shire, esquier. The said Robert Gamage had issue, Iohn Gamage, that now is. Sole heire generall to the said sir Roger Berkrolles, knight, and Catharine, one of the foure sisters, and heires generall to the aforesaid sir Richard Turberuile, knight, is sir Edward Stradling knight, that now is. Sole heire generall to the said sir Richard Stakepoole, of Penbrooke shire, and Margaret his wife, another of the foure sisters, and heires generall to the said sir Richard
Turberuile knight, is sir George Vernon knight. Heires generall to the said sir Iohn de la Beare knight, and Agnes his wife, an other of the foure sisters, and heirs generall of the said sir Richard Turberuile knight; are O∣liuer S. Iohn, Lord S. Iohn of Bledso, and William Basset of Glamorgan esquier, that now is. Iohn Gamage, esquier that now is, is as well heire ge∣nerall lineallie descended from Sara the fourth sister, and heire to the said sir Richard Turberuile knight, as also heire by the entaile aforesaid, to the whole Lordship of Coyty. ¶ Robert de S. Quintine, his Petegree. SIr Robert de S. Quintine, to whom the lordship of Lhanblethian was giuen; and his issue male enioied the same, vntill king Henrie the third his time. And then, or in short time after, his issue male failed, of whome is descended sir William Parr, late Marques of Northampton. ¶ Richard de Syward, his Petegree. SIr Richard Syward, to whom the lordship of Ta∣lauan was giuen; and his issue male enioied the same, vn∣till king Edward the thirds time: at which time the heires thereof hauing other lands in Somersetshire, sold the said lord∣ship to the Lord Spencer, then Lord of Glamorgan, and went into Somersetshire to dwell there, where his issue male conti∣nueth yet. ¶ Gilbert de Humfreuile, his Petegree. SIr Gilbert Humfreuile aforesaid, to whome the castell and manour of Penmarke was giuen; and his issue
male enioied the same, till the said king Edward the thirds time: and then the inheritance of the said castell and manour descended to sir Iohn S. Iohn of Fonmon knight, to whome the forenamed lord S. Iohn of Bledso is sole heire. ¶ Roger de Berkerolles knight, his Petegree. SIr Roger Berkerolles afore said knight, to whom the manour of East Orchard was giuen; and his issue male enioied the same, till the 13. yeare of Henrie the fourth. That sir Laurence Berkerolles knight died, whom sir Edward Stradling knight, as sole heire did succéed, being sonne to sir William Stradling knight, sonne to sir Edward Stradling knight, and Wenlhian sole sister and heire to the said sir Lau∣rence, of whom Edward Stradling knight (that now is) is line∣allie descended. ¶ Reginald de Sully knight, his Petegree. SIr Reginald de Sully, to whome the castell and manour of Sully was giuen; and his issue male en∣ioied the same, vntill about king Edward the first his time. And then it fell to a daughter married to sir Morgan de Avan, Lord of the lordship of Avan aboue named: whose sonne sir Iohn de Avan had but one daughter, of whome sir George Blunt of Shropshire is lineallie descended, as sole heire, whose ancestor gaue the said lordship of Avan, and the castell and manour of Sully to the Lord Spencer in exchange, for other lands in England. ¶ Peter le Soore knight, his Petegree. SIr Peter le Soore knight, to whome was giuen the castell and manour of Peters towne; and his issue
male enioied the same, vntill king Henrie the fourth his time, and then died without issue, and his inheritance fell betwéene diuers. ¶ Iohn le Fleming knight, his Petegree. SIr Iohn le Fleming knight, to whome the castell and manour of S. George was giuen; and his issue male enioied the same, vntill king Henrie the fourth his time: and then it fell to Edmond Malefant, who had married a daughter to the last Fleming. And in king Henrie the seuenth his time, the Malefants issue by Flemings daughter failed: and then it fell to Iohn Butler of Dunreeven aboue named Esquier; and after the death of him and of Arnold his sonne, both the inheri∣tances of Fleming & Butler, fell to Walter Vaghan of Brode∣ward in the Countie of Hereford Esquier now liuing, sisters sonne to the said Arnold Butler. ¶Oliuer de S. Iohn knight, his Petegree. SIr Oliuer S. Iohn knight, to whome the castell and manour of Fonmon was giuen; and his heires male haue euer since enioied the same, to whom the aboue named lord S. Iohn of Bledso, that now is, is sole heire; whose ancestors from the winning of the said lordship of Glamorgan out of the Welshmens hands, haue continuallie dwelt at Fonmon afor∣said, vntill the latter time of king Edward the fourth. That Iohn S. Iohn esquier had the said lordship of Bledso, and manie other possessions besides, by the death of dame Margaret Beau∣champe his mother, who was also mother to Margaret, Du∣chesse of Somerset, mother to king Henrie the seuenth. Si∣thence which time, the said Iohn S. Iohn, and sir Iohn S. Iohn knight, father to my Lord that now is, haue alwaies dwelt in Bledso, but they doo kéepe their lands in Wales still in their hands.
¶ VVilliam le Esterling alias Stradling, his Petegree. SIr William Esterling knight, to whome the castell and manour of S. Donats was giuen. Sir Iohn le Esterling knight, his sonne succéeded him. Sir Moris le Esterling knight, his sonne succéeded him. Sir Robert le Esterling knight (most commonlie called Stradling by shortnesse of speach and change of some let∣ters) succéeded him. Sir Gilbert Stradling knight, his sonne succéeded him. Sir William Stradling knight, his sonne succéeded him. Sir Iohn Stradling knight, his sonne succéeded him. It doth not appeare in what stocke or sirname anie of these seuen knights aboue named, did marrie: but the christian names of the wiues of William the first, Robert, and Iohn the second, were Hawisia, Mathilda, and Cicilia. Sir Peter Stradling knight, his sonne succéeded him: who in the begining of king Edward the first his time and reigne married Iulian, sole daughter and heire of Thomas Hawey. By whom he had thrée manours, Hawey, & Com∣hawey in Somersetshire yet remaining to his heires, and Compton Hawey in Dorcetshire sold of late yeares. Sir Edward Stradling knight their son succéeded them: and he quartered the Hawey his armes with his: and married with Elianor, daughter & heire to Gilbert Strang∣bow, a yoonger brother: whose wife was daughter and heire to Richard Garnon, and had by hir two manours in Oxefordshire. Sir Edward Stradling knight his sonne succéeded him, & married with Wenlhian, daughter to Roger Berkrolles knight, and sole sister and heire to sir Laurence Berkrolles knight, as it happened afterward. Sir William Stradling knight, his sonne married with Isabel daughter and heire to Iohn S. Barbe of Somerset∣shire:
but he had no lands by hir, for it was entailed to the heires male. This sir William, in king Richard the se∣conds time, went a pilgrimage to Ierusalem, and receiued there also the orders of knighthood of the sepulchre of Christ. Sir Edward Stradling knight his sonne succéeded him, who, bicause he was sole heire generall to the said S. Barbe, did quarter S. Barbes armes with his. To whome also (in the 13. yeare of king Henrie the fourth) fell the whole inheritance of the Berkerolles, and the right of the fourth part of Turberuiles inheritance, Lord of Coyty a∣foresaid: the which for lacke of issue male of the said Berke∣rolles remained to Gamage, and to his heires male, by the especiall entaile aforesaid. The which sir Edward did quar∣ter not onelie the said Berkerolles armes with his, but also the Turberuiles and Iestynes armes: of whome the Tur∣beruiles had in marriage one of the inheritours, as is be∣fore said; bicause the said sir Edward was one of the foure heires generall to sir Richard Turberuile, to wit, sonne to sir William Stradling, sonne to Wenlhian sister and heire to the said Laurence Berkerolles, and daughter to Catha∣rine, eldest sister, and one of the foure heires generall to the aforesaid sir Richard Turberuile. The said sir Edward maried with Iane daughter to Henry Beauford, afterwards Cardinall, begotten (before he was Priest) vpon Alice one of the daughters of Richard Earle of Arundell: and in the beginning of king Henrie the se∣uenth his reigne, he went likewise on pilgrimage vnto Ierusalem, as his father did, and receiued the order of the sepulchre there. This sir Edward had to his brother sir Iohn Stradling knight, who married with the heire of Dauncy in Wilt∣shire: and had issue sir Edmond, who had issue Iohn and Edmond. Iohn had issue Anne, ladie Davers, of whome the Davers, Hungerfordes, Fynes, and Leuet, and a great progenie of them are descended: and of the said Edmond commeth Carnysoyes of Cornewal.
The said Edward had an other brother called William, of whome Stradling of Ruthyn and others are descended: the same William had a daughter named VVenlhian, who by the Earle of Ryuers had a daughter, married to sir Ro∣bert Poynes, of whome commeth all the Poynes, the New∣tons, Perots, and others. Sir Harrie Stradling knight his sonne succéeded him, and married with Elizabeth sister of whole bloud to sir VVilliam Herebert knight, Earle of Penbroke; and had is∣sue by hir one sonne, and two daughters: one of them was married to Myles ap Harry, of whome Mistresse Blanch ap Harrie, and hir bretheren and vncles are descended: the o∣ther daughter was married to Fleming of Monton, in VVales. This sir Harrie, in the sixtéenth yéere of King Edward the fourth, went in like maner on pilgrimage to Ierusalem, and receiued the order of the sepulchre there, as his father and grandfather did; and died in the Isle of Cypres, in his comming home; whose booke is to be séene as yet, with a letter that his man brought from him, to his Ladie & wife. The saieng is, that diuers of his said ancestours made the like pilgrimage: but there remaineth no memorie in writing but of these thrée. This sir Harrie, sailing from his house in Somersetshire, to his house in Wales, was taken prisoner by a Brytaine pirate, named Colyn Dolphyn, whose redemption and charges stood him in 2000. markes; for the paiment whereof he was driuen to sell the castell and manour of Basselek and Sutton in Monmouthshire, and two ma∣nours in Oxfordshire. Thomas Stradling, esquier, his sonne succéeded him, and married Ienet, daughter to Thomas Matthew of Rayder Esquier: and had issue by hir two sonnes, Edward and Harrie, and one daughter named Iane, and died before he was xxvi. yeares of age. After whose death, his wife mar∣ried with sir Rice ap Thomas, knight of the garter. Harrie
married with the daughter and heire of Thomas Iubb, learned in the lawe, and had issue by hir Francis Stradling, of S. George, by Bristow, yet liuing. Iane was married to sir William Gruffyth, of Northwales knight, and had issue by hir thrée sonnes, Edward, sir Rice Gruffyth knight, and Iohn; and seauen daughters. The eldest married to Stanley of Houghton, the second to sir Richard Buckley, knight, the third to Lewys, the fourth to Moston, the fift to Conwey, the sixt to Williams, the seauenth to Pers Motton, and after to Simon Theloal, esquier, whose wife at this time she is; the eight to Philips. Of which daugh∣ters there be a wonderfull number descended. Edward married Iane, daughter to sir Iohn Puleston knight, and had issue by hir, thrée daughters. Iane married to VVilli∣am Herebert of S. Iulian; Catharine married to VVilliam Herebert of Swansey, and an other daughter married to sir Nicholas Bagnoll knight. Sir Edward Sradling knight, succéeded his father, and married with Elizabeth, one of the thrée daughters of sir Thomas Arundell of Lanheyron in Cornewall knight. The other two were married to Speke, and S. Lowe, and had issue foure sonnes; Thomas, Robert, Edward, and Iohn. Robert married VVatkyn Locher his daughter, and hath by hir manie children; Edward married with the daughter and heire of Robert Baglan of Lantwit, and hath also diuers children; and Iohn is a priest. Also the said sir Edward had two daughters; Iane married to Alexander Popham, of Somersetshire, of whom is a great number descended; and Catharine married to sir Thomas Palmer, knight of Sussex, who hath a sonne named VVilliam. Sir Thomas Sradling knight, his sonne succéeded him, and married Catharine, the eldest daughter to sir Thomas Gamage of Coyty knight, and to dame Margaret his wife, daughter to sir Iohn S. Iohn, of Bledso knight; by whom he hath liuing yet two sonnes, Edward and Dauid; and fiue daughters, Elizabeth, Damasyn, Iane, Ioice, and
Wenlhian. Sir Edward Stradling knight, that now is, married Agnes second daughter to sir Edward Gage, of Sussex, knight, and as yet in the yeare 1572. hath no issue. Memorandum, that of the heires male, of the aforesaid twelue knights (that came with sir Robert Fitzhamon, to the winning of Glamorgan, the Lordship aforesaid) there is at this daie but the Stradling a liue, that dwelleth in VVales, and enioieth the portion giuen in reward to his ancestors. There be yet of the yoonger brothers of the Turberuiles and Flemings. Greenefeeld and Syward doo yet remaine, but they dwell in England, and haue doone awaie their lands in VVales. The Lord S. Iohn of Bledso (although he kéepeth his an∣cient inheritance in Wales) yet he dwelleth in England. ¶Thus farre the copie of the winning of Glamorgan, as I receiued the same at the hands of mistris Blanch Parrie, collected by Sir Edward Stradling knight. There were besides with the said Robert Fitzhamon in this voiage, diuers other noble men and gentlemen, some out of England, some out of Dyuet, and other places in Wales, which came thither with the said Eneon against Rees ap Theodor, of whome Robert Sitsylt was one, who albeit he had no part of the said Lordship of Glamorgan (that I can read of) yet neuerthelesse, he was in respect of his good ser∣uice there doone, preferred to the marriage of an inheri∣trice of great possessions in the land of Ewyas, and the countrie néere adioining. Of which Robert Sitsylt I find this that followeth, recorded in a verie ancient writing, conteining his whole genelogie of 16. descents of heires male lineallie; which writing for the more credit of the historie, I thought good here to insert, as followeth.
IN the yeare of Christ 1091. Robert Sitsylt came with Robert Fitzhamon to the conquest of the countrie of Glamorgan, and after wedded a Ladie, by whome he had Halterennes and o∣ther lands in Hereford and Glocestershires: he had a sonne called Iames Sitsylt. Iames Sitsylt, tooke part with Mawd the em∣presse against king Stephen, and was slaine at the siege of the castell of Wallingford, An. 4. Stephan. hauing then vpon him a vesture, whereon was wrought in needle worke his armes or ensignes, as they be made on the toombe of Gerald Sitsylt in the Abbeie of Dore, which are afterward trulie blazed, in a iudgement giuen by commission of king Edward the third, for the ancient right of the same armes. This Iames had a sonne called Iames Sitsylt, and foure daughters. Iohn Sitsylt, the sonne of Iames, was after the death of his father, in the same warres with Ro∣ger Earle of Hereford, and constable of England, and being taken prisoner at the siege of Lincolne, Anno. 6. Stephani, he paid for his ransome 400. marks, and therefore sold his lordship of Beauport, and all his lands in the countie of Glocester: he tooke to wife a Ladie, called Mawd de Frenes, and
had issue Eustace. Eustace Sitsylt the sonne of Iohn, was wedded  to Elianor the daughter of Sir Walter Pembridge Knight, and had by hir Baldwin, and Iohn; and foure daughters, whereof one of them was the wife of Sir Thomas Fitzneale knight. Baldwin Sitsylt the sonne of Eustace, was  made knight by King Henrie the second, in the warres that the king had against the Welshmen, he was also killed in the same warres, at the siege of the castell of Cardif, his father being aliue; he tooke to wife the daughter of Maurice de Bromp∣ton, and had by hir, Gerald Sitsylt, Eustace Sitsylt Henrie Sitsylt, Iohn Sitsylt, and Walter Sitsylt; and two daughters, Catharine and Elianor. Ca∣tharine was the wife of Hugh Muredake, and E∣lianor was the wife of Walter Wallis. This Bald∣win Sitsylt knight tooke to his second wife, Mar∣gerie the daughter of Stephen Radnor knight, and had by hir, Stephen Sitsylt, Roger Sitsylt, Hugh Sitsylt, and Dauid Sitsylt; and three daugh∣ters, the first was Mawd and she was a Nun, the second was Ione and she was the wife of Iohn de Solers, the third daughter Anne was the wife of Owen ap Meredyth. This man gaue certeine lands in the towneship of Kigestone, vnto the moonkes of Dore, and granted vnto the same
moonks freedome of common and pasture, and o∣ther liberties in his woods. Gerald Sitsylt, the first sonne of Baldwin Sit∣sylt knight, tooke to wife Mabil the daughter of Sir William Moigne knight, and had by hir three sonnes, Gerald Sitsylt that died a child, Robert Sitsylt that married and had children, and Owen Sitsylt a moonke of the Abbeie of Dore. He had also three daughters, Catharine, that was wed∣ded to Sir Griffin ap Yoreford, and after to Dauid ap Euan, and the third time to Geffreie de Bret, sonne of sir Walter Bret knight. Anne the second daughter of Gerald Sitsylt was wedded to Robert the sonne of Richard Bromewich. And Ellen the third daughter of Gerald Sitsylt, was the wife of Iohn Abrahal, father of Sir Iohn Abrahal knight. Robert Sitsylt, the sonne of Gerald tooke to wife Alicia daughter of Sir Robert Tregois knight, and had by hir Iames Sitsylt his first son, Gerald the second sonne, Thomas the third sonne, and Baldwin the fourth sonne; and Margaret the first daughter, and Elizabeth the second daughter. Iames Sitsylt the sonne of Robert, tooke to wife Isabel the daughter of Sir Iohn Knel knight, and had by hir Iames and Gerald twins; Iames
died yoong: he had also Robert Sitsylt, and Iohn Sitsylt; and fiue daughters, that is to saie, Alicia wedded to Walter Monington, Grace wedded to Roger sonne of William Blunt, Elianor wedded to Thomas Paine, Margerie wedded to Morgan ap Meredyth, and Sislie married to Howel ap Blethin, and after to sir Hugh Bruge. Gerald Sitsylt sonne of Iames, tooke to wife  Margaret, daughter of Stephen Dalaber, and by hir had Iohn Sitsylt; and after he wedded Bridget the widow of Sir Simon Ward knight, and had by hir Iames Sitsylt, and the third time married the daughter of Martin Hopton, and had by hir Martin Sitsylt, Henrie Sitsylt, and Dauid Sit∣sylt, and Ione a daughter. And the fourth time the same Gerald Sitsylt tooke to wife Iane the daugh∣ter of Robert Emerton, and had by hir one sonne named Stig and Sitsylt, that was slaine in the warres of Striuelyn in the time of King Edward the second,Chron. de Dôr. and had no issue, as the register of the Abbeie of Dore maketh mention. Iohn Sitsylt the sonne of Gerald, tooke to wife  Sibyl the daughter of Robert of Ewyas, and had by hir sir Iohn Sitsylt knight, George Sitsylt, and a daughter named Margaret, that was the wife of sir Robert Baskeruile knight, who had by hir Sir Iohn Baskeruile knight; and by his se∣cond
wife he had sir Richard Baskeruile knight, that tooke to wife Iane the daughter and heire of George Sitsylt second sonne of this Iohn Sitsylt, and had by hir sir Iohn Baskeruile knight. Sir Iohn Sitsylt knight, tooke to wife Alicia the sister of the said sir Roger Baskeruile, and sir Roger married his sister, as is afore said. This sir Iohn Sitsylt had Iohn Sitsylt and Roger Sitsylt. In the time of the warres that King Edward the 3. made against Scotland, at a place called Halydon hill néere Barwick anno 6. Edward 3. there arose a great variance and contention betwéene Sir William de Facknaham knight, on the one side approouant, and this Sir Iohn Sitsylt knight, on the other side defendant, for an ensigne of armes, that is to say; The field often barrets siluer and azure, sup∣ported of 5. scocheons sable charged with so manie lions of the first rampants incensed geuls, which ensigne both the parties did claime as their right. But as both the parties put themselues to their force to maintaine their quarell, and vaunted to maintaine the same by their bodies; it plea∣sed the king that iustice should be yéelded for triall of the quarell, without shedding of bloud: and so the bearing of the ensigne was solemnlie adiudged to be the right of the said Sir Iohn Sitsylt, as heire of bloud lineallie descended of the body of Iames Sitsylt, Lord of Beauport slaine at the siege of Walingford, as before is declared. The finall order and de∣termination of which controuersie is laid downe by Iohn Boswel gentleman, in his booke intituled The concords of Armorie, fol. 80. This Sir Iohn Sitsylt had a charge of men at armes, for the custodie of the marches of Scotland, in the 11. yéere of King Edward the third.
Iohn Sitsylt, the son of sir Iohn Sitsylt knight, tooke to wife Ione daughter of sir Richard Mo∣nington knight, and had by hir Iohn Sitsylt (that died his father being liuing) and Thomas Sit∣sylt. Thomas Sitsylt married Margaret the daugh∣ter  and heire of Gilbert de Winston, and had by hir Philip Sitsylt, and Dauid Sitsylt. This man was a great benefactour to the moonks of Dore, and forgaue them great summes of monie which they ought him. Philip Sitsylt married Margaret, the daugh∣ter  of Iohn Philips, and had by hir Richard, Iohn, and Margaret. Richard Sitsylt or Cecill, married Margaret  the daughter of Philip Vaughan, and had by hir Philip Cecill, Margaret Cecill, Iohn Cecill, Dauid Cecill, and Iames or Ienkin Cecill. These petegrées and descents I gathered faithfullie out of sundrie ancient records and euidences, whereof the most part are confirmed with seales autentike therevnto appen∣dant, manifestlie declaring the antiquitie and truth there∣of; which remaine at this present in the custodie of the right Honorable Sir William Cecill, Knight of the noble order of the Garter, Lord Burghley, and Lord high Treasurer of England, who is lineallie descended from the last recited Richard Sitsylt, father to Dauid Cecill, grandfather to the said Sir William Cecill now Lord Burghley: and at this date William Sitsylt or Cecill Esquire coosen germane to the said Lord Burghley, remooued by one degrée onelie, is
possessed of the foresaid house of Halterennes in Ewyas land as the heire male of the house of Sitsylts, and is descended of Philip Cecill, elder brother to the said Dauid. Giral. Camb. in Itinera∣rio Cambrie.About the same time, or shortlie after, Barnard Newmarch, a noble man also of Normandie, obtained by conquest the Lordship of Brechnock, containing thrée cantreds, and married Nest, the daughter of Nest, daughter to Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn, Prince of VVales, by whom he had issue Ma∣hael, and a daughter. This Mahael being a worthie knight, was disinherited by the malice of his owne mother, who contrarie to matrimoniall dutie, kept vnlawfull compa∣nie with a knight, whom she set more by than hir husband. Wherevpon Mahael being offended with the dissolute life of his mother, warned hir to auoid infamie; and on a time méeting the said knight comming from hir, fought with him, and hurt him sore. Wherefore Nest to be auenged of hir sonne for that fact, went to king Henrie the first, and so∣lemnelie (rather of malice and reuengement, as Giraldus noteth, than of anie truth) sware vpon the Euangelists, that the said Mahael hir sonne was not begotten by Bar∣nard Newmarch hir husband, but by another louer of hirs. By reason of the which oth, (or periurie rather as mine au∣thor thinketh) Mahael was disinherited, and his sister (whom hir mother affirmed to be the verie daughter of the said Barnard) was by the said king, with the whole inheri∣tance, bestowed vpon Milo, the sonne of Walter Consta∣ble, who was after created Earle of Hereford, Lord of Glocester, Brechnocke, and the forrest of Deane. This Milo Earle of Hereford, and Lord of Brechnocke (as the same Giraldus writeth) told king Henrie the first, of the singing & triumphing of birds by the poole called Lhyn Sauathan, at the passing by of Gruffyth ap Rees ap Theodor, the said Mi∣lo and Paine Fitz Iohn, Lord of Ewyas land being present. Wherevnto the King answered; that It was not a thing to be woondered at so much, for in truth (saith he) although we by our great force and strength doo offer iniurie and
violence to that nation, yet are they well knowne to be the lawfull inheritours of that countrie; the words of Giral∣dus be these. Quibus auditis, Rex respondisse memora∣tur; Illud non-adeo esse admirandum, quia licèt genti∣bus illis per vires nostras magnas iniuriam & violen∣tiam irrogemus, nihilominus tamen in terris ijsdem¦ius haereditarium habere noscuntur. Milo had by his said wife fiue sonnes, to wit, Roger, Walter, Henrie, William and Mahael, which were all successiuelie (except William) Earles of Hereford, and Lords of Brech∣nocke, and died all without issue. He had also thrée daugh∣ters. Margaret the eldest married to Humfrey de Bohune, the sonne of Humfrey Bohune, Steward in house to Wil∣liam Rufus, which was the sonne of Humfrey le Bohune, that came into Enlgand with William Conqueror. This Humfrey was in hir right Earle of Hereford, & Constable of England. Bertha the second daughter was married vn∣to Philip Bruse, created by King Stephan Lord Bruse of Gower, Bould, and Brimber; and in his wiues right, lord of Brechnock.W. Paston. Ch. Lanthon. Lucia the third daughter was married to He∣rebert the sonne of Herebert, a base sonne to King Hen∣rie the first, who was in hir right Lord of all the forrest of Deane, of whom descended the Fitz Herebert of Derbishire. The castell of Brechnock being first built by the said Barnard Newmarch, was greatlie augmented and beautified by the last Humfrey Bohune, Earle of Hereford, Essex, North∣ampton, and Constable of England,Earle Con∣stable. who had issue two daughters his heires; Elianor the elder was married vn∣to Thomas Plantagenet, alias Thomas of Woodstock, the sixt sonne of Edward the third, who was by King Richard the second, created Earle of Buckingham, and after duke of Glocester, and in hir right Earle of Essex, Northamp∣ton, and Constable of England. Marie the second daughter was married to Henrie Plantagenet, alias Bolingbrooke, Earle of Derbie, who was afterward King of England, by
the name of Henrie the fourth. The said Thomas Plantagenet, Duke of Glocester and Lord of Brechnock, had issue Humfrie Plantagenet Earle of Buc∣kingham, Lord of Brechnock, &c: who died without issue; and 4. daughters, which were heirs after their brother. Anne the eldest was married to Edmund Stafford, Earle of Stafford, who by hir had issue, Humfrie Earle of Stafford, Hereford, & Northampton, Lord of Brechnock, &c. And afterwards the said Anne was maried to William Viscount Burgcher, cre∣ated Earle of Ewe in France by King Henrie the fift, fa∣ther of Henrie created Earle of Essex by King Edward the fourth. This Humfrie Earle Stafford, was by King Hen∣rie the sixt, created Duke of Buckingham, and so this Lord∣ship of Brechnock came to the Dukes of Buckingham, and by the attaindour of Edward the last Duke of Buckingham, is come to the crowne. There came manie Gentlemen with the said Barnard New∣march, at that time to Brechnock, vpon whom he bestow∣ed diuers manours, which their heires doo possesse and en∣ioy euen to our time; as to the Awbreyes the manour of Abercynuric and Slowch, to the Walbiefes the manour of Lhanhamlach and Taly Lhyn, to the Gunters the ma∣nour of Gilston, to the Havards the manour of Pontwi∣lym, &c. But now hauing long digressed, let vs returne a∣gaine to our author. About this time William Rufus and Robert his brother being made freends, came both toge∣ther into England, and lead an armie into Scot∣land against Malcolme the king,Matt. Paris. page. 20. who had entred Northumberland, & spoiled it in the kings absence: and he yeelded himselfe to William, and by oth be∣came his vassall and subiect.Matt. West. page. 16. Then William reedi∣fied Carlile, and brought people from the South part of England to inhabite it. But shortlie after, Malcolme came againe into England, spoiling the
land,Ran. Cest. lib. 7. cap. 7. Buchan. li. 7. pag. 64. who being fought withall, was slaine, and his sonne Edward also: then Edgar his sonne, which was pledge with king William, was crowned in his steed. At this time Cadogan ap Blethyn ap Con∣vyn destroied all Dyuet in the end of Aprill; and shortlie after, the same summer, the Normanes in great companies landed in Dyuet or Westwales & Cardigan, and builded castels there, and so began to inhabite the countrie vpon the sea shoare. The Normans hauing gotten into their hands all the lands and liuings of the nobilitie of England, began to spie out the commodities of Wales: and séeing that Robert Fitz∣hamon, and the other knights that went with him, had sped so well, they made sure to the king to grant them the lands of the Welshmen. Whervpon the king, thinking that to be the best waie for him, aswell to incourage them to be the more willing to serue him, as also to prouide for them at other mens cost, granted to diuers of his nobles sundrie countries in Wales, to hold of him by knight seruice: for the which they did homage and sweare fealtie vnto him, as foloweth. 1 Roger Mountgomery, Earle of Arundel and Salope, did his homage for the lordships of Powys and Caerdigan. 2 Hugh Lupus Earle of Chester did his homage for Te∣gengl and Ryuonioc, with all the land by the sea shoare, vnto the riuer of Conwey. 3 Arnulph a yoonger sonne of Roger Mountgomery for Dyuet. 4 Barnard Newmarch for Brechnock. 5 Ralph Mortimer for Eluel. 6 Hugh de Lacie for the land of Ewyas. 7 Eustace Cruer for Molde and Hopedale, and manie other for other lands. Then Roger de Mountgomery, to whom the Con∣queror had giuen the Earldome of Arundell and
Salopsburie or Shrewsburie entred into Powys land, and wan the castell and towne of Baldwyn, which he fortified, and called it Mountgomery after his owne name.Matt. Paris. page. 23. Also this yeare William Rufus went to Normandie against his brother Robert, and sent to England for 30000. footemen, of whome when they came to the sea shore the king tooke ten shil∣lings a peece,15000 pound easi∣lie gotten. and sent them home. But shortlie after hee made a voiage into Northumberland a∣gainst the Earle,H. Hunt. Matth. West. lib. 2. pag. 16. which rebelled, and after he had taken Newcastell and Bamborough, hee tooke the Earle at Tinmouth, and returned homeward. The same yeare Gruffyth ap Conan king of Northwales, with Cadogan ap Blethyn, who then ruled South∣wales, entred the land of Cardigan, & killed a great number of Normanes, being not able anie longer to suffer their great pride and crueltie. But after their returne, the English captaines sent for more men to England, and thought priuilie to make a roade to Northwales. Which iournie was discoue∣red to Cadogan, who gathered his power, and met with them in the wood or forrest of Yspys, and set vpon them with great hew and crie: and they de∣fended themselues manfullie, but in the end they were compelled to flee with great losse; and Cado∣gan followed them hard, and spoiled the countrie of Cardigan and Dyuet, and destroied all the castels sauing two, which were Penbrooke and Rydcors, which he could not get, and so returned to Powys with much ioy. 1093In this yeare 1093. the Normanes that inha∣bited the countrie of Glamorgan, spoiled the coun∣tries of Kydwely and Ystrad Tywy, and left them without anie inhabitors. Then VVilliam Rufus be∣ing
informed of the great slaughter of his subiects aswell in Chesshire,Matt. West. lib. 2. pag. 17. Matt. Paris. pag. 24. Shropshire, VVorcestershire, and Herefordshire, as within VVales, which Gruffyth ap Conan and the sonnes of Blethyn ap Convyn had doone, gathered his power together, and entred VVales at Mountgomery, which castell being late∣lie ouerthrowne by the VVelshmen,Matt. Paris. he reedified a∣gaine; but the VVelshmen kept so the straites of the mountaines with the woods and the riuers,Hol. pag. 326. that the king did no good, but lost his labour and his men: therfore he returned backe to his great dishonor.1094 In the yeare 1094. died VVilliam the sonne of Baldwyn, who (at the kings commande∣ment) had built the castell of Rydcors, after whose death the castell was forsaken by his men; and the inhabitants of Gwyr,Ran. Cest. li. 7. cap. 8. Sup. Mar. Scot. Brechnock, Gwent & Gwent¦lhwc cast from their necks the burthen of the Nor∣manes that had wonne their countries and held them in subiection, and chased them out of their countries, but they returned againe with great strength of Englishmen and Normanes. Then the countrie men, which abhorred their pride and cru∣ell rule, met with them at a place called Celly Tar∣vawc, and fought with them manfullie, so that they put them to flight with great slaughter, and cha∣sed them backe againe out of the land. Neuerthe∣les, the greedie Normanes would not giue ouer, but doubling their strength, returned againe to Brechnockshire, making a vow to leaue no liuing thing within that countrie. But it hapned other∣wise, for the people fled before them, and staid at a straite, and killed a great number of them. About this time Roger Mountgomery Earle of Salop and Arundell, William Fitzeustace Earle of Glocester,
Arnold de Harecourt and Neale le Vicount, were slaine betwéene Cardyf and Brechnock by the Welshmen. Also Walter Eureux Earle of Sarum, and Hugh Earle Gourney were there hurt and died after in Normandie. Therefore when the Normanes saw that they had all the losse, they manned and victailed the ca∣stels which they had before time builded there, and returned backe: but in their returne, Gruffyth and Ivor the sonnes of Ednerth ap Cadogan met them vpon the sudden at Aberlhech, and falling vpon them slew the most part of them, and the rest escaped to England. But the Normane captaines defended the castels manfullie, and kept them, vn∣till they were driuen by force for safegard of their liues to forsake them: then the ancient dwellers enioied their countries againe quietlie. More∣ouer certeine lords of Northwals, namelie Vchthed the sonne of Edwyn ap Grono, and Howel ap Grono with the children of Cadogan ap Blethyn of Powys land, gathered a number of men, & passed through Cardiganshire to Dyuet (which countrie the king a little before had giuen to Arnulph sonne to Roger Mountgomery, who had builded there the castell of Penbrooke; and appointed keeper and steward of the same, one Gerald de Windsore) and there bur∣ned, spoiled and destroied all the countrie, sauing the said castell of Penbrooke, which they could not winne, and so returned home with great bootie. After the returne of these lords, Gerald issued out of the castell, and spoiled the lands of S. Dauids, and tooke manie prisoners, and returned to the castell. Io. Castor. Mar. Scotus.The yeare following, William Rufus returning from Normandie to England, and hearing of the great slaughter of his men doone by the Welsh∣men,
gathered all his power, & with great pompe and pride entred Wales. But the Brytaines fearing the great strength of the king, put their hope onlie in the almightie Lord, turning to him in fasting, praier, and repentance of their sinnes: and he that neuer forsaketh the penitent and contrite hart, heard their praiers; so that the Normanes and Englishmen durst neuer enter the land, but such as entred were all slaine, and the king returned with small honor, after he had built certaine castels in the marches. The yeare following being 1096.1096 Hugh de Mountgomerie Earle of Arundell and Salopsburie,Matt. Paris. page. 59. whom the Welshmen call Hugh Goch, that is to saie Hugh the read headed,Fabian, par 7 cap. 225. Mar. Scotus. and Hugh Vras, that is, Hugh the fat Earle of Chester, and a great num∣ber of Nobles more, did gather a huge armie, and entred into Northwales, being thereto mooued by certeine Lords of the countrie. But Gruffyth ap Conan the Prince, and Cadogan ap Blethyn tooke the hilles and mountaines for their defense; bi∣cause they were not able to meete with the Erles, neither durst they well trust their owne men. And so the Erles came ouer against the Ile of Môn or Anglesey, where they did build a castell of Aberlhi∣ennawc. Then Gruffyth and Cadogan did go to An∣glesey, thinking to defend the Ile, and sent for suc∣cour to Ireland: but they receiued verie small. Then the treason appeared, for Owen ap Edwyn (who was the Princes cheefe counseller, and his father in lawe, whose daughter Gruffyth had mar∣ried, hauing himselfe also married Everyth the daughter of Convyn, aunt to Cadogan) was the cheefe caller of those strangers into Wales,
who openlie went with all his power to them, and did lead them to the Ile of Anglesey: which thing when Gruffyth and Cadogan perceiued, they sailed to Ireland, mistrusting the treason of their owne people. Then the Earles spoiled the Ile, and slew all that they found there. And at the verie same time, Magnus the sonne of Haroald came with a great nauie of ships towards England, minding to laie faster hold vpon that kingdome than his father had doone, and being driuen by chaunce to Anglesey, would haue landed there, but the Earles kept him from the land. And there Magnus with an arrowe, stroke Hugh Earle of Salop in the face, that he died thereof, and suddenlie either part for∣sooke the Ile, and the Englishmen returned to England, and left Owen ap Edwyn Prince in the land, who had allured them thither. 1098In the yeare 1098. returned Gruffyth ap Co∣nan, and Cadogan ap Blethyn from Ireland, and made peace with the Normanes, and gaue them part of their inheritance: for Gruffyth remained in Môn, and Cadogan had Cardigan, and a peece of Powys land. About this time the men of Brechnock slew Lhewelyn the sonne of Cadogan. Then Howel ap Ithel of Tegengel, went to Ireland. Also Ryth∣march Archbishop of S. Dauids, sonne to Sulien (bishop) died, the godliest, wisest, & greatest clerke that had beene in Wales manie yeares before, sa∣uing his father, who had brought him vp, and a great number of learned disciples. King William Rufus, after he had walled the ci∣tie of London, and builded Westminster hall, went to Normandie, and after he had brought all the countrie to his subiection, returned home, and
was slaine with an arrow by Walter Tyrell as he shot at a stagge in the new forrest.Matt. Paris. pag. 71. Then Henrie his brother was crowned in his steede, for Robert the elder brother was all this while in the holie land, who shortlie returned and landed at Ports∣mouth, against whom Henrie came with a great power; but in the end they were agreed, that Henrie should paie yearelie to Robert 3000. marks, and the longer liuer should be the others heire. This Henrie maried Mawd the daughter of Mal∣colme king of Scots, by Margaret the daughter of Edward sonne to Edmund Ironside. Also this yeare died Hugh Earle of Chester, and Richard his sonne was made Earle in his place; at this time also di∣ed Grono ap Cadogan, and Gwyn ap Gruffyth. In the yeare 1101.1101 Robert de Belesmo sonne to Roger de Mountgomery Earle of Salope, and Arnulph his brother Earle of Penbrooke did rebell against the king,Matt. Paris. Ran. Cest. which when the king heard, he sent for them to come to him, but they made blind excuses, and gathered their strength, and fortified their castels, and then gaue great gifts and made large promi∣ses to the sonnes of Blethyn ap Convyn, Iorwerth, Cadogan and Meredyth, and intised them to ioine their powers to theirs. Robert had fortified foure castels, Arundell, Tekinhill, Shrewsburie and Brugge, which castell was the cause of the warre: for Ro∣bert had builded it without the kings leaue, and Arnulph fortified his castell of Penbroke. Then they entred the kings land, & burned & spoiled it, cari∣eng awaie rich booties. And Arnulph to haue more strength, sent Gerald his steward to Murkart king of Ireland, to desire his daughter in marriage, which he obtained, with promises of great suc∣cours,
which did incourage him the more against the king.1102 Then the king gathered a great armie, and first beseeged the castell of Arundell and wan it,Matt. Paris. page. 78. Matt. West. lib. 2. pag. 26. and likewise he did with Tekinhill, and after∣ward lead his power before Brugge, which for the situation and depth of the diches, being also well manned and victailed, the king doubted the speedie winning thereof. Wherefore he was counseled to send priuilie to Iorwerth ap Blethyn,Io. Castor. promising him great gifts, if hee would forsake the Earle and serue him, remembring what wrongs the Earles father Roger and his brother Hugh had doone to the Welshmen. Also the king to make him more willing to sticke vnto him, gaue him all such lands as the Earle & his brother had in Wales without tribute or oth;Ran. Cest. li. 7. cap. 13. which was a peece of Powys, Cardi∣gan & halfe Dyuer, & the other halfe had the sonne of Baldwyn with Stradtywy and Gwyr. Iorwerth being glad of these offers, receiued them willinglie, and then cōming himselfe to the king, he sent his pow∣er to the Earles land, which doing their maisters cōmandement, destroied & spoiled all the countrie, for the Earle had caused his people to conueie all their cattell and goods to Wales, litle remembring the mischiefes that the Welshmen had receiued at his fathers and brothers hands. But when these newes came to the Earle to Cadogan & Meredyth Iorwerths brethren, they were all dismaid, & despai∣red to be able to withstand the king: for Iorwerth was the greatest man of power in Wales. And at this time Arnulph was gone to Ireland for his wife and succour. Also a litle before, Magnus againe had landed in Môn, & receiued of Gruffyth ap Conan, & hewed downe asmuch timber wood as was neede∣full
for him, and so returning to the Ile of Man, which he had woon, he builded three castels there, and sent to Ireland to haue the daughter of Mur∣cart in mariage for his sonne, which he obtained, and made his sonne king of Man. Then Earle Ro∣bert hearing this, sent to him for helpe, but recei∣ued none: therefore seeing no remedie, he sent to the king, desiring him that he might forsake the realme, which thing the king granted, and he sai∣led to Normandie. And likewise the king sent word to his brother Arnulph, that either he should folow his brother and depart the land, or yeeld himselfe to the kings mercie and pleasure: but he chose to depart the land, and so he did. After this, when the king was returned home, Iorwerth tooke his brother Meredyth, and sent him to the kings prison: for his brother Cadogan a∣greed with him, to whome Iorwerth gaue Caer∣dhydh, & a peece of Powys. Then Iorwerth himselfe went to the kings court, to put the king in re∣membrance of his promise: but the king, when he saw all quiet,Brwnt yw'r gwr, ni sai yn ei air. forgate the seruice of Iorwerth, and his owne promise, and contrarie to the same tooke Dyuet from Iorwerth, and gaue it to a knight cal∣led Saer; and Stradtywy, Cydewen and Gwyr he gaue to Howel ap Grono: and so Iorwerth was sent home emptie. At this time King Henrie gaue diuers castels and lordships in Wales to Normanes and Englishmen, of whom there is mention oftentimes hereafter in this historie. This yeare died Grono sonne of Rees ap Theo∣dor in prison. Also at this time Magnus the sonne of Heroald entred the countrie of Lenoux in Scot∣land, & after he had gotten a great prey returned
to his shippes, but the inhabitants pursued him so hard, that they put his people to flight, slew him, and rescued their goods and cattell. In the end of this yeare the king did send diuerse of his councell to Shrewesburie, and willed Iorwerth ap Blethyn to come to meete them there to consult about the kings busines and affaires. Now when he came thither, all the consultation was against him, whō contrarie to all right and equitie they condemned of treason, bicause the king feared his strength, and that he would reuenge the wrongs that he had receiued at the kings hands, and so they com∣mitted him to prison. Those Noble men that were sent by the King to Shrewes∣burie, were Richard de Belmersh, (or de Beleasmo as some doo call him) who being chéefe dooer about Roger Mount∣gomery, Earle of Salop, was preferred to the Bishopricke of London, and afterwards appointed by this King Hen∣rie, to be warden of the Marches, and gouernour of the countie of Salop: Walter Constable, the father of Milo Earle of Hereford, and Rayner the kings lieutenant, in the countie of Salop. About this time (as Bale noteth) the church of Meneuia or S. Dauids,Io. Bal. Cent. cap. 58. in append. began to be subiect to the sea of Canturburie, being alwaies before the Metrapolitane church of all Wales. 1103In the yeare 1103. Owen ap Edwyn died, after great miserie and long sicknesse. Then also Richard the sonne of Baldwyn did fortifie the castell of Rid∣cors, and chased Howel ap Grono out of the coun∣trie, to whom the King had giuen the custodie of that castell, who neuerthelesse returned shortlie after, and burned all the countrie, houses, corne, and haie, and slew a great number of the Nor∣manes, as they returned homeward, and kept all
the countrie in his subiection, except the castels, and these garrisons. At this time the King did take the rule of Dyuet from Saer, to whom he had committed the same, and gaue it to Gerald, who had beene sometimes Steward there under Ar∣nulph. Then the Normanes, who were in the castell of Rydcors, and other castels there abouts, seeing they could not haue the vpper hand of Howel ap Grono in open fight, fell to their accustomed prac∣tise of treason, and so obtained their purpose in this manner. There was one Gwgan ap Meyric, who had nursed a sonne to Howel ap Grono, and therefore verie well trusted and loued of him, as the manner of Wales is. This traitour (being cor∣rupted by the Normanes) procured his maisters death, bidding him one night to his house to make merrie, whither he came gentlie. Then Gw∣gan gaue notise thereof to the garrisons of the castels, who in the dawning of the daie entred the towne, & comming about the house, gaue a great showte, wherewith Howel awooke, and coragious∣lie leapt out of his bed, and sought his weapons, but the traitor Gwgan had conueied them awaie when he was asleepe. Then he called for his men, but they were all fled to saue their liues: and as he would haue gotten awaie, he was taken by Gwgan and his companie, and strangled, whose bodie he deliuered to the Normanes, which cut off his head, and brought it to the castell of Rydcors. And this traitorous murther of the kings lieute∣nant was left vnpunished. For whatsoeuer fault the Normanes committed, was alwaies winked at: and if the Welshmen did neuer so little offend the lawes of the king, it was thought an heinous
fault: which was the cause that afterwards they rebelled against the king, who sought nothing but their vtter destruction. Ran. Cest. li. 7. cap. 13.About this time Anselme Archbishop of Can∣turburie called a synod at London, where among o∣ther things,Si. Dunelm. it was ordeined and decreed, that priests should not marrie, which was not before that time forbidden in Brytaine. This ordinance or decree seemed to some verie cleanlie and honest; but of other it was thought perilous and dange∣rous, least they seeking to be cleane and honest (as they termed it) should fall into horrible un∣cleanlinesse and dishonestie, abhominable to a christian man:1100 and this was a thousand one hun∣dered and odde yeares, after the incarnation of Christ. King Henrie, in the fift yeare of his reigne, sai∣led with a great power to Normandie,Matt. Paris. pag. 83. where his brother Robert, with Robert de Belesmo, Arnulph and William Earle of Mauritania gaue him bat∣tell: but the King got the victorie, and tooke the Duke his brother and William de Mauritania pri∣soners, and carried them to England, whom he committed to perpetuall prison, and caused his brothers eies to be put out.Matth. West. lib. 2. pag. 25. Matt. Paris. page. 84. Then shortlie after died Edgar king of Scots, and Alexander his bro∣ther was crowned in his place, by consent of king Henrie. At this time Meyric and Gruffyth the sonnes of Trahaern ap Caradoc were both slaine by Owen ap Cadogan ap Blethyn. Also Meredyth ap Blethyn brake the prison, where he had been a long time, and came home, and gat his owne inheri∣tance againe, and enioied it quietlie.1108 The yeare 1108. the rage of the sea did ouerflow and drowne
a great part of the lowe countrie of Flanders,Ran. Cest. lib. 7. cap. 13. Polydor. Iac. Mayer. in such sort that the inhabitants were driuen to seeke themselues other dwelling places, who came to King Henrie, and desired him to giue them some void place to remaine in: who being verie liberall of that which was not his owne, gaue them the land of Ros in Dyuet or Westwales, where Pen∣brooke, Tenby and Hauerford are now built,Hol. pag. 347. & there they remaine to this daie, as may well be per∣ceiued by their speach and conditions, farre diffe∣ring from the rest of the countrie. At that time Gerald steward did build againe the castell of Pen∣brooke, in a place called Congarth Vechan, and brought thither all his houshold stuffe, and other goods, with his wife and children. Then also Ca∣dogan ap Blethyn made a great feast in Christmas, and bad all the Lords of the countrie to his house in Dyuet, among whom came Owen his sonne, who being at his fathers house, and hearing the beau∣tie of Nest wife to Gerald steward of Penbrooke praised aboue all the women in the land, was mer∣uelous desirous to see hir. And for so much as Gladys wife to Rees ap Theodor or Tewdor, and mo∣ther to Nest, was the daughter of Rywalhon ap Convyn, and coosen germane to Cadogan his fa∣ther; he with a few, vnder the colour of freendship and coosenage, went to see hir: & finding the truth to surmount the fame, he came home all inflamed with hir loue, and in that doting moode the same night returning thither againe, with a sort of wild companions entred the castell priuilie, and compassed the chamber about, and set the house on fire, wherewith Gerald and his wife awoke; and he would haue issued out to know what that noise
meant, but his wife fearing some treason, staied him, and counselled him to go to the priuie, and so pulling vp the boord she helped him out that waie, and then she came to the chamber dore, and said that there was none but she and hir children, yet they entred in and sought al about; but when they could not find him, they tooke hir and hir two sons, and a sonne and a daughter borne by a concubine to Gerald, and caried them awaie to Powys, and so burning the castell they spoiled all the countrie. Now when Cadogan hard this, he was verie sorie and feared the kings displeasure, and forthwith went to Powys, and willed his sonne to send home to Gerald his wife and children with his goods: but Owen in no wise would depart with the woman, yet at hir request he sent to Gerald his children a∣gaine. And when Richard bishop of London, whom the king had appointed Warden of the Marches being at Shrewsburie hard of this, hee was verie sore offended, and sent for Ithel and Madoc the sonnes of Riryd ap Blethyn: to whom he promised rich gifts and great rewards, besides the rule of the whole countrie, if they could take or kill Owen, to reuenge the dishonor that he had doone to the king: and to them he added Lhywarch the sonne of Trahaern ap Caradoc, (whose two brethren Owen had slaine) and Vchtryd the sonne of Edwyn: which foure promised the bishop to bring him Owen and his father either aliue or dead; and therevpon foorthwith gathered their power to destroie the whole countrie: but Vchtryd sent priuie word be∣fore, that all such of the people, as would haue their liues saued, should come to him. And when the countrie heard this, some fled to Arustly, some
to Melienyth, some to Stradtywy, and some to Dy∣uet, where Gerald was destroieng the countrie. And at that time Walter bishop of Hereford did ga∣ther an armie to defend Carmarthyn, and met with such as fled to Arustly and Melienyth, and destroied a great number of them. Those that went to Stradtywy were gentlie receiued by Meredyth ap Rytherch: and Vchtryd saued all such as came to him: and so these foure came with their powers to the castell of Rydcors, and thought best to haue entred the countrie by night, and to take Cadogan and Owen his sonne vnawares. But Vchtryd dis∣suaded them from that, and thought it dangerous to enter the countrie by night, for feare of am∣bushment, but counselled them to enter in by day with their men in good order. In the meane while Cadogan and Owen gat a ship at Aberyst∣wyth, which was latelie come from Ireland and es∣caped awaie: and the daie after, when they entred into the land, they found none of them that they sought. Therefore putting all the fault vpon Vch∣tryd, they burned and spoiled all the countrie, sa∣uing the Sanctuaries of Padarn and Lhandhewi Breui, yet they tooke diuerse men out of those pla∣ces, and caried them prisoners to their countries, and then returned to their owne castels againe. Then Owen, with such as had beene with him at the burning of the castell, fled to Ireland to king Murcart, who receiued him ioiouslie: for he had beene there before in the time of the warre of the two Earles in Anglesey or Môn, and had brought the king rich gifts from Wales. But Cadogan kept himselfe priuilie in Powys, & sent to the king to declare his innocencie. Tehn the king was con∣tent,
he should remaine in the countrie, and enioy the towne and lands that he had by his wife, for she was daughter to a Lord of Normandie called Pygot de Say. Then Madoc and Ithel his two ne∣phewes diuided such lands as he and his sonne Owen had in Powys betwixt them, and ruled it ve∣rie euill, for they could neuer agree among them∣selues: within a while Cadogan made such freends to the king, that paieng a 100. pound fine, he should enioy againe his landes in Caerdigan, and that the inhabitants should returne againe to their houses and till the ground, for the king had giuen commandement, that no Welshman nor Normane should dwell within Caerdigan. When they that were in Ireland vnderstood this, they re∣turned home priuilie, and hid themselues in their coosens houses, and shortlie after Owen returned againe to Wales; but not to Caerdigan: for his fa∣ther had receiued that land vpon such condition, that he should not suffer Owen to come therein, nor succour him, either with counsell, monie or men. Nowbeit, Owen came to Powys, and would faine haue sent messengers to the king, but he could get no man that durst venture to speake for him. Also at that time there happened some vari∣ance betwixt Madoc ap Riryd, and the bishop of London, lieutenant of the Marches, about certeine felons of England that had fled to him for succor, whom the bishop sent for, but could not get: wher∣fore he was sore offended with him. Then Riryd vnderstanding of that, sent to Owen, & desired his freendship, whose greatest enimie he was before: and by this meanes they were made freends, and swore either to other, that none of them should
betraie the other, nor agree by himselfe with the king or with his officers, without the other: and therevpon they burned and spoiled the lands of such as they loued not,1109 & destroied all things that they met withall.Matt. West. lib. 2. pag. 26. Ran. Cest. lib. 2. cap. 14. Matt. Paris. page. 85. At this time also the Empe∣rour Henrie did send his ambassadors to entreate of a mariage with Mawd the daughter of king Henrie, and had hir to his wife. And shortlie after the king banished and disinherited Peter de Bruse, William Mallet, and William Baynard, and put to death the Earle of Mayne. That yeare appeared a terrible Comete.Matt. West. lib. 2. pag. 27. Then also the king remembred Iorwerth ap Blethyn, whom he had kept long in pri∣son, and sent to know of him, what time he would paie to haue his libertie; and he promised the king 300. pound, or the worth thereof in cattell or hor∣ses: then the king set him at libertie, and gaue him his land againe, and gaue ten pound of that monie to Henrie, sonne to Cadogan by the daugh∣ter of Pygot. All this while Owen and Madoc were burning and spoiling the Englishmen and Normanes, and euer withdrew themselues to the land of Iorwerth, which thing greeued him greatly; wherevpon he sent word of his danger, desiring them to spare his land, & Cadogans: for if it were knowne that they came in anie of theirs, the land was forfeited to the king. When Owen and Riryd heard this, they vsed his countrie more often than they were woont: then Iorwerth seeing that, chased them out of his countrie. Then they went to the countrie of Vchtryd in Merionyth shire, and the sons of Vchtryd sent word to their people to keepe them out of their countrie, and so they did: for mee∣ting them by the waie, they set vpon them, and
Owen and Madoc defended themselues manfullie: but at the last they and their men were driuen backe, and so they fled, Owen to Caerdigan to his fa∣thers countrie, and Madoc to Powys. Then Owen with his companions made diuerse roades to Dy∣uet, and spoiled the countrie, carieng awaie the men and the cattell to the ships that they came in from Ireland, and after ransomed them, and ga∣thered a great number to him, & set vpon a towne of Flemings and burned it, and returned to Caerdi∣gan, nothing esteeming his fathers danger, nor the kings displeasure. At this time it chansed that Owens men among other mischeefes laid wait for a bishop that was towards the king, whose name was William de Brabant, and slew him and all his men. Then Iorwerth & Cadogan were at the court to speake with the king, concerning certaine busi∣nesse of their owne: and as the king talked with them, behold there came in a Fleming, brother to the dead bishop, who made an exclamation, decla∣ring how Owen ap Cadogans men had slaine his brother and a great number moe, and how they were succoured in Cadogans land. Then the king being therewith sore displeased, asked Cadogan what he could saie to the matter, and he putting all the fault in his son, excused himselfe as well as he could. Then said the king to Cadogan; Seeing thou canst not keepe thine owne, but that thy son and thy companions shalbe receiued and succored therein in disorder, I will giue it one that will keepe them out, & I will keepe thee at my charges all thy life, charging thee vpon thine allegeance, that thou enter not within Wales, vntill such time as I haue taken further order. And so the king
gaue him twentie daies, and set him at libertie to go whither he would, sauing to Wales. When Owen and Madoc heard this, they departed to Ire∣land. Then the king foorthwith sent for Gilbert sirnamed Strangbow Earle of Strygill, which was a noble, valiant and a woorthie knight, to whom he said thus; Thou hast beene diuerse times a suter to me to haue some lands in Wales, and now I giue thee all the lands and inheritance of Cadogan ap Blethyn, win it and take it. Gilbert re∣ceiued it ioifullie, and thanked the king, and ga∣thered all the power he might, & landed in Caer∣digan shire, and brought the countrie to his subie∣ction without anie contradiction. Then he builded two faire castels there, one towards Northwales vppon the riuer Ystwyth at the sea shore, a mile from Lhanbadarn: another towards Dyuet vpon the riuer Teiui,Cilgarran, as some thinke. at a place called Dyngerant, where Roger Mountgomery had begonne a castell before time. And shortlie after Madoc ap Riryd returned from Ireland, because he could not well awaie with the maners and conditions of the Irishmen, and being arriued came to the countrie of his vncle Iorwerth, who hearing that, and fearing to lose his lands (as his brother Cadogan had doone) made proclamation that no man should dee for him, but take him for his enimie. Which when Madoc vn∣derstood, he gathered to him a number of vnthrifts and outlawes, and kept himselfe in the rockes and woods, deuising all the meanes he could to be re∣uenged vpon Iorwerth, for that vnkindnes and dis∣courtesie as he tooke it, and so entred freendship priuily with Lhywarch ap Trahaern, who hated Ior∣werth to the death. Then hauing knowledge that
Iorwerth laie one night at Caereneon, they two ga∣thered all their strength, & came about the house at midnight, then Iorwerth & his men awoke, and defended the house manfullie, vntill their foes set the same on fire: which when Iorwerths men saw, euerie one shifted for himselfe, so that some scaped through the fire, and the rest were either burnt or slaine, or both. Then Iorwerth himselfe seeing no re∣medie, aduentured rather to be slaine than burned and came out: but his enimies receiued him vpon sharpe speares, and ouerthrew him in the fire, and so he died a cruell death. As soone as the king vn∣derstood this, he called Cadogan before him, & gaue him his brothers land, which was Powys, and pro∣mised Owen his pardon, willing his father to send for him to Ireland. About this time king Henrie preferred his base sonne Ro∣bert to the marriage of Mabil, daughter and sole heire of Robert Fitzhamon Lord of Glamorgan, in whose right the said Robert was Lord of Glamorgan, and was also at the same time by his said father, created Earle of Glocester: he builded the castell of Cardyff. Now when Madoc saw his other vncle Cado∣gan rule the countrie, he hid himselfe in rough and desert places, and adding one mischiefe vpon an∣other, determined also to murther him by one waie or other. Therefore after that Cadogan had brought the countrie to some staie of quietnesse, and saw right and iustice ministred therein, ha∣uing euer an eie & respect to the king, he came to the Trallwng (now called the Poole) and the elders of the countrie with him, and minding to dwell there, began to build a castell. Then Madoc pre∣tending nothing but mischiefe, hearing this, came
suddenlie vpon him, & Cadogan thinking no hurt, was slaine before he could either fight or flee. Af∣ter this Madoc sent streight to the bishop of Lon∣don the kings lieutenant at Shrewesburie, & prai∣ed him to remember what he had promised him before time, when he chased Owen out of the land, for the bishop hated Owen and Cadogan, and gaue Madoc all such lands as his brother Ithel was pos∣sessed of. Now Meredyth the sonne of Blethyn hea∣ring of the death of both his brethren, sped himself to the king, desiring of him the lands of Iorwerth, which Cadogan had latelie obteined, and the king gaue him the rule thereof, till such time as Owen sonne to Cadogan was come from Ireland: who came shortlie after, and went to the king, who re∣ceiued him to his peace, and gaue him his lands. Wherevpon Owen promised to the king a great fine, and gaue pledges for paiement of the same. Likewise Madoc did fine to the king for his peace and lands: neuerthelesse, the king bad him take heede of the kinsfolkes of such as he had murthe∣red, vpon his owne perill. In the yeare 1111. Robert de Belesmo was ta∣ken by the king in Normandie,1111 and committed to perpetuall prison in Warham, too gentle a punish∣ment for so cruell and bloodthirstie a man as hee was: for all his delite was therin, in so much that he put out both the eies of his owne child with his thumbes for a pastime, as the boy plaied vn∣der his gowne.1112 The yeare after Meredyth ap Ble∣thyn sent a number of his men to make a road in∣to the countrie of Lhywarch ap Trahaern ap Gwyn, who was Meredythes and Owens enimie, as he that succoured Madoc to kill his vncles Iorwerth
and Cadogan, Meredyths brethren. These men, as they passed through the countrie of Madoc in the night, they met with a man which belonged to the said Madoc, whome they tooke, and examined him where his maister was: and he first said that he could not tell; but being put in feare of death, he confessed that he was not far from thence. There∣fore they laie quietlie there all the night, and in the dawning they came suddenlie upon Madoc and his men, where they slew a great number of them, and taking Madoc prisoner, they brought him to their Lord, who was right glad thereof, and put him in safe prison, till he had sent word to his Ne∣phew Owen, who came thither streight, then Mere∣dyth deliuered Madoc vnto him. And albeit he had slaine Owens father being his owne vncle, yet Owen remembring the freendship and oth that had beene betwixt them two in times past, would not put him to death, but putting out his eies let him go. Then Meredyth & Owen diuided his lands betwixt them, which was Caereneon, Aberhiw, and the third part of Devthwr. 1113The yeare following, king Henrie prepared an armie against Wales,Matt. Paris. page. Matt. West. lib. 2. pag. 27. Ran. Cest. li. 7. Io. Castor. Polydor. lib. 11. being thereto prouoked by such as would haue the Welshmens lands, that was Gilbert Strangbow Earle of Strygill, to whom the king had giuen Caerdigan, who made sore com∣plaints vpon Owen ap Cadogan, declaring that he receiued and maintained such as robbed and spoi∣led in his countrie. Also Hugh Earle of Chester said no lesse by Gruffyth ap Conan prince of North∣wales, how that his men and the men of Grono ap Owen ap Edwyn Lord of Tegengl spoiled and bur∣ned the countrie of Cheshire, adding, to aggra∣uate
the matter, that Gruffyth did neither owe ser∣uice nor paied anie tribute to the king: wherefore the king swore that he would not leaue one liuing creature in Northwales and Powys land,Hol. pag. 352. but de∣stroie the land vtterlie & put in new inhabitants. Then parting his armie into three bands: the leading of the first he committed to Gilbert Earle of Strigill, wherein was the whole power of all the fourth part of England & Cornwall against South∣wales: the leading of the second had Alexander king of Scotland & Hugh Earle of Chester, wherein the power of Scotland and the North was, who went against Northwales: and the king lead the third himselfe, wherin was the strength of middle England. Then Meredyth ap Blethyn hearing this, came and yeelded himselfe to the king. But Owen fearing to commit himselfe to them which were so greedie of his lands, fled to Gruffyth ap Conan to Northwales: whervpon the king tur∣ned all his strength that waie, and came himselfe as far as Murcastelh, and the king of Scots as far as Pennant Bachwy: but the people fled to the mountaines and woods and caried all their victu∣als and cattell with them, so that the king could not folow them; and such of his men as entred the land, were either slaine or galled in the straites. Then the Scottish king did send to the prince to come and yeeld him to the king, and promised him the kings peace, but he was acquainted with such promises and would not. Then the king, because hee would not returne without owing of some thing, sent to Owen to come to him, and to forsake the prince who was not able to defend himselfe, but was readie to make peace with the Scottish
king and the Erle of Chester. Yet for all this Owen would not trust the king, vntill such time as his vncle Meredyth came from the king to him, and counselled him not to forsake the king of Englands offer, but to trust his promise, and to make hast be∣fore the prince agreed with the king, who offered him all his lands without tribute. Then Owen hearing this came to the king, who receiued him thankfullie, and told him; that because he had tru∣sted the kings word and promise, he would not on∣lie performe that, but also exalt him aboue all his kinne, and giue him his lands without tribute. The Prince also hearing of this sent to the king to haue his peace, which (because the king could not come by him) he obtained for a great summe of monie. Some Brytish copies affirme, that the submission both of Gruffyth ap Conan & also of Owen ap Cadogan, was pro∣cured by the subtile policie of Meredyth ap Blethyn and the Earle of Chester: the one working with Gruffyth, and bea∣ring him in hand, that Owen had submitted himselfe to the king, & made his peace with him, before it was so in déede: so that the prince somewhat yéelding to the Earles request, if Owen had so done contrarie to his oth (for they were sworne either to other, the one not to agrée without the as¦sent of the other) séemed to incline to peace. On the other side Meredyth going himselfe in person to his Nephew Owen, affirmed for a truth, that the Prince and the Earle of Chester were throughlie agréed concerning peace, and that the Prince was on his iournie towards the king to make his submission: and in the meane time all messen∣gers betwéene Owen and the Prince were (by the procure∣ment of Meredyth intercepted: wherevpon Owen wil∣linglie yéelded himselfe to the King. Then the king hauing finished his busines in
Wales, called Owen vnto him, and told him that if he would go with him to Normandie, and be faith∣full vnto him, he would performe all his promises with him. Wherevpon Owen went with the king to Normandie, where he was made knight, & had all promises performed at the kings hand, at his returne from Normandie the yeare following. At this time died Griffri bishop of Meneuia, and the king made one Barnard a Norman bishop in his place,The Prero∣gatiue of the Kings of England, in appoin∣ting of Bi∣shops, brought to Wales. contrarie to the minds of all the Clergie of Wales, who were alwaies accustomed to choose their bishop. At the same time there was a talke through Southwales of Gruffyth the sonne of Rees ap Theodor, who for feare of the king had beene of a child brought vp in Ireland, and had come ouer two yeares passed, which time he had spent priui∣lie with his freends, kinsfolks, and affines; as with Gerald steward of Penbrooke his brother in law, and others. But at the last he was accused to the king, that he intended the kingdome of South∣wales as his father had enioied it, which was now in the kings hands: and that all the countrie ho∣ped of libertie through him; therefore the king sent to take him. But Gruffyth ap Rees hering this, sent to Gruffyth ap Conan prince of Northwales, de∣siring him of his aid, and that he might remaine safelie within his countrie▪ which he granted, and receiued him ioiouslie for his fathers sake. At this time also Howel the brother of this Gruffyth, being committed to prison by Arnulph Earle of Penbrooke, in the castell of Mountgomery, where he remained prisoner a great while, made an escape, and being sore hurt and mai∣med, fled to Gruffyth ap Conan, where his brother was. Which things when the king heard, he sent
gentle letters to the Prince, desiring him to come and speake with him, which Gruffyth ap Conan did, whom the king receiued honorablie, and gaue him rich gifts and pretious iewels, after the vsage of the Normanes, who make much of men for to serue their turne. Then afterward he talked with him of Gruffyth ap Rees, promising him mountaines of gold, to send the said Gruffyth or his head vnto him; the which thing the Prince (being deceiued with the faire words of the king) promised to doo, and so returned home ioifullie. But Gruffyth ap Rees and Howel his brother had counsell giuen them, to withdraw themselues out of the waie awhile, vn∣till they vnderstood what the Prince would doo, for their freends suspected the kings message. The Prince, assoone as euer he came to his palace at Arberffraw, inquired for Gruffyth ap Rees, and lear∣ning where he was, sent certaine horsemen for him to come to his court: and as they came to∣wards the house where he was, he had warning of their comming, and with much adoo escaped to the Church of Aberdaron, and tooke Sanctuarie there. Then the messengers returned againe, and declared to the Prince how all things fell out, and the Prince being sore offended, commanded him to be pulled out by force: but the Clergie of the whole countrie withstood that, and defended the liber∣ties of the Church. That night some that pitied to see that yoong innocent to be sought as a lambe to the slaughter, conueied him away out of North∣wales to Stratywy in Southwales, where he was compelled for safegard of his owne life to rebell against the king: and so gathering all the power he could to him, made warre against the Flemings
and Normanes. The next yeare after, to wit 1116.1116 Gruffyth ap Rees did gather his power togither,Polydor. lib. 11. Hol. pag. 353. Mar. Scotus. and laid siege to a castell that was ouer against Arberth, and wan the same, & made it plaine with the ground: then he came before the castell of Richard de Pwns at Lhanymdhyfry, to whom the king had giuen the Cautref Bychan, and would haue burnt it; but Me∣redyth ap Rytherch ap Caradoc lieutenant of the same and the garrison defended it manfullie: yet Gruffyth burnt the vtterward, and slew manie of the garrison, and likewise lost manie of his owne men, and so returned without profit. From thence he went to Abertawy, and laid siege to the castell which Henrie Beumount Earle of Warwicke had built, and likewise burned the vtterward and the court house, & destroied the countrie to Stratywy. Then a great number of wild yoong men drew to the said Gruffyth from euerie place, so that he be∣gan to waxe strong, and made roads into Ros and Dyuet, spoiling and robbing all the countrie. Wherefore the Normanes and Flemings consulted how to remedie that mischiefe, and called to them all such as were the kings freends and lords in the countrie, as Owen ap Rytherch, and Rytherch ap Theodor, and his sonnes Meredyth & Owen, whose mother was Heynyth the daughter of Blethyn ap Convyn, and Owen ap Caradoc whose mother was Gwenlhian another daughter of Blethyn ap Con∣vyn, and Meredyth ap Rytherch; and asked whether they were true and faithfull to the king of Eng∣land, and they said they were. If you be (said they) you must keepe and defend the kings castel of Car∣marthyn, and that after this maner: first Owen ap
Caradoc shall keepe it a fortnight, and Rytherch ap Theodor and his sonnes another fortnight, and so by course, which they were content to doo. Then Owen tooke vpon him the keeping of the castell, and the castell of Robert Courtmaine in Abercomyn or Abercorran was committed to Blethyn ap Gadi∣vor. Shortlie after, Gruffyth ap Rees sent spies to vnderstand the estate of Caermarthyn and the castell, who vewed it, & brought him good tidings: therefore he came with his power suddenlie vpon the towne, and gaue a great shout; and Owen ap Caradoc, which kept it, ranne to the place where the shout was giuen, thinking that his men would haue followed him, but the most part of them fled, and so Owen was staine fighting man∣fullie, and the towne wonne and destroied all saue the castell, which was sore defaced. So Gruffyth returned to his accustomed place with great spoile and bootie: wherevpon a great number of lustie yoong men drew vnto him, and serued him, thinking that all was his. After that he went to Gwyr, and wan a castell and burnt it. Then Wil∣liam de Londres forsooke his castell, and fled with his men, but Gruffyth destroied the castell, and ca∣ried awaie all the cattell and spoile of the coun∣trie: and when the men of Caerdigan heard this, they sent for Gruffyth, choosing him rather to be their head and ruler, being their coosen and coun∣trie man than anie other. Wherfore he went thi∣ther vnto them, and was well receiued of Cadiuor ap Grono, and Howel ap Dinerth, and Trahaern ap Ithel, who had forsaken Dyuet, & left it full of Nor∣mans, Flemings, and Englishmen. There were also manie strangers in Caerdigan, which ruled that
countrie, but yet the people hated them, not for∣getting the wrongs that they had receiued at their hands. Notwithstanding, Henrie king of England had brought all that countrie to his sub∣iection, some by force, some by vanishment, and some by gifts & rewards. Whereat Gruffyth was nothing dismaid, but boldlie came to Caerdigan Is∣coed, and laid siege to a strong hold which Earle Gilbert & the Flemings builded at Blaen Porth Gwi∣than. Where after long fight, & diuerse assaults, with the slaughter of diuerse within, and but one of his men, they burned the towne, and brought the countrie to subiection. Then all the strangers fled awaie and left their houses, which the Welsh∣men burned and destroied all to Penwedic. Then they assaulted the castell in Stradpythylh, (which belonged to Raphe Erle Gilberts steward) and got it, and slew the men that were within. And from thence they camped at Glasgryg a mile from Lhan∣badarn, where they did wrong to the church, for they tooke out some of the cattell to vittaile them∣selues,Priuilege of sanctua∣rie claimed for cattell. that were within the compas of the San∣ctuarie: then they purposed to laie siege to the ca∣stell of Aberystwyth the daie folowing. Which being declared to Raphe steward, he sent priuilie to the castell of Stratmeyric (which Gilbert had built) for succour, which he conueied frō thence by night. The daie folowing Gruffyth came towards the castell out of order, fearing nothing, and did not vnderstand what number of men was within the castell, and so stood vpon a hill (the riuer being be∣twixt him and the castell with a bridge to passe o∣uer) where he and his men staied and consulted concerning the making of engines to assault it,
vntill it was the euening, at which time the Nor∣manes (seeing their disorder) sent archers to the riuer side, to skirmish with them, to intice the Welshmen to the bridge, that the armed horsemen might suddenlie issue out and set vpon the naked footmen. Then the Welshmen approched neare to the bridge and skirmished with them, & suddenlie issue foorth one horseman, and would haue passed the bridge, but his horse was wounded with a pike and began to faile, & as he returned to the foote∣men he fell of his horse, and the Welshmen pursued him ouer the bridge. When the Englishmen sawe that, they fled towards the castell, and the Welsh∣men folowed to the hill top, and suddenlie the am∣bush of horsemen that laie vnder the hill thrust be∣twixt them that had passed ouer & the bridge, and they that fled turned backe with more strength, and so the Welshmen were compassed on either side, and the bridge so kept that no rescue could come to them, where they were slaine for the most part all, being all naked men. Then the rest seeing the great number of the men armed which they looked not for, turned backe, and departed the countrie. Now when the king heard of all these slaughters and spoiles, he sent for Owen ap Cado∣gan to him, to whom when he came the king said: Owen I haue found thee true and faithfull vnto me, therefore I desire thee to take or kill that murtherer Gruffyth ap Rees, that doth so trouble my louing subiects; I assure thee my cheefe trust is in thee, and in Lhywarch ap Trahaern, who shall go with thee, and you two shall waite vpon my sonne Robert, whom I will send shortlie against that traitour with an armie. And looke how thou
seruest me at this time, so will I recompense thee without faile. Then Owen being wonderfull glad that the king put such confidence in him, encoura∣ged his men to doo their indeuour at this time to pleasure the King, as they had doone heretofore to offend him: and so ioining with Lhywarch, they went towards Stratywy, to meete with the kings sonne. And when they came to the confines of the countrie, they made a vowe that neither man woman nor child should escape their hands aliue. When the people vnderstood of this cruell band, they fled out of the countrie, some to woods, some to rocks and caues, and some to the kings ca∣stels to saue their liues. Then they diuided their people to enter the woods and straits, which be verie manie in that countrie. And Owen himselfe tooke with him about 100. men, and entred the wood, and perceiued that men and cattell had pas∣sed that waie, whom he followed and ouertooke, & slaieng some of them, put the rest to flight: then taking their cattell returned backe towards his companie. But at that instant, behold, Gerald steward of Penbroke, with all his power of Fle∣mings was comming to meete the kings sonne, and met with them that fled, who cried out vnto him for helpe, and declared that Owen ap Cadogan had spoiled them of all their goods. Now when Gerald and the Flemings vnderstood that Owen was there with so litle companie, they thought it a meete time to be reuenged of their old wrongs, and so pursued him to the woods. Owen being war∣ned by his men, that a great number pursued him, and counselled to make hast awaie, would not so doo, bicause he vnderstood them that followed to be
the kings freends, and nothing doubted of them. But when they came nigh, they began to shoot at his men, who would haue had Owen to flee, but he turned manfullie to his enimies, and encouraged his men to fight, affirming, that although their e∣nimies were seauen to one,This re∣proch and defacing of anie nation doth neuer come to good end. Ric. 3. at Bosworth field. yet they were but Fle∣mings and such as feared their names, and were good for nothing but to emptie cuppes, and with that set vpon them couragiouslie. And it chanced that at the first meeting Owen was stricken with an arrowe to the heart, and slaine: which thing when his men sawe they fled, and brought word to Lhywarch ap Trahaern and their fellowes, who suspecting the kings armie, seeing they could not trust them in the kings seruice, returned to their countrie. Polydor. lib 11. Hol. pag. 354.About this time, the order and court of Parliament began first in England. The kings of elder time did neuer lightlie call togither all the states of the realme, vnlesse it were in the begining of their gouernment, to settle things in qui∣etnesse at their Coronations, or when some great warre was in hand: otherwise in the ordering of the common wealth the kings did all things by their officers, with dire∣ctions and edicts, or by such of the nobilitie as were chifee rulers in their seuerall counties. After the death of Owen, his brethren diuided his landes betweene them, sauing that which he had taken by force from his vncle Meredyth, be∣ing the lands of Madoc ap Riryd ap Blethyn. The names of his brethren were these: Madoc whose mother was Gwenlhian the daughter of Gruffyth ap Conan,The chil∣dren of Ca∣dogan ap Blethyn. Eneon whose mother was Sanna the daughter of Dyfnwal: Morgan whose mother was Evelhiw or Elhiw the daughter of Cadivor ap Col∣hoyn
lord of Dyuet: Henrie and Gruffyth whose mo∣ther was the daughter of the lord Pigot Cadogans wedded wife, Meredyth by Evrvron Hoedliw, Owen was the sonne of Inerth the daughter of Edwyn. After this, Eneon ap Cadogan and Gruffyth ap Me∣redyth ap Blethyn did lead their power against a castell that Vchtryd ap Edwyn had built at Cym∣mer in Merionyth, for Cadogan had giuen to his coosen germane Vchtryd, Merionyth and Ceuilioc, vpon condition that he and his should be freends to his freends, and foes to his foes in all causes: but contrarie to that condition, he and his sonnes were euer against Cadogans children, in euerie enterprise that they went about. Therfore after they had set vpon the castell, and slaine diuerse of the garrison, the rest yeelded to them, and so when they had wonne all the countrie they diuided it betwixt them. Thus Gruffyth ap Meredyth had Mowthwy, Cyuelioc, and halfe Penlhyn; and the o∣ther halfe of Penlhyn & Merionyth came to Eneon. An. 1116.1116 king Henrie sailed into Normandie with a great armie against the French king,Hol. pag. 355. Matt. Paris. pag. 89. who with the Erle of Flanders and others went about to make William sonne to Robert Curthoise duke of Normandie; but at king Henries arriuall they re∣turned home without honor. This yeere died Wil∣liam Strangbow of a consumption. The next yeare after fell a great variance betweene Howel ap I∣thel Lord of Ros and Ryuonioc, now Denbighland, and Riryd and Lhywarch the sonnes of Owen ap Ed∣wyn. Then Howel sent to Meredyth ap Blethyn and to Eneon and Madoc Cadogans sonnes for succour, who came downe from Merionyth with 400. men well appointed and met with the sonnes of Owen
in the vallie of Clwyd their owne land, which sonnes of Owen sent for their coosines the sonnes of Vchtryd to come with their powers to succour them: & all these met togither with cruell harts, and fought manfully, but in the end after great slaughter Lhywarch the sonne of Owen ap Edwyn was slaine, and with him Iorwerth the sonne of Nudh which was a noble man and a worthie sol∣diour, and Riryd fled: and so Howel ap Ithel had the victorie, but he was so sore wounded that he died within fourtie daies after. Then Meredyth ap Ble∣thyn and the sonnes of Cadogan made speed home for feare of the Frenchmen, which laie in garri∣sons about Chester. 1120In the yeare 1120. died Murcart the worthiest and greatest prince in all Ireland. And the same time there was a great battell fought betweene king Henrie,Matt. West. lib. 2. pag. 29. and the French king who was ouer∣throwne and a great number of his nobles taken.Matt. Paris. pag. 89. &. 91 And shortlie after, as king Henrie returned to∣wards England,Matt. Paris. page. 92. by misgouernment of the shipma∣ster, there was a ship drowned,Hol. pag. 357 Matth. West. lib. 2. pag. 30. wherein perished the kings two sonnes William and Richard, with his daughter and niece, and manie other to the number of 150.Matt. Paris. pag. 92. Hol. pag. 358. The next yeare after, the king did marrie Adelyce daughter to the duke of Lo∣uaine & forthwith prepared a great armie against Wales, and came to Powys land: which when the lords of the land, Meredyth ap Blethyn, and the three sons of Cadogan, Eneon, Madoc and Morgan saw, they sent to Gruffyth ap Conan prince of North∣wales to desire succours at his hands: and he an∣swered that they should not receiue anie of him, nor enter within his lands, for he had made peace
with the king. Thus hauing no hope of aid from him, they purposed to defend themselues within their owne land after the best maner they could, and set men to keepe and defend the straits wher∣by their enimies must needes passe. And as it chanced, the king himselfe with a small number came vnto one of those defended places, for his whole armie had goone a further waie about, be∣cause of their carrages: at whose comming the men which kept the straits skirmished with the kings men, and with their arrowes hauing the aduantage of the ground slew some, and hurt manie. Among these one drew his bowe, and shooting towards his foes, by fortune stroke the king a great blow vpon the breast, but by meane of his maze the arow hurt him not; neuerthelesse he was wonderfullie dismaied withall, & conside∣ring how rashlie by misfortune he might lose in that wild countrie the honour and fame which he had wonne before, did send to parle with them, that kept the passage, and to will them vnder assu∣rance to come and speake with him: which they did. Then he asked them whose men they were, and how they durst be so bold as to put the king in such danger; and they said that they were Mere∣dyth ap Blethyns men, and did nothing but their maisters commandement in keeping the passage. Then the king willed them to go to their maister, and counsell him to go to the kings peace, and he should receiue no hurt, which he and his coosins did,1122 and fined to the king for their offenses 1000. heads of cattell, and the king returned to England. King Henrie hauing thus quieted Wales,Io.  leauing the lord Fitzwaren warden or lieutenant of the Marches, returned
to England, where he held thrée Parliaments this yeare, the first about Christmasse at Norwych, the second about Easter at Northampton, and the third after Whitsuntide at London. The yeare ensuing Gruffyth ap Rees ap Theo∣dor did kill Gruffyth ap Sulhaern, and Eneon the son of Cadogan died, and gaue his part of Powys and Merionyth which he had wonne to his brother Me∣redyth: but Meredyth ap Blethyn his vncle put him backe by force, & tooke it to himselfe. At this time the king did set at libertie Ithel ap Riryd ap Blethyn, whom he kept in prison manie yeares, who came home, thinking to haue enioied his owne lands. Now when Gruffyth ap Conan prince of North∣wales heard, how that Meredyth ap Blethyn had ta∣ken by force the lands of his Nephew Meredyth ap Cadogan, he sent his sonnes Cadwalhon and Owen with a power to Merionyth, who brought all the countrie to their subiection, and caried the cheefe men and the cattell to Lhyyn: and afterward the sonnes of Cadogan destroied the land of Lhywarch ap Trahaern, because he ioined with the sonnes of the prince.Matt. West. lib. 2. pag. 31. Ran. Cest. lib. 7. cap. 16. Hol. pag. 359 Ro. Houeden. H. Hunt. lib. 8. About this time there came one Io∣hannes Cremensis a cardinall from the Pope, who after he had gotten many rich gifts and rewards of Bishops and Abbots, held a synod at London at the natiuitie of our Ladie, where he inueied bit∣terlie against the mariage of priests, declaring how vnseemelie a thing it was to come from his woman to the altar, and the same night he was found with a whore in bed with him. 1125The yeare 1125. Meredyth ap Blethyn did kill his brothers sonne Ithel ap Riryd. And shortlie af∣ter Cadwalhon ap Gruffyth ap Conan slew his three
vncles, Grono, Riryd, and Meilyr, the sonnes Owen ap Edwyn, and also Morgan ap Cadogan slew his brother Meredyth with his owne hands.Matt. Paris. page, 94. About this time died Henrie the Emperour, who had ma∣ried Mawd king Henries daughter and heire. In the yeare 1127.1127 the king sent his daughter to Normandie,Hol. pag. 361▪ to be married to Geffrey Plantagenet, sonne to the Earle of Aniow, and folowed him∣selfe shortlie after. Gruffyth ap Rees was put be∣side the lands, which the king had suffered him quietlie to possesse, by the false accusations of the Normanes, which dwelled in the countrie with him. And then also Daniel Archdeacon of Pow∣ys died, a man both learned and godlie, who trauelled all his time to set peace and concord be∣twixt his countriemen. An. 1128. died Gruffyth ap Meredyth ap Blethyn, and the same yeare Lhewe∣lyn the sonne of Owen ap Cadogan tooke Meredyth ap Lhywarch, and deliuered him to Paine fitziohn to be kept safe in the castell of Brugenorth. This Me∣redyth had slaine Meyric his coosen germane, and had put out the eies of his two coosen germanes the sonnes of Griffri. The yeare ensuing Ieuaf the sonne of Owen put out the eies of two of his bre∣thren, and banished them the countrie, also Lhewe∣lyn ap Owen slew Iorwerth ap Lhywarch. And Mere∣dyth ap Blethyn tooke the same Lhewelyn his ne∣phew, & puting out his eies gelded him, to the end he should get no children, that he might haue his lands, and slew Ieuaf ap Owen his brother. Also Meyric slew Lhywarch and Madoc his sonne, his owne coosens, who himselfe was so serued, shortlie after. Then Morgan the sonne of Cadogan repen∣ted him greatlie for the murther of his brother
Meredyth, wherefore he tooke his iournie to Ieru∣salem, and died in his returne at Cyprus. 1132In the yeare 1132. Robert Curthoise the kings brother died in the castell of Cardiffe.Matt. Paris. pag. 97. The yeare folowing Cadwalhon sonne to Gruffyth ap Conan was slaine at Nanhewdwy,Matt. West. lib. 2. pag. 34. by Eneon the sonne of Owen ap Edwyn his vncle (whose three brethren he had slain) with Cadogan ap Grono ap Edwyn. That yeare also died Meredyth ap Blethyn ap Convyn, the greatest lord and cheefest man in Powys, as he that had gotten his brethren and nephewes lands by hooke and by crooke into his owne hands. In the yeare 1135. died Henrie king of England, one of the worthiest and victoriousest princes that euer reig∣ned in the Ile of Brytaine.1135 After whome Stephen Earle of Boloigne sonne to the Earle of Bloys his sisters sonne, a stout and a hardie knight reigned king of England,Tho. Walsh. Hol. pag. 365 for (by the meanes of Hugh Bygod steward to king Henrie) the Archbishop of Cantur∣burie, and all the nobilitie of England, contrarie to their former oth made to Mawd the Empresse, cre∣ated and crowned him king.Matt. Paris. page. 100. Then shortlie after Dauid king of Scots wan by treason Carlile and Newcastell, against whō Stephen lead an armie, to whom Dauid yeelded himself, & restored Newcastell, and kept Carlile by composition: but he would not sweare to him,Fabian. Io. Cast. Hector Boet. for he had sworne alredie to Mawd his nice. Yet Henrie his sonne sware to Stephen, and had the Earledome of Huntingdon giuen him. This yeare Richard and Gilbert his sonne were slaine by Morgan ap Owen. And shortlie after Cad∣walader and Owen Gwyneth the sonnes of Gruffyth ap Conan (in whome remained the hope of all Wales, for they were gentle & liberall to all men,
terrible and cruell to their enimies, meeke and humble to their freends, the succour and defense of widowes, fatherlesse, and all that were in neces∣sitie: and as they passed all other in good and lau∣dable vertues, so they were paragons of strength, beautie and well proportionat bodies) gathered a great power against the Normans and Flemings, who entring Cardigan, wan, destroied and burned the whole countrie with the castell of Walter Espec, the castell of Aberystwyth, which was verie strong and well manned. And thither came Howel ap Meredyth and Rees ap Madoc ap Ednerth, who went forward and rased the castell of Richard de la Mare, and the castell of Dinerth and Caerwedros, & returned home with much honor. Afterward, to∣wards the end of the same yeare they returned a∣gaine with 6000. footemen,Iohn Stowe. page. 188. and 2000. horsemen well armed, and to them came Gruffyth ap Rees & Howel ap Meredyth of Brechnoke and his sonnes, & Madoc ap Ednerth, who subdued the whole coun∣trie to Aberteivi, placing againe the old inhabi∣tants, and chasing awaie the strangers. A∣gainst them came Stephen constable of Aberteivi, Robert Fitzmartyn, the sons of Gerald, and William Fitziohn,Florentius Wigorn. Sup. Mar. Scot. with all the power of the Normanes, Fle∣mings and Englishmen that were in Wales or the marches. Now after a cruell and bloodie fight, the strangers after their accustomed vse put all their hope in their forts, and forsooke the field, and the Welshmen folowed hard, that besides 3000. that were slaine, a great number were drowned, and taken and caried awaie captiues. After this victorie, Owen and Cadwalader ouerran the whole countrie, and returned home with rich spoiles, as
well in armour and horse, as in other things with great triumph. And at this time the pride of the nobles of England began to appeare, for first Hugh Bigod kept the castell of Norwich, but forthwith, sore against his will, he restored it to the king him∣selfe. Matt. Paris. page. 100.The cause of this tumult of the nobles, was rumor which went abroad of the death of the king, who was then sicke of a lethargie. Those which bare him no good will, verified the rumor as much as in them laie, and stirred the people in the behalfe of the Empresse. Such as were his fréends tooke strong castels to saue themselues: as this Hugh Bigod, for feare of the fréends of the Empresse, tooke the castell of Norwich, and afterward being certified that the king was well againe, he was loth to deliuer the same out of his po∣session, vnlesse it were into the kings owne hands. After that, the king did besiege Excester, which Baldwyn de Reduerijs kept against him,W. Pamus. lib. 1. cap. 15. Matt. Paris, ibidem. and wan it; and so he did the Ile of Wight, which was the said Baldwynes, and banished him out of the land. The yeare 1137. died Gruffyth ap Rees ap Theodor,Tho. Walsh. the light,1137 honor and staie of Southwales, who had by his wife Gwenlhian the daughter of Gruffyth ap Conan, Rees commonlie called the lord Rees, and others. Sup. Mar. Scotus.Florentius moonke of Worcester, in his supplie to Marianus Scotus, saith; that This Gruffyth ap Rees Prince of South∣wales, died by the deceitfull practise of his wife. He wri∣teth also of a noble knight named Paine, a man of great va∣liancie, who being verie earnest in pursuing of the Welsh∣men, was at this time hurt with a speare, and so died, and was caried to Glocester and there buried. Also towards the end of the same yeare died Gruffyth ap Conan king or prince of Northwales,
the onelie defense and sheeld of all Wales, after he had escaped manie great dangers by sea and land in Ireland and Wales, and after manie wor∣thie victories, and after he had brought North∣wales, which he found full of strangers, to peace and quietnesse, hauing ruled the same worthilie 50. yeares. This prince had manie children by di∣uerse women: first by Angharat the daughter of Owen ap Edwyn, he had sonnes Owen, Cadwalader, and Cadwalhon who was slaine before his fa∣ther died; and daughters Marret, Susanna, Ranulht, Agnes and Gwenlhian. And by another woman he had Iago, Ascain, Edwal Abbot of Penmon, Do∣lhing who was also a priest and well learned, and Elen the wife of Hova ap Ithel Velyn of Yal. He re∣formed the disordered behauior of the Welsh min∣strels, by a verie good Statute which is extant to this daie. There are thrée sorts of minstrels in Wales. 1 The first sort named Beirdh, which are makers of songs and odes of sundrie measures, wherein not onelie great skill and cunning is required; but also a certeine naturall inclination and gift, which in Latine is termed Furor poë∣ticus. These doo also kéepe records of Gentlemens armes and petegrées, and are best esteemed and accounted of a∣mong them. 2 The second sort of them are plaiers vpon instruments, théefelie the Harpe and the Crowth: whose musike for the most part came to Wales with the said Gruffyth ap Co∣nan, who being on the one side an Irishman by his mother and grandmother, and also borne in Ireland, brought ouer with him out of that countrie diuers cunning musicians; into Wales, who deuised in a manner all the instrumentall musike that is now there vsed, as appéereth as well by the bookes written of the same, as also by the names of the
tunes and measures vsed amongst them to this daie. 3 The third sort called Atcaneaid are those which doo sing to the instrument plaied by another, and these be in vse in the countrie of Wales to this daie. This statute or decrée here mentioned, dooth not onelie prescribe and appoint what reward euerie of the said min∣strels ought to haue, and at whose hands: but also of what honest behauiour and conuersation they ought to be, to wit, no make bates, no vagabounds, no ale-househanters, no drunkards,A verie good lawe against a∣buses in Musicians. no brallers, no whoorehunters, no théeues, nor companions of such. In which things if they offend, e∣uerie man by the said statute is made an officer, and autho∣rized to arrest and punish them, yea and take from them all that they haue then about them. They are also in the same statute forbidden to enter into anie mans house, or to make anie song of anie man without speciall licence of the par∣tie himselfe. And this statute or decrée hath béene oftentimes allowed by publike authoritie of the chéefe magistrats of that coun∣trie, as appeareth by sundrie commissions directed to diuers Gentlemen in that be∣halfe.
Owen Gwyneth. Owen Gwyneth the sonne of Gruffyth ap Conan. AFTER the death of Gruffyth ap Conan, his sons diuided the land betwixt them after the maner of Wales. And Owen surnamed Gwyneth the eldest sonne was made prince of Northwales (for the name of king is no further vsed in the Brytish booke) who in the beginning of his reigne togi∣ther with his brethren made the third expedition into Southwales, & ouerthrew the castell of Strad∣meyric, and castell Stephen, and Humffreys castell, and burned the towne of Caermarthyn, and retur∣ned home with much honour. At this time died Iohn Archpriest of Lhanbadarn, who for his godlie
life is counted amongst the Saincts. This yeare went king Stephen to Normandie,Any weal∣thie man may be ca∣nonized a saint at Rome if his Executors will go to the charges thereof. and made peace with the French king & with the Earle of Aniow, and then returned home. The yeare folowing, be∣ing 1138. king Stephen made a viage against Da∣uid king of Scots, who had burned and spoiled a great part of England, who as soone as he heard of of the kings comming returned home; and Stephen folowed him, destroieng all the South part of Scotland.1138 In the summer ensuing, diuerse noble men of England fortified their castels,Matt. Paris. Tho. Walsh. Io. Cast. and rebelled against the king, as William Erle of Glocester for∣tified Ledes and Bristow,Matt. Paris. pag. 101. Ralph Lunel Cari, William Fitzalen Shrewesburie, Paganellus Ludlow, William de Moyun Dunestor, Robert de Nichol Warham, Eu∣stace Fitziohn Merton, and Walklyn Douer, which castels the King got, some by assault, some by faire promises, and some by treason. Also at this time the Scots hearing this business entred Eng∣land againe, against whom William Earle of Abe∣marle, William Pyppel of Notingham, Walter Espec, and Gilbert Lacie gathered the power of the North, and being animated with an eloquent oration made and pronounced to the whole armie by Ralph Bishop of Orkneys, set vpon the Scots manfullie at Almerton, and after great slaughter of them, put the king to flight, and returned with great tri∣umph. In the beginning of the next yeare, king Stephen tooke the castels of Ludlowe and Leeds, and kept the bishops of Salisburie and Lincolne fa∣sting,W. Parnus. Matt. Paris. page, 103. Tho. Walsh. Io. Castor. till they had deliuered him the castels of Vises and Shirburne, which the bishop of Salisburie had builded, and Newerke vpon Trent and Sleeford, which two likewise the Bishop of Lincolne had
built.1139 The same yeare Mawd the Empresse, daugh∣ter and heire to king Henrie (to whom king Ste∣phen with all the nobles of England had sworne fi∣delitie) landed at Arundell with hir brother Robert Earle of Glocester,Matt. Paris. pag. 103. & there was receiued honora∣blie of William de Albineto, who had latelie ma∣ried Adeliz the Queene, late wife of king Henrie, to whome the same king had appointed & giuen the Earldome of Arundell for hir iointer. Then king Stephen laid siege to the castell, but seeing it was impregnable, he raised his siege, and suffered the Empresse and hir brother to escape to Bristow, where they were receiued. In the yeere 1140. Cynwric the sonne of Owen was slaine by the men of Madoc ap Meredyth ap Blethyn ap Convyn,1140 and the next yeare after king Stephen with a great armie did besiege Lincolne,W. Parnus. lib. 1. cap. 8. Matt. Paris. pag. 104. Matt. West. lib. 2. pag. 36. against whome came Ranulph Earle of Chester, & Robert Earle of Glocester with his father in law, and the Barons which were disinherited to raise the siege. But before they came, the towne was won: then passing a dangerous marrish, they camped hard by the king, readie to giue him bat∣tell; who likewise brought foorth his men in three battels. In the first were these, Alan Earle of Bry∣taine, the Earle of Mellent, Hugh Bygod Earle of Norfolke, Simon Earle of Hampton, and Earle Warren. In the second the Earle of Albemarle, and William of Ypres a noble man & a worthie souldi∣our. And in the third the king, with Baldwyn Fitz∣gilbert, and a great number of nobles more. And of the other part the disinherited Barons had the first place,Matt. Paris. ibidem. the Erle of Chester with his succours of Wales (better couraged than armed) had the se∣cond
place, and the Earle of Glocester lead the last battell. These after a cruell fight tooke the king prisoner,W. Parnus. lib. 1. cap. 9. Matth. West. lib. 2. pag. 37. Matt. Paris. pag. 105. and afterward the Queene and William of Ypres, Bryan Fitzcount. But within a while after that, William Martell and Geffrey de Mandeuile ga∣thered a new armie, & fought with the Empresse and hir brother at VVinchester, & put hir to flight, taking Earle Robert prisoner, for exchange of whom the king was set at libertie. The yeare fo∣lowing the king had an ouerthrow at VVilton,W. Parnus. lib. 1. cap. 10. Matt. West. page. 38. Matt. Paris. ibidem. af∣ter the which he besieged the Empresse the same yeare at Oxford, who escaping thence fled to VVa∣lingford. The same yeare also Madoc ap Ednerth a man of great estimation in VVales died, and the sons of Blethyn ap Gwyn slew Meredyth ap Howel. 1142Also the yeare 1142. Howel ap Meredyth ap Ry∣therch of the Cantref Bychan, & Rees ap Howel were slaine by treason of the Flemings. Likewise Howel ap Meredyth ap Blethyn was murthred by his own men. Then also Howel & Cadogan the sons of Ma∣doc ap Ednerth did either kill other. And shortlie after there fell a variance betwixt Anarawd sonne to Gruffyth ap Rees prince of Southwales, and his father in law Cadwalader the sonne of Gruffyth ap Conan and brother to prince Owen Gwyneth, who from words grew to fight: where Anarawd was slaine, the hope and staie of Southwales. For the which thing prince Owen tooke such displeasure at his brother, that he and his sonne Howel gathe∣red an armie against him, and destroied all his countrie, and burned his castell at Aberystwyth; for Cadwalader himselfe had fled to Ireland, and had hired Octer (sonne to Octer) and the sonne of Tur∣kel, and the sonne of Cherulf, with a great number
of Irishmen and Scots for 2000. markes to his suc∣cour, and landed at Aberinenay in Carnaruonshire, against whome the prince came with a great power: but before the armies met there was a peace concluded betwixt the brethren. Which when the Irishmen vnderstood, then withheld Cad∣walader as prisoner for their wages, and he deliue∣red them 2000. heads of cattell, besides manie prisoners and spoiles that were taken in the countrie. But as soone as the prince knew his bro∣ther set at libertie, he fell vpon the Irishmen, and slew a great number of them, and recouered all the cattell with the prisoners and other spoiles: then as manie as escaped aliue returned home with great shame and losse. About the same time Hugh Earle of Chester, fortified his castell of Cymaron, and wan Melie∣nyth to himselfe, & likewise the castell of Clun was fortified by a lord Normane, and all Eluel brought to their subiection.W. Parnus. lib. 1. cap. 11. At that time king Stephen tooke Geffrey Mandeuile prisoner at S. Albon, where the Earle of Arundell was like to be drowned by default of his horse.Matt. Paris. page. 105. The Earle Mandeuile gaue to the king for his libertie the towre of London, with the castels of Walden and Plassey,Matt. West. lib. 2. pag. 38. who afterward liued by spoile of abbers, and was slaine in a slur∣mish against the king,1143 whom he had sore anoied: and his sonne Arnulph was banished the realme.Matt. Paris, pag. 107. This yeare Hugh de Mortimer tooke Rees ap Howel in a skirmish, and diuerse other with him & imprisoned them. At the same time Howel and Co∣nan the sonnes of prince Owen gathered an armie against the Flemings and Normanes, & gaue them an ouerthrow at Aberteiui, and keeping the towne,
returned home with great honor. Also this yeare died Sulien ap Rythmarch a man of great know∣ledge, one of the Colledge of Lhanpardarn. About this time Gilbert Earle of Clare came with a great power to Dyuet, and built the castell of Carmarthyn, and the castell of the sonnes of Vch∣tryd. Then also Hugh Mortimer slew Meyric ap Ma∣doc ap Riryd, and Meredyth ap Madoc ap Ednerth. Cadelh the son of Gruffyth ap Rees prince of South∣wales gat the castell of Dyneuowr, which Erle Gil∣bert had built, and after he and his brethren Mere∣dyth and Rees gathered their powers, and laid siege to the castell of Carmarthyn, which was yeel∣ded vnto them, reseruing only the liues to those of the garrison: and from thence they brought their armie before the castell of Lhanstephan, where the Normanes and Flemings meeting with them had a great ouerthrow, & so they wan the castell. Wher∣vpon all the Flemings and Normanes inhabiting that countrie all about, gathered their powers togither, and their captaines were the sonnes of Gerald and William de Hay, who laid siege to the same castell vpon the sudden. But Meredyth ap Gruffyth, to whose custodie the castell was com∣mitted, encouraged his men to fight and to defend the place, and that which lacked in him of strength (for he was of great yeares) he supplied in cou∣rage and discretion. He suffred his enimies to scale the wals, and when the ladders were full, he gaue the watchword, and his souldiours did manfullie with engines ouerturne all the ladders, and mai∣med a great number of armed men and tried sol∣diours, and put the rest to flight. Shortlie after died Run the sonne of prince Owen of Northwales, a
faire and a goodlie yoong man, whose death when it came to his fathers eares did so trouble him, that no kind of plesure could comfort his heauie hart, so that he led the night in teares and the day in heauinesse, till God who tooke compassion vpon the poore leauings and remnants of the Brytaines, euen as he had discomforted the prince with the death of his sonne, so he did glad his sorowfull hart with the ouerthrow of his enimies: for there was a castell at the Mould verie strong and well man∣ned, which did trouble the whole countrie about, and had been oftentimes besieged, but neuer won. Prince Owen leuied a power and laid siege to it, but the garrison defended it manfullie, and aboad diuerse assaults: but at the last, mauger their heads, the sight of the prince did so incourage his men, that they entred by force, and slew a great number, and tooke the rest of the defendants, and rased the fort to the earth: which victorie atchie∣ued did so please the prince, that he left his solita∣rie plaints, and fell to his accustomed pastimes. At the same time king Stephen ouerthrew his enimies at Farendon.Matth. West. lib. 2. pag. 38 Matt. Paris. page. 107. But in the yeare ensuing Rondel Earle of Chester and king Stephen were made freends,1145 neuerthelesse the king tooke him pri∣soner, and kept him so (contrarie to his promise) vntill such time as the Earle had deliuered to the king the castell of Lincolne, with all other fortes of the kings that he had in his custodie. At this time Cadelh, Meredyth, and Rees the sons of Gruf∣fyth ap Rees ap Theodor did lead their powers a∣gainst the castell of Gwys, which after they saw they could not win, they sent for Howel the sonne of Owen prince of Northwales to their succor, who
for his prowesse in the field and his discretion in consultation, was counted the floure of chiualrie, whose presence also was thought onlie sufficient to ouerthrowe anie hold; who being desirous to win honor, gathered his men, and came to these lords before the castell of Gwys, whō they receiued ioifullie. Now when he had vewed the place, hee caused engines to be made to batter the walles with force of men, and other to cast great stones to their enimies, & to disquiet the garison. Which preparations when they within beheld, their sto∣machs failed, and forthwith they yeelded the fort, then Howel returned home with great honour. Shortlie after, there fell a great dissention be∣twixt Howel and Conan prince Owens sonnes, and Cadwalader their vncle; wherevpon they called their strength vnto them, and entred the coun∣trie of Merionyth: where the people fled to the sanctuaries to saue their liues. These two yoong Lords made proclamation, that no man should hurt those that would yeeld to them: wher∣vpon the people which had fled, returned to their houses without hurt. Thus they brought all the countrie in subiection to them, & lead their armie before the castell of Cynvael, which Cadwalader had built and fortified, wherein was the Abbot of Tuygwyn, or Whitehouse, to whome the Lord had committed the defense of his castell. Then Howel and Conan summoned the fort with great threat∣nings, but they within defied them: wherevpon Howel & Conan promised the Abbot Meruyn great rewards, to let them haue the house. But he (like a faithfull seruant, whom neither terrible manaces, nor pleasant proffers could mooue to vntruth, but
as his lord trusted him so would he continue still, and not deceiue his expectation) denied them of the same, choosing rather to die with honour, than to liue with shame. With which answere the yoong Lords were greatlie offended, that a priest should staie their prosperous proceedings, and thervpon assaulted the castell so sore, that after they had beaten downe the walles, they entred by force, and slew and wounded all the garrison, sauing the Abbot, who escaped awaie priuilie by meanes of freends whom he had in Howels armie. The yeare 1147.1147 died Robert Earle of Glocester & Gilbert Earle of Clare, & Vchthred bishop of Lan∣daff, after whome Nicholas ap Gurgant was made bishop. And the yere 1148.1148 died Barnard bishop of S. Dauids or Meneuia,Girald. Cam. & after him came Dauid Fitzge∣rald to be bishop there, who was before Archdea∣con of Caerdigan.Castell y Rodwyth. The yeare ensuing Owen prince of Northwales did build a castell in Yale, and his brother Cadwalader built another at Lhanrystyd, and gaue Cadogan his son his part of Caerdigan. Towards the end of this yeare, Madoc the sonne of Meredyth ap Blethyn did build the castell of Os∣westrie,The castell of Oswe∣strie. and gaue his nephewes Owen and Mey∣ric the sonnes of Gruffyth ap Meredyth his part of Cyuelioc. The yeare after, prince Owen did impri∣son Conan his sonne for certaine faults commit∣ted against his father: also prince Owens sonne tooke his vncle Cadwalader prisoner, and brought his countrie and castell to his subiection. At this time also Cadeth the sonne of Gruffyth ap Rees fortified the castell of Carmarthyn, & from thence lead his armie to Cydwely, where he de∣stroied and spoiled all the countrie, and after his
returne he ioined his power with Meredyth and Rees his brethren, and entring Caerdigan wan the part called Is Aeron. Not long after, there fell a variance betwixt Rondel Earle of Chester, and Owen prince of Northwales. Then Rondel gathered a great power of his freends and hired soldiours, from all parts of England: to whom Madoc ap Meredyth prince of Powys, disdaining to hold his lands of Owen, ioined all his power: and they both togither entred prince Owens land, who like a worthie prince not suffering the spoile of his sub∣iects, met them at Counsylht, and boldlie bad them battell, which they refused not, but being more in number and better armed and weaponed, were glad of the occasion: yet before the end they threw awaie weapon and armour, and trusted their feet, whome the Northwales men did so pursue that few escaped, but were either slaine or taken, sa∣uing the cheefe captaines, whose horses caried them awaie cleere. In the yeare 1150.1150 Cadelh, Meredyth and Rees, the sonnes of Gruffyth ap Rees Prince of Southwales, wanne all Caerdigan from Howel the sonne of prince Owen, sauing the castell of Lhanvihangel in Pengwern, and at the castell of Lhanrystyd they lost manie of their men, therefore they slew all the garrison when they wan it, and thence they went to the castell of Stratmeyric, which they fortified and manned, and then retur∣ned home. This Cadelh had a great pleasure in hunting, and vsed much that pastime; which thing when the inhabitants of Tenby or Denbigh y pys∣cot in Penbrooke shire knew, they laid in ambush∣ment for him, and so when this lord had vncoupled his hounds, and pursued the stag with a few com∣panions,
they fierslie set on him & his companie, and seeing they were but few and vnarmed, they easilie put them to flight, and wounded Cadelh ve∣rie sore, yet he escaped their hands, & came to his house, where he laie a long time like to die. Then his brethren Meredyth & Rees entered Gwyr, where burning and destroing all the countrie, they wan the castell of Aberlhychwr & rased it to the ground, and then returning home with great bootie, reedi∣fied the castell of Dynevowr. The same yeare also Howel the sonne of Owen prince of Northwales for∣tified Humfreys castell in the vallie of Caletwr. In the yeare 1151.1151 Owen Gwyneth tooke Cu∣netha his brother Cadwalhon his sonne, and put out his eies, and gelded him, least he should haue children to inherit part of the land. Lhewelyn also the sonne of Madoc ap Meredyth slew Stephen the sonne of Baldwin. About the same time Cadwalader the brother of Prince Owen escaped out of his ne∣phew Howels prison, and subdued part of the Ile of Môn or Anglesey to himselfe: but his brother Owen sent an armie against him, and chased him thence, who fled to England for succour to his wiues freends, for she was the daughter of Gilbert Earle of Clare.Matt. Paris. pag. 113. Matt. West. lib. 2. pag. 41. The same yeare Galfride Arthur was made bishop of Lhanelwy, now called in En∣glish Saint Asaph. Also Simon Archdeacon of Cyuelioc, an man of great worthines and fame, dy∣ed at the same time. And the yeare ensuing Mere∣dyth and Rees, the sonnes of Gruffyth ap Rees, did lead their powers to Penwedic, before the castell, which did belong to Howel the sonne of Prince Owen, and with great paines got it. Shortlie af∣ter, priuilie by night they came to the castell of
Tennbie, which was in the keeping of Fitzgerald, and scaled it vpon the sudden, and got it, and did so reuenge their brothers hurt. Then returning thence they diuided their armie, and Rees went to Stratcongen, which he destroied and spoiled, and went thence to Cyuelioc, which he destroied in like manner. But Meredyth laid siege to the castell of Aberavan, and wan it, and came home with rich spoiles.Ran. Cest. lib. 7. cap. 20. At this time died Rondle Earle of Chester, and Hugh his sonne was created Earle in his place. 1153In the yeare 1153. died Meredyth ap Gruffyth ap Rees Lord of Caerdigan and Stratywy, in the 25. yeare of his age, a worthie knight, and fortunate in battell, iust and liberall to all men. Also the same yeare died Geffrey bishop of Landaff. The yeare ensuing, Henrie Shortmantel the Empresse sonne entred England, and wan diuerse castels, as Maluesburie,Matt. West. page. 41. Matt. Paris. page. 114. Walingford, and Shrewsburie. About the same time Eustace the sonne of king Stephen was drowned, wherevpon the king and Henrie concluded a peace. 1154In the yeare 1154. died Stephen king of Eng∣land,Matt. West. lib. 2. pag. 52. Matt. Paris. page. 115. and Henrie Plantagenet the Empresse son was crowned in his steed. This Henrie was wise and learned and besides a worthie knight, he neuer ware gloue except he bare a hawke on his fist, and neuer sate but at his meate, and delited in haw∣king, hunting, riding, and in all honest exercises. In the beginning of his reigne, and in the yeare 1155.1155 Rees ap Gruffyth ap Rees, whome the Welsh booke surnameth Lord Rees, and all the Latine and English writers of that time name King of Southwales, did gather all his strength togither to
defend his countrie from Owen Gwyneth, whom he heard to be leuieng of men to conquer South∣wales. So Rees came as far as Aberdyvi ouer a∣gainst Northwales, and perceiuing the rumour to be false, built a castell there, and so returned backe. At the same time Madoc ap Meredyth prince of Powys did build a castell at Caereneon besides Cy∣mer.Castelh Caer∣eneon. At that time Meyric his nephew escaped out of prison, where he had beene long kept; then also Eglwys vair in Myvot was built, also Terdelach king of Conacht in Ireland died. At this time king Henrie banished the Flemings,Io. Cast. whom king Stephen had brought in, and sent some of them to their coosins in Westwales; likewise the king bannished Wiliam Peuerell of Notingham.Matt. West. page. 43. Matt. Paris. page. 126. And Hugh Mortimer fortified the castell of Cleberie against the king, which the king tooke and rased, and Hugh yeelded to the king, and deliuered to his hands the castels of Wygmor and Brugge. Like∣wise Roger the sonne of Myles of Glocester Earle of Hereford deliuered to the king the tower of Glo∣cester, and died shortlie after, and his brother Wal∣ter enioied his land; but the king kept the Earle∣dome of Hereford, and the towne of Glocester in his owne hands. The yeare folowing, Conan Earle of Richmond sailed to Brytaine, where he was re∣ceiued of the most part for their duke. Shortlie af∣ter king Henrie & his brother Geffrey were agreed in Normandie, and the king being returned into England,Matt. West. page. 44. receiued of the Scottish king Carlile, New∣castell, and Banburgh, with the countrie about, and gaue him the Earldome of Huntingdon. Also Wil∣liam Earle of Egle and Northfolke, base sonne to king Stephen, deliuered Henrie the castels of Pe∣uensey
and Norwich, and the king confirmed to him his other lands. At this time Caradocus Lhancaruan, who is reputed and taken of all learned men to be the author of this present historie, endeth his collections of the successions of the Bry∣taines, from Cadwalader vntill this time, of whome some studious antiquarie wrote these verses following: Historiam Brytonum doctus scripsit Caradocus, Post Cadwalladrum regia sceptra notans. In those two Ab∣beis, the Princes and Noble∣men of Wales were buried.The successions and actes of the princes of Wales after this time, vntill the yeare 1270. were kept and recor∣ded from time to time in the Abbeis of Conwey in Northwales, and Stratflur in Southwales, as witnesseth Gutryn Owen, who being in the daies of Edward the fourth wrote the best and most perfect copie of the same. 1157About this time the king gathered all his po∣wer togither from all parts of England,W. Parnus. lib. 2. cap. 5. Matt. West. ibidem. Matt. Paris. pag. 129. Io. Castor. intending to subdue all Northwales, being therevnto procu∣red and mooued by Cadwalader, whom the Prince his brother had banished out of the land, and be∣reaued of his liuing, and by Madoc ap Meredyth prince of Powys, who enuied at the libertie of Northwales, which knewe no lord but one. And so the king led his armie to Westchester, and camped vpon the marsh called Saltney. Likewise Owen, like a valiant prince, gathered all his strength, and came to the vtter meares of his land, purposing to giue the king battell, & encamped himselfe at Ba∣singwerk. Which thing when the king vnderstood, he chose out of his armie diuerse of the cheefest bands, and sent certeine Earles and Lords with them towards the princes campe:W. Parnus lib. 2. cap. 5. and as they passed the wood called Coed Eulo, Dauid & Conan the princes sons met with them, & set vpon them
fearslie, & what for the aduantage of the ground & for the suddennes of the deed, the Englishmen were put to flight, and a great number slaine, and the rest were pursued to the kings campe. The king being fore displeased with that foile, remooued his campe alongst the sea coast,Hol. pag. 397. thinking to passe be∣twixt Owen and his countrie; but Owen foreseeing that, retired backe to a place which is called to this daie Cîl Owen (that is, the retire of Owen) and the king came to Ruthlan. W. Parnus. lib. 2. cap. 5.In this first viage of king Henrie against the Welshmen, he was put in great danger of his life in a strait at Coun∣sylth not far from Flynt, where Henrie of Essex, whose office by inheritance was to beare the standard of England, cast downe the same and fled: which thing incouraged the Welshmen in such sort, that the king being sore distressed, had much a doo to saue himselfe: and (as the French Chro∣nicle saith) was faine to flée; of whose part Eustace, Fitz-Iohn, and Robert Curcie two worthie knights, with diuerse other noble men and gentlemen, were slaine. After that, Owen incamped and intrenched him∣selfe at Bryn y pin, and skirmished with the kings men dailie, and in the meane while that the King was fortifieng the castell of Ruthlan; his nauie, which was guided by Madoc ap Meredyth Prince of Powys, anchored in Môn or Anglesey, and put on land the soldiours, which spoiled two churches, and a little of the countrie thereabouts. But as they returned vnto their ships, all the strength of the Ile set vpon them and killed them all, so that none of those which robbed within the Ile brought tidings how they sped. Then the shipmen seeing that, liked not their lodging there, but waid vp anchors and went awaie to Chester. In the
meane time there was a peace concluded betwixt the king and the Prince, vpon condition that Cad∣walader should haue his lands againe, and his bro∣ther should be his friend. Then the King leauing the castels of Ruthlan and Basywerke well fortified and manned, after he had built a house thereby for the templers, returned to England. At that time also Iorwerth Goch ap Meredyth got the castell of Yale, and burned it. The yeare folowing, Morgan ap Owen was traitorously slaine by the men of Ivor ap Meyric, with whom died the best poet in the Brytish toong of his time, called Gurgan ap Rees: and his brother Iorwerth got the towne of Caerlheon, and the lands of Owen. Then the king made peace with all the princes & lords of Wales, except Rees ap Gruffyth ap Rees prince of Southwales, which Rees fearing the kings power, caused his people to remooue their cattell & goods to the wildernesse of Tywy, and he still made war against the king. Therefore the king sent for him to come to his court, to conclude a peace before the power of England & Wales were sent for him: wherevpon Rees after consultation came to the king, and an order was taken that Rees should en∣ioy the Cantref Mawr, as it should please the king, so that his land should be whole togither, and not in diuerse places and shires: but the king did con∣trarie to his promise, appointing Rees lands in di∣uerse places, and lordships intermingled with o∣ther mens lands. Which deceit although Rees perceiued well inough, yet he receiued it peece∣meale as it was, and liued quietlie, vntill Roger Earle of Clare hearing this, came to the king, and desired his highnesse to giue him such lands in
Wales as he could win, which the king granted. Then he came with a great armie to Caerdigan, & first he fortified the castell of Stratmeyric, and af∣terwards the castell of Humfrey, of Dyuy, of Dy∣nerth, & Lhanristyd. When these castels were well manned and fortified, Walter Clyfford, who had the keeping of the castell of Lhanymdhyfri, made a road to the land of Rees, and returned with a boo∣tie, after he had slaine diuerse of Reeses men. Then Rees sent to the king to complaine, and to haue a redresse, who had onelie faire words and nothing else: for the king winked at the faults of the Englishmen and Normanes, and punished the Welshmen cruellie. Rees seeing this, laid siege to Lhanymdhyfri, and in short space wan the castell. Also Eneon the sonne of Anarawd Reeses brothers sonne, being a lustie gentleman, and desirous to make his countrie free from seruitude, and percei∣uing his vncle to be discharged of his oth to the king, laid siege to the castell of Humfrey, & by force wan it, slaieng all the garrison, wherein he found horses and armour to furnish a great number of men. Likewise Rees, seeing he could enioy no part of his inheritance but that he wan by the sword, gathered his power, & entring Caerdigan, left not a castell standing in the countrie, of those which his enimies had fortified, and so brought all to his subiection. Wherewith the king being sore offen∣ded, returned to Southwales, and when he saw he could doo no good, he suffered Rees to enioy all that he had gotten, and tooke pledges of him to keepe the peace in his absence. Then returning to Eng∣land, he tooke his iournie to Normandie, and made peace with the French king. But the next yeare
Rees prince of Southwales did lead his power to Dyuet, and destroied all the castels that the Nor∣manes had fortified there, and afterward laid siege to Caermarthin. Which thing when Reynold Erle of Brystow the kings base sonne heard, he called to him the Earle of Clare, and his brother in law Cadwalader the brother of prince Owen, with How∣el and Conan prince Owens sonnes, and two other Earles, and came to raise the siege with a great armie: whose comming Rees abode not, but got him to the mountains called Kefn Rester, and there kept himselfe, and they camped at Dynwyl hîr, and builded a castell there, who after they could not heare of Rees, returned home without doing of a∣nie notable act. King Henrie remained in Norman∣die all this yeare, where he made warre against the Earle of S. Giles for the citie and Earledome of Tholouse. 1160In the yeare 1160. died Madoc ap Meredyth ap Blethyn prince of Powys at Winchester. This man was euer the king of Englands freend, and was one that feared God, and releeued the poore, his bodie was conueied honorablie to Powys, and buried in Myuot. This man had by his wife Susanna the daughter of Gruffyth ap Conan prince of North∣wales three sonnes, Gruffyth Maylor, Owen, and E∣lise, and a daughter called Marred: he had base sons, Owen Brogynton, Kynwric Euelh, and Eneon Euelh, which base sonnes were not baselie esteemed, who with the other had part of their fathers inheri∣tance, and so had other through Wales, especiallie if they were stout and of noble courage. And here I thinke it conuenient to declare how Powys land came to be diuided in many parts, and
thereby weakened and so brought vnder the Nor∣manes, before the rest of Wales. Meredyth sonne to Blethyn ap Convyn prince of Powys had two sons, Madoc of whom we speake, and Gruffyth, betweene whom Powys was diuided. Madoc had that part which was called Powys Vadoc, which part again was diuided betwixt his three sons, Gruffyth May∣lor, Owen Vachan, and Owen Brogynton after this maner. Gruffyth Maylor had Bromfield, Yale, Hope Dale, Nanhewdwy, Mochnant îs Rhayard, Chirke, Cynlhayth, and Glyndouerdwy. Owen Vachan had Mechain Iscoyd. And Owen Brogynton had Dyn∣mael, and Edeyrneon. The other part of Powys cal∣led afterward Powys Wenwynwyn, was the part of Gruffyth ap Meredyth, after whose death his sonne called Owen Cyuelioc enioied it, as it shall be at large hereafter declared. The lord∣ship of Powys.Powys before king Offas time reached Estward to the riuers of Dee and Seauerne, with a right line from the end of Broxen hilles to Salop, with all the countrie betwéene VVye and Seauerne, whereof Brochwel yscithroc (of whom mention is made before, pag. 22.) was possessed: but after the making of Offas ditch (as it is said before pag. 19.) the plaine countrie toward Salop, being inhabited by Saxons and Normans, Powys was in length from Pulford bridge Northeast, to the confines of Caerdigan shire, in the parish of Lhanguric in the Southwest; and in bredth from the furthest part of Cyuelioc Westward, to Elsmere on the Eastside. This countrie or principalitie of Powys was ap∣pointed by Roderike the Great for the portion of his third sonne Anarawd, and so continued intierlie vntill the death of Blethyn ap Convyn. After whom, although the dominion was diminished by limiting parts in seueraltie amongst his sonnes Meredyth and Cadogan, yet at length it came wholie to the possession of Meredyth ap Blethyn, who had is∣sue
two sonnes Madoc and Gruffyth, betwéene whom the said dominion was diuided, Madoc maried Susanna the daughter of Gruffyth ap Conan prince of Northwales, and had that part, which was after called after his name Powys Vadoc, which dominion and Seigniorie was diuided betwixt the thrée sonnes of the said Madoc, to wit, Gruffyth Maelor, Owen ap Madoc, and Owen Brogynton, which Owen Brogynton al∣though he was baselie begotten, yet for his valiancie and no∣ble courage he had part of his fathers inheritance, to wit, Edeyrneon and Dinmael, and had issue Gruffyth, Blethin, and Iorwerth. Owen ap Madoc had to his portion of inheritance limited the territorie of Mechain Is coed, and had issue Lhe∣welyn and Owen Vachan. Gruffyth Maelor the eldest sonne lord of Bromfield had to his part the two Maelors and Moch∣nant is Rayadr, he maried Angharat the daughter of Owen Gwyneth prince of Northwales, by whome he had issue one sonne named Madoc, who held his fathers inheritance wholie, and had issue Gruffyth called lord of Dînas brân (because he dwelled in that castell) who maried Emma the daughter of Iames lord Audley, and had issue Madoc, Lhewelyn, Gruffyth and Owen. This Gruffyth ap Madoc tooke part with king Henrie the third and Edward the first, against the prince of Northwales, and therefore for feare of the prince he was faine to lie for his owne safegard in his said castell of Dînas brân, which standeth on the toppe of a verie stéepe hill, to the which there is no waie but one to come. He died, his children being within age, wherevpon shortlie after ensued the destruction of two of them: for the said king Ed. 1. gaue the wardship of Ma∣doc (who had for his part the lordships of Bromfield and Yale, and the said castell of Dînas brân, which the reuersion of Maelor Saesnec after his mothers decease, who had the same to hir iointer) to Iohn Earle Warren; and granted the wardship of Lhewelyn, (to whose part the lordships of Chirke and Nan∣hevdwy came) to Roger Mortimer third sonne to Roger Mor∣timer the sonne of Ralph Mortimer Lord Mortimer of Wig∣mor. These guardians forgetting the seruice doone by the fa∣ther
of the wardes to the king, so garded their wardes with so small regard,See the re∣cords in the Towre. that they neuer returned to their possessions. And shortlie after the said guardians did obtaine the same lands to themselues by charters of the king. This Iohn Earle Warren began to build the Holt castell, and William his son finished the same. The lordship of Bromfield and Yale conti∣nued in the name of the Earle Warren thrée descents, Iohn, William and Iohn that died without issue, and then the said lordship togither with the said Erldome of Warren, descended to Alice daughter of the said William Erle Warren, and sister and heire of the said last Iohn Earle Warren, which Alice ma∣ried Edmond Fitzalan Erle of Arundell, in the which house of Fitzalanes it remained thrée descents after the said Edmond and Alice, to wit, to Richard Earle of Arundell, and to Richard Earle of Arundell his sonne, and to Thomas Earle of Arun∣dell sonne of the said last Richard. And then for want of issue of the said Thomas Earle of Arundell and Warren, the said lordship fell to two of his sisters, whereof one named Elizabeth was maried to Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolke, the o∣ther named Ioane was maried to William Beauchamp lord of Abergauenny, whose part afterwards came by a daughter to the Neuil lord of Abergauenny: and sithence it came to the hands of Sir William Stanley knight, by whose attaindor it escheated to the crowne, and so remaineth parcell of hir ma∣iesties possessions at this daie. Roger Mortimer Iustice of Northwales,Chirke. builded the castell of Chirke, and maried Lucia the daughter and heire of Sir Ro∣bert de Wafre knight, by whom he had issue Roger Mortimer, who maried Ioane Turberuile, and had issue Iohn Mortimer lord of Chirke. This Iohn sold the lordship of Chirke, to Ri∣chard Fitzalan Earle of Arundell, sonne to the said Edmond, and so it was annexed againe to Bromfield and Yale. The third sonne of Gruffyth lord of Dînas brân, named also Gruffyth, had for his part Glyndowrdwy,Glyndowr∣dwy. which Gruffyth ap Gruffyth was father of Madoc Crupl father of Madoc Va∣chan father of Gruffyth father of Gruffyth Vachan, father of
Owen Glyndowr, who rebelled in the time of king Henrie the fourth, by whose attaindor that part also came to the kings hands, which was purchased of the king by Robert Salisburie of Rug, of whome Salisburie the lord of Glyndowrdwy that now is descended. Owen the fourth sonne of Gruffyth lord of Dînas brân had for his part Cynlhaeth, which at this daie to∣gither with the lordship of Chirke land is parcell of the posses∣sions of the right honorable the Earle of Leycester. The other part of Powys, containing the countries of A∣rustly, Cyuelioc, Lhannerch hudol, Caereneon, Mochnant vwch Rayader, Mechain vwch Coed, Mouthwy, Deuthwr,  Strat Marchelh, and Teirtref or the thrée townes, rightfullie de∣scended to Gruffyth ap Meredyth ap Blethyn before mentio∣ned, who was by King Henrie the first created Lord Powys, he married Gweyryl or Weyryl the daughter of Vrgene ap Howel ap Ieuaf ap Cadogan ap Athlestan Glodryth, and by hir had issue Owen surnamed Cyuelioc. Owen Cyuelioc enioied his whole inheritance as his fa∣ther did, and married Wenlhian the daughter of Owen Gwy∣neth, Prince of Northwales, by whom he had issue Gwen∣wynwyn or Wenwynwyn: after whose name that part of Powys was afterward called Powys Wenwynwyn. He had also a bastard brother called Caswalhon, to whom he gaue the territories called Swydh Lhannerch Hudol and Braniarth. Gwenwynwyn succéeded his father in the whole segniorie, sauing Lhannerch, Hudol and Braniarth, which were giuen to his base brother Caswalhon Maelrhy, during his life time one∣lie. Which Gwenwynwyn married Margaret daughter to Rees ap Theodor Prince of Southwales, and by hir had issue Gruffyth ap Gwenwynwyn. Gruffyth ap Gwenwynwyn succéeded his father in all his possessions, and had issue sixe sonnes, among whom his inheri∣tance was diuided as foloweth. Owen the eldest sonne had for his part, Arustly, Cyuelioc, Lhannerch hudol, and the moi∣tie of Caereneon. Lhewelyn the second sonne had Mochnant vwch Rayader and Mechain vwch Coed. Iohn the third sonne
had the fourth part of Caereneon. William the fourth sonne had Mouthwy. Gruffyth Vachan the fift sonne, had Deuthwr, Strat marchelh and Teirtref. Dauid the sixt sonne had the other fourth part of Caereneon. Owen ap Gruffyth had issue one onelie daughter his heire, named Hawys Gadarn, that is, Hawys the hardie, against whom hir vncles Lhewelyn, Iohn, Gruffyth Vachan, and Da∣uid arose, challenging the lands of their brother Owen, and affirming that a woman was not capable of lands in that countrie. Wherevpon Hawys made such fréends in England, that the matter being opened vnto King Edward the second, the said King bestowed hir in marriage vpon a seruant of his named Iohn Charleton, termed Valectus Domini Regis, borne in Appley, a little off from Welinton 1268. in the countie of Salop, whom he made Lord Powys in hir right. This Iohn Charleton Lord Powys, being aided by the king  tooke thrée of his wiues vncles, to wit, Lhewelyn, Dauid and Iohn, whom he laid vp fast in the kings castell of Hardlech, and obteined a writ from the King of the Shirife of the countie of Salop, and Sir Roger Mortimer Lord of Chirkland and iu∣stice of Northwales, for the apprehension of Gruffyth Vachan, with Sir Roger Chamber, and Hugh Mountgomerie his two sonnes in lawe, which then were in armour against the said Charleton and Hawys. Wherevpon the said Gruffyth Vachan and his brethren, hauing then lost their greatest staie, which was Thomas Earle of Lancaster, submitted themselues to the kings order, touching all matters in variance betwéene them and their néece: who finding by records, that Gruffyth ap Me∣redyth, auncestor to the said Hawys, vpon his submission to King Henrie the first, became subiect to the King of England, and therevpon was by the said King created Baron of Pow∣ys, which Baronie he and his heires held afterward of the king in Capite, as other Barons of England did. And therefore the said Hawys (as it séemed vnto him) had more right to hir fa∣thers possessions, being in hir vncles hands, than they to hirs. But to make a finall end betwéene them, order and composi∣tion
was taken, that Hawys should enioie hir inheritance, in fée simple to hir and to hir heires for euer, after the tenure of England. And that hir vncles Lhewelyn, Iohn, Dauid, and Gruffyth, should hould their portions to them and to their heires male for euer. And in default of such issue male, the same to descend and remaine to the said Hawys, and to hir heires for euer. Mowthwy.William Lord of Mowthwy, otherwise called Wilcocke Mowthwy, being the fourth sonne, (bicause he did not trouble his said néece Hawy about hir inheritance,) had his lands con∣firmed and assured in fée simple to him and to his heires ge∣nerall male or female foreuer. He maried Alianor the sister of Elen, Owen Glyndowres mother, the daughter of Thomas sonne of Lhewelyn sonne of Owen sonne of Meredyth sonne of Owen sonne of Gruffyth sonne of Rees sonne of Gruffyth sonne of Rees ap Theodor prince of Southwales, by whome he had issue Iohn de Mowthwy. Iohn the sonne of William Lord of Mowthwy had issue E∣lizabeth his daughter and sole heire, which was maried to Sir Hugh Burgh knight. Sir Hugh Burgh knight in the right of his wife lord of Mowthwy, had issue Sir Iohn Burgh. Sir Iohn Burgh lord of Mowthwy, maried Iane the daugh∣ter of Sir William Clopton knight lord of the manours of Clopton and Radbrooke in the countie of Glocester, and by hir had issue foure daughters, Elizabeth, Ancreda, Isabell and Alianor. Elizabeth maried to Thomas Newport father of Iohn, father of Thomas father of sir Richard Newport knight late deceased father of Francis and Andrew now liuing. An∣creda maried to Iohn Leighton of Stretton father of Sir Tho∣mas Leighton of Watelsborough knight, father of Iohn Leighton, father of Edward Leighton Esquire, eldest sonne: and of Sir Thomas Leighton knight second sonne now li∣uing. Isabell maried to Iohn Lingen, father of Sir Iohn Lin∣gen knight. And Alianor maried to Thomas Mytton, father of William Mytton, father of Richard Mytton, who by parti∣tion
had amongst the said coheires enioied the said Seignio∣rie and Lordship of Mowthwy. The said Iohn Charleton first of that sirname had issue by the said Hawys Iohn, and died An. 1353. Iohn Charleton the second lord Powys held that Seignio∣rie  seuen yeares, and then died, An. 1360. leauing behind him a sonne and heire called also Iohn. Iohn Charleton the third lord Powys succéeded his father, and enioied that lordship fouretéene yeares, and then died, An. 1374. leauing behind him two sons, Iohn and Edward. Iohn Charleton the fourth lord Powys possessed his fathers  inheritance after him 27. yeares, and then died without issue, An. 1401. Edward Charleton brother and heire to the said Iohn, suc∣céeded  him in the lordship of Powys, and held the same 19. yeares, he maried Alianor daughter and one of the heires of of Thomas Earle of Kent, being the widow of Roger Morti∣mer Earle of March, and mother to Anne countesse of Cam∣bridge, the mother of Richard duke of Yorke, and had issue by hir two daughters his heires, Iane eldest daughter maried to Sir Iohn Gray knight, and Ioyce second daughter maried to Iohn lord Tiptoft, by whome she had issue Iohn lord Tiptoft, created by king Henrie the sixt Earle of Worcester, who died without issue: and foure daughters, Philip, Ioyce, Ioane, and Margaret: the first Philip, maried to Thomas lord Ros. The second Ioyce, maried to Edmond Dudley sonne and heire to Iohn baron Dudley. The third Ioane, maried to Sir Edward Inglethorp knight, who had issue Isabell maried to Iohn Ne∣uill Marques Montague. After the death of the said Alianor, this Edward lord Powys maried Elizabeth the daughter of Sir Iohn Barkley knight, and died An. 1420. After whose death the lordship of Powys was diuided into thrée parts: first the said Elizabeth had for hir dowrie Lhannerch hudol, Strat marchelh, Deuthwr and Teirtref, and maried to hir second husband the Baron of Dud∣ley. The said Iane the eldest daughter had for hir part Ca∣ereneon,
Mecham, Mochnant and Plâsdinas. The third, Ioyce the yoonger daughter had Cyuelioc and Arustly. Henrie Gray the sonne of Sir Iohn Gray knight, and Iane daughter and one of the heires of Edward Chareleton lord Powys, was in the right of the said Iane his mother lord Pow∣ys, he was also by king Henrie the fift created Earle of Tan∣queruile, and maried Antigone base daughter to Humfrey duke of Glocester, fourth sonne to king Henrie the fourth, and had issue Richard, Humfrey, and Elizabeth the wife of Sir Roger Kinaston. Richard Gray lord Powys maried Margaret the daughter of Iames lord Audley, and by hir had issue Iohn and Elizabeth, the wife of Iohn Ludlow sonne of sir Richard Ludlow knight, which Iohn and Elizabeth had issue two daughters, Anne and Alice. Anne the elder maried Thomas Vernon, second sonne of Sir Henrie Vernon of Haddon in the Peke, of whom Hen∣rie Vernon of Stokesay now liuing is descended. Alice the se∣cond daughter maried Humfrey Vernon third sonne of the said sir Henrie, and brother to the said Thomas, of whom Iohn Vernon of Hodnet now liuing is descended. Iohn Gray lord Powys had issue Iohn. Iohn Gray lord Powys had issue Edward. Edward Gray lord Powys maried Anne the daughter of Charles Brandon duke of Suffolke, and died without lawfull issue. The same yeare Cadwalhon ap Madoc ap Ed∣nerth was taken by his brother Eneon Clyd, and deliuered to Owen prince of Northwales, who sent him to the kings officers to be imprisoned at Win∣chester, from whence he escaped shortlie after, and came to his countrie. Henrie king of England re∣mained in Normandie all this yeare,Matt. Paris. pag. 130. whose sonne named also Henrie maried Margaret the daughter of Lewys king of France. The yeare next folow∣ing died Meyric bishop of Bangor. Then king Hen∣rie
and the French King fell at variance;Matt. West. pag. 46. wherevp∣on shortlie after, King Henrie went to Gascoyne to chastise certeine rebels there. But in the yeare 1162.1162 there was a peace concluded betweene the kings of England and France.Matt. Paris. pag. 131. At that time Howel the son of Ieuaf ap Cadogan ap Athlestan Glodrydh, got the castell of Walwern in Cyuelioc, and rased it: which thing when it was told Owen Prince of Northwales, it displeased him wonderfullie, at the which he was so greeued, that nothing could make him merrie, vntill such time as he had gathered his power, & came to Lhanthinam in Arustly, and thence fet great spoiles. Then the people of the countrie came all to their Lord Howel ap Ieuaf, who folowed the spoile to Seauerne side, where the Princes campe was: whereof the Prince sée∣ing such an occasion of reuenge offered him, was right glad, and set vpon his enimies, and slew the most part of them, and the rest with their Lord es∣caped to the woods and rocks. Then the Prince being ioifull of this reuenge, built vp his castell a∣gaine, and fortified it stronglie. The yeare folow∣ing, Owen the sonne of Gruffyth ap Meredyth, na∣med Owen Cyuelioc,Castelh Caer∣ec Hòua. and Owen ap Madoc ap Mere∣dyth got the castell of Carrechoua by Oswestrie, and wasted it. About the same time,1163 there was a combate fought betweene Robert Mountfort,Matth. West. page. 46. and Henrie de Essex, to trie which of them had begun the flight in the voiage against the Welshmen in the mar∣ches. Either of them accused the other, but in the triall Henrie was ouercome, and afterward disin∣herited, & shauen a moonke at Redding. Then the king gathered a great power against Southwales,
and came himselfe as farre as Pencadayr beside Brechnock, where Rees came to him and did him homage,Matt. West. page. 47. Matt. Paris. page. 134. and gaue him pledges, and then the king went to Ireland againe. About this time Eneon the sonne of Anarawd ap Gruffyth nephue to prince Rees was murthered in his bed by a man of his owne named Lhywarch. Also Cadogan ap Meredyth was slaine after the like maner by one Walter ap Riccart. Then the lord Rees (as he is called in Welsh, or king Rees as the Latine authors name him) tooke the Cantref Mawr (which is a great countrie) and the land of Dynevowr, and enioied it. And this yeare died Cadiuor ap Daniel Archdea∣con of Caerdigan; and Henrie ap Arthen, which was the worthiest clerke that had beene manie yeares in Wales. The yeare ensuing, the lord Rees seeing he was not able to maintaine his estate with such lands as the king had appointed him, entred the lands of Roger de Clare Earle of Glocester, (for by the Earles means was his nephue murthered) and wanne the castels of Aberheidol and of the sonnes of Wynyaon & rased them. And so in short time he brought all Caerdigan to his subiection, from thence he made manie roades against the Flemings, and got great spoiles in their countrie. Then all VVales agreed to forsake the rule of the Normanes (whose treason and crueltie they could not abide) and to serue princes of their owne na∣tion. This yeare Hamelyn base brother to king Henrie maried the Countesse of VVarren, which was wife to VVilliam Earle of Egle, base sonne to king Stephen, and daughter and heire to VVilliam Earle VVarren. Also this yeare died VValter Gif∣ford Earle of Buckingham without heire, & there∣fore
the Earledome fell to the kings hands. In the yeare 1165.1165 Dauid the sonne of Owen prince of Northwales did destroie all Flynt shire, which was the kings, and caried all the people and cattell with him to the Dyffryn Cloyd now called Ruthyn land. Which thing when the king vnderstood, he leuied an armie in hast, and came to succour his castels and people as far as Ruthlan, and after he had laine there three daies, and could do no good, he returned to England, where he ga∣thered another armie of chosen men, through all his dominions, as England, Normandie, Aniow, Gascoine, & Gwyen; sending for succours from Flan∣ders and Brytaine, & then returned towards North∣wales, minding vtterlie to destroie all that had life in the land, and comming to Croes Oswalt cal∣led Oswaldstree, incamped there. On the contra∣rie side, prince Owen and his brother Cadwalader with all the power of Northwales, and the lord Rees with the power of Southwales: & Owen Cynelioc, and the sonnes of Madoc ap Meredyth with the power of Powys: and the two sonnes of Madoc ap Ednerth, with the people betwixt Wye and Sea∣uerne, gathered themselues togither, and came to Corwen in Edeyrneon, purposing to defend their countrie. But the king vnderstanding that they were so nigh, being wonderfull desirous of battel, came to the riuer Ceireoc, and caused the woods to be hewen downe. Wherevpon a number of the VVelshmen vnderstanding the passage, vnknow∣ing to their captaines met with the kings ward, where were placed the piked men of all the armie, and there began a hote skirmish, where diuerse worthie men were slaine on either side, but in the
end the king wanne the passage, and came to the mountaine of Berwyn, where he laie in campe cer∣taine daies, and so both the armies stood in awe each of other: for the king kept the open plaines, and was affraid to be intrapped in straits; but the VVelshmen watched for the aduantage of the place, & kept the king so straitlie, that neither for∣rage nor victuall might come to his camp, neither durst anie soldiour stirre abroad. And to augment these miseries, there fell such raine, that the kings men could scant stand vpon their feete vpon those slipperie hilles. In the end the king was compel∣led to returne home without his purpose, & that with great losse of men and munition, besides his charges.Roger Houe∣den. Therefore in a great choler he caused the pledges eies (whom he had receiued long be∣fore that) to be put out: which were Rees and Cad∣walhon the sonnes of Owen, and Cynwric and Me∣redyth the sonnes of Rees and other. Ger. Dor. Rad. Coge∣shall. Hol. pag. 408.I find also written by diuers, that in the assieging of a bridge the king was in no small danger of his life: for one of the Weshmen, shooting directlie at him, had persed him through the bodie, if Hubert de S. Clere constable of Col∣chester (perceiuing the arrow comming) had not thrust him selfe betwixt the King and the same arrow, whereby he sa∣ued his maister and died himselfe for him presentlie. Al∣though Polydor (writing the historie out of the same au∣thors) doo conceale the same. Then after long consultation, the king came the third time towards Northwales, intending to haue his armie conueied by sea, & to land in some conuenient place of the countrie, and so he came to Chester, and there laie a certeine time, till all his nauie was gathered togither, aswell hired
ships of Ireland as his owne, and vpon the sudden he brake vp his campe, and gaue both ships and men leaue to depart. The same yeare Rees prince of Southwales laid siege to the castell of Aberteiui, and wan it, and made it flat with the ground, and likewise wan Cilgerran & rased it. At which time he tooke prisoner Robert the sonne of Stephen (his coosen germane, sonne to Nest his aunt, who after the death of Gerald had maried Stephen constable) and so returned home with great honor and rich spoile. About the same time died Lhewelyn sonne to prince Owen a worthie gentleman and of great towardnesse. In the yeare ensuing the Flemings and Normanes came to Westwales with a great power, against the castell of Cilgerran (which Rees had fortified) and laid siege to it, assaulting it di∣uerse times: but it was so manfullie defended, that they returned home as they came, and short∣lie after they came before it againe, where they lost manie of their best men, and then departed a∣gaine. The same yeare Owen prince of Northwales laid siege to the castell of Basygwerke, which the king had fortified, and in short time wan the same and rased it.Girald, Cam. About the same time Dermot the son of Murchart was chased out of his dominion in Ireland, and went to Normandie to king Henrie for succour. Also Iorwerth Goch was spoiled of his lands in Powys, by Owen Cyuelioc the son of Gruf∣fyth ap Meredyth lord of Powys, & by Owen Vachan second sonne to Madoc ap Meredyth: which lands they diuided betwixt them, so that Owen Cyuelioc had Mochnant aboue Rayader, and Owen Vachan Mochnant beneath Rayader. This yeare there was an earthquake in Northfolke and Suffolke. At this
time king Henrie maried Geffrey his sonne to Con∣stance the onelie daughter & heire of Conan Earle of Richmond and duke of Brytaine. 1167In the yeare 1167. Owen prince of Nothwales, Cadwalader his brother, and Rees prince of South∣wales brought an armie to Powys against Owen Cyuelioc, and wan all his lands, & chased him out of the countrie, and gaue Caereneon to Owen Va∣chan the sonne of Madoc ap Meredyth, to hold of prince Owen; and the lord Rees had Walwern, bi∣cause it stoode within his countrie. But within a while after, Owen Cyuelioc returned with a num∣ber of Normanes and Englishmen to recouer his countrie againe, and laid siege to the castell of Ca∣ereneon, and winning the same, burned it to the ground. Also the same yeare, the aforesaid princes Owen, Rees and Cadwalader, laid siege to the castell of Ruthlan, which the king had latelie built and fortified, which the garrison defended manfullie and worthilie; yet the princes would not depart vntill they had won it, which they did at two mo∣neths end, and then rased it. Afterward they gat the castell of Prestaryn and destroied it, and then brought all Tegengl to Owens subiection, and re∣turned home with much honor. In the yeare fo∣lowing Conan the sonne of prince Owen slew Vr∣geney Abbot of Lhwythlawr, and Lhawthen his ne∣phue. At this time Henrie duke of Saxonie maried Mawd king Henries daughter. Then also the no∣bles of Poitiew rebelled against king Henrie, vpon hope of the French kings aid, and slew VVilliam Fitzpatrike Earle of Salisburie: then the king crea∣ted VVilliam his sonne Earle in his steed. Also the Brytaines of Armorica rebelled against king Henrie;
wherefore he destroied a great part of the coun∣trie. The next yeare Henrie the kings eldest sonne did homage to the French king for the Earledome of Aniow, and the stewardship of France, which belonged thereto: and Geffrey did his brother ho∣mage for the dukedome of Brytaine. Then the king made a great ditch or trench betwixt France and Normandie, to defend the countrie from sudden in∣cursions and theeues. And this yeare Robert the sonne of Stephen constable was released out of his coosins the lord Rees his prison,Giral. Camb. Expug. Hib. and was sent to Ireland with a great power to succour Dermot son to Murchart, who landed at Lochgarmon and wan it, and so went forward. Girald. Cam. Vat Hist. Hol. in his historie of Ireland.This Robert Fitzstephen, Moris Fitzgerald his brother, and their nephues Robert Meyler, and Raymond, with an ar∣mie of Welshmen vnder the conduct of Richard Strangbow Earle of Strigule, were the chiefe captains and dooers in the conquest of Ireland, when it was first reduced vnder the subiection of the crowne of England: of whom the Fitzge∣ralds, Fitzstephens and Fitzmoris are descended, of whom Giraldus writeth at large in his historie of Ireland. In the yeare 1169. Meyric ap Adam of Buelht was murthered in his bed,1169 by Meredyth Bengoch his coosen germane.It is like that the bones were laid a good way a sun∣der in the measuring. Also this yeare there were found the bones of a giant cast vp by the sea, of such length, that his body seemed to containe fiftie foote in height. At this time the king caused his sonne Henrie to be crowned king of England by the Archbishop of Yorke. Also this yeare Owen Gwy∣neth the son of Gruffyth ap Conan prince of North∣wales passed out of this world, after he had gouer∣ned his countrie well and worthilie 32. yeares. This prince was fortunate and victorious in all
his affaires, he neuer tooke any enterprise in hand but he atchieued it. He left behind him manie chil∣dren gotten by diuerse women, which were not e∣steemed by their mothers and birth, but by their prowes and valiantnesse. First he had by Gladus the daughter of Lhywarch ap Trahaern ap Caradoc, Iorweth drwyndwn (that is, Edward with the bro∣ken nose,) Conan, Maelgon and Gwenlhian: by Chri∣stian the daughter of Grono ap Owen ap Edwyn, he had Dauid, Roderike, Cadwalhon Abbot of Bardsey, and Angharat wife to Gruffyth Maylor: he had be∣sides these Conan, Lhewelyn, Meredyth, Edwal, Run, Howel, Cadelh, Madoc, Eneon, Cynwric, Philip and Riryd lord of Clochran in Ireland, by diuerse women, of whom Run, Lhewelyn, and Cynwric died before their father: of the rest you shall heare hereafter.
Dauid ap Owen. Dauid the sonne of Owen Gwyneth. AFTER the death of Owen, his sonnes fell at debate who should inherite after him, for the eldest sonne borne in matrimonie, Edward or Iorwerth Drwyndwn, was counted vnmeete to go∣uerne, bicause of the maime vpon his face. And Howel who tooke vpon him all the rule was a base sonne, begotten vpon an Irishwoman. Therefore Dauid gathered all the power he could, and came against Howel, and fighting with him slew him, and afterward enioied quietlie the whole land of Northwales, vntill his brother Iorwerths son came to age, as shall hereafter appeare.Madoc ap Owen Gwyneth. Madoc another of Owen Gwyneth his sonnes left the land in con∣tention
betwixt his brethren, and prepared cer∣taine ships with men and munition, and sought aduentures by seas, sailing West, & leauing the coast of Ireland so far north, that he came to a land vnknowen, where he saw manie strange things. This land must needs be some part of that coun∣trie of which the Spaniardes affirme themselues to be the first finders sith Hannos time;H. Lhoyd. for by reason & order of Cosmographie, this land, to the which Madoc came, must needs be some part of Noua Hi∣spania or Florida. Wherevpon it is manifest, that that countrie was long before by Brytaines disco∣uered, afore either Columbus or Americus Vesputius lead anie Spaniardes thither. Of the viage and re∣turne of this Madoc there be manie fables fained, as the common people doo vse in distance of place and length of time rather to augment than to di∣minish: but sure it is, that there he was. And af∣ter he had returned home and declared the plea∣sant & fruitfull countries that he had seene with∣out inhabitants; and vpon the contrarie part, for what barren and wild ground his brethren and nephues did murther one another: he prepa∣red a number of ships, and got with him such men and women as were desirous to liue in quietnes, and taking leaue of his freends tooke his iournie thitherward againe. Therefore it is to be presup∣posed, that he and his people inhabited part of those countries, for it appeareth by Francis Loues, that in Acusanus and other places, the people ho∣nored the crosse: whereby it may be gathered that Christians had beene there, before the comming of the Spaniards. But bicause this people were not manie, they folowed the maners of the land, they
came vnto, and vsed the language they found there. This Madoc arriuing in that Westerne countrie, vnto the which he came, in the yeare 1170. left most of his people there: and returning backe for more of his owne nation, ac∣quaintance and fréends, to inhabite that faire and large countrie, went thither againe with ten sailes, as I find no∣ted by Gutyn Owen.Gutyn Ow∣en. I am of opinion that the land, where∣vnto he came, was some part of Mexico: the causes which make me to thinke so be these. 1 The common report of the inhabitants of that coun∣trie, which affirme, that their rulers descended from a strange nation, that came thither from a farre countrie: which thing is confessed by Mutezuma king of that coun∣trie, in his oration made for quieting of his people, at his submission to the king of Castile, Hernando Curteis being then present, which is laid downe in the Spanish Chronicles of the conquest of the West Indies. 2 The Brytish words and names of places, vsed in that countrie euen to this daie, doo argue the same: as when they talke togither,Da. Ingram. they vse this word Gwrando, which is, Hearken or listen. Also they haue a certeine bird with a white head,Sir Hu. Gilb. discouerie. which they call Pengwin, that is, white head. But the Iland of Corroeso, the cape of Bryton, the riuer of Gwyndor, and the white rocke of Pengwyn, which be all Brytish or Welsh words, doo manifestlie shew that it was that countrie which Madoc and his people inhabited. The same time Elianor the kings daughter was married to Alfonsus king of Castil. Also Richard Strangbowe Earle of Strigul went to Ireland with∣out the kings leaue, and married the daughter of Dermot king of Dublyn: wherefore the king seased all his lands in England to his owne hands, and Dermot died shortlie after, and was buried at Ferna. About the end of this yeare, Thomas Bec∣ket
Archbishop of Canturburie was slaine. The yeare ensuing, Rees prince of Southwales came with great power to Powys, and subdued Owen Cyuelioc the Lord thereof, and tooke pledges of him, and so returned home with much honour. Then the king called his nobles to consult about the enterprise of Ireland, which had beene before determined to be taken in hand.Girald. Cam. in Hist. Hibera. To this con∣sultation came messengers from Richard Strang∣bowe Earle of Strigule Marshall of England: to deliuer to the kings hands the citie of Dublyne and the towne of Waterford, with such other townes as he had by the right of his wife: where∣vpon the king restored to him againe his lands in England and Normandie, and made him steward of Ireland, and so it was concluded for the kings go∣ing to Ireland. When the king was in his iournie towards Ireland, the Lord Rees came to the king, who receiued him to his peace, & confirmed vnto him all that he had. Then Rees promised the king towards his conquest of Ireland 300. horsses and 400. Oxen, and gaue him 14. pledges. Then the king came to Southwales, & entring Caerlhêon vpō Vske tooke the towne from the Lord thereof Ior∣werth ap Owen ap Caradoc, keeping the same to his owne vse. Wherefore Iorwerth departed from the king, and calling to him his two sonnes Owen and Howel, whom he had begotten by Angharat the daughter of Vchtryd bishop of Landaff, and his si∣ster sonne Morgan ap Sitsylt ap Dyfnwal, gathered a number of men, and vpon the kings departure entred the countrie, spoiling and burning as they went, and tooke the towne of Caerlhêon, and destroied it, saue the castell which they could not
get. But the king kept on his iornie to Penbrooke, and there he gaue Rees all Caerdigan, Stratywy, A∣rustly & Eluel. Then Rees being at Aberteiui, which he had wonne from the Earle of Glocester and for∣tified of late, came from thence to Penbrooke in the calends of October, and spake with the king, and returned againe the daie after, and then chose out of the horsses, which he caused to be brought thi∣ther for the king 86. and made them to be brought to Penbrooke, and presented them to the king, who chose out of the same 36. of the best, and sent the rest backe againe with great thankes. The same daie the king went to Saint Dauid, and offering there, dined with the bishop Dauid, the sonne of Gerald, coosen germaine to Rees; whither Ri∣chard Strangbowe Earle of Strigule came from Ireland to speake with the king, and after dinner the king returned to Penbrooke. Within a while after, the king being at the white house, rendered to Rees Howel his sonne, who had beene long for pledge with him: and then also he gaue him day for the other pledges, and for his tribute till his returne from Ireland.Girald. Cam. Vat. Historie. Matt. Paris. pag. 168. The next daie, being the morrowe after the feast of S. Luke the Euange∣list, the king tooke shipping there, and had faire passage to Ireland, and so landed at Dublyne, where he laie quietlie that winter. The Christmasse fo∣lowing, Henrie the yong king kept a solemne feast, where William S. Iohn procurator of Normandie, and William Fitzhamon Seneshall of Brytaine, and 110. besides, were made knights. In the yeare 1172. there fell a great plague among the kings soldiours in Ireland,1172 by reason of the change of the aire and victuals, and therefore the king returned
and landed in Wales in the passion weeke, and re∣mained in Penbrooke on Easter daie, and the daie folowing, and on tuesdaie tooke his iournie to∣wards England. Then the lord Rees met with him at Talacharn, to doo his dutie. The king as he pas∣sed from Cardyf by the new castell vpon Vske, sent for Iorwerth ap Owen ap Caradoc to come & speake with him, vnder safe conduct to him his sons and freends, meaning to conclude peace with him, and so to quiet all VVales. Wherevpon Iorwerth tooke his iournie towards the king, and sent word to Owen his sonne being a lustie yoong gentleman, to meete with him by the waie; but as he came at his fathers commandement, the Earle of Brystowes men (hearing of it) came forth of the new castell vpon Vske, and laid wait for him by the way (being vnder the kings safe conduct, & trusting to his pro∣mise) and suddenlie set vpon him, and murthered him traitorouslie and cowardlie, being vnarmed and hauing but a few in his companie. Which thing when his father heard by some of his men that had escaped, he was verie sorie, and re∣turned home with all his freends, and his sonne Howel, and would neuer afterwards trust neither the kings promise nor anie Englishmans: but forthwith gathered all the power & freends that he could make, and without mercie destroied all the countrie with fire and sword to the gates of Hereford and Glocester, to auenge the death of his son. Then the king made the lord Rees chiefe Iu∣stice of all Southwales by commission, and tooke his iournie to Normandie. In the same yeere died Cad∣walader ap Gruffyth ap Conan prince of Northwales; who had by his wife Alice the daughter of Richard
Clare Earle of Glocester, Cunetha, Radulph, and Ri∣chard, and by other women he had Caduan, Cadwa∣lader, Eneon, Meredyth goch and Cadwalhon. To∣wards the end of this yeare Sitsylt ap Dyfnwal and Ieuan ap Sitsylt ap Riryd got the castell of Aberge∣venny vpon the sudden, and tooke the kings garri∣son prisoners: and the yeare ensuing was the fai∣rest winter that euer was seene. At this time there fell a variance betwixt the two kings of England,Matt. Paris. pag. 169. the father and the sonne, and there clea∣ued to the sonne the Queene his mother, and both his brethren Geffrey and Richard, and the Earle of Chester, and William Patrick, with the three sonnes of the Earle of Mellent. Camerarius de Tancquer∣villa, Valeran de Hibera, Gilbert de Regularijs, Simon de Montfort,This Ralph was vncle to the Queene. Radulph de la Haie, Hugh de S. Maura, and the French king, with the Earle of Flanders gaue the yoong king aid, who tooke Hugh Lacie, and Hugh Beauchamp in the castell of Vernoyle,Matt. Paris. pag. 169. yet the elder king was not discouraged, who had Al∣manes and Brabanters to his soldiours.Hol. pag. 437 Also Rees prince of Southwales sent to him Howel his sonne with a goodlie companie of men to serue him, and the king was verie glad & sent the lord Rees great thanks. King Henrie ouerthrew his enimies di∣uerse times, and tooke Radulph de Fulgerijs and the Earle of Chester prisoners, but William Patricke and Haftulph de Hilario escaped. Also the Earle of Leycester & Hugh de nouo Castello (as they began a stirre in England) were taken at Burie by the el∣der kings soldiours▪ and committed to prison. In this meane time Iorwerth ap Owen brought his power against Caerlhêon, and they of the towne fought with him, whome he ouerthrew, and tooke
manie prisoners of them, and wan the towne, and laid siege to the castell, which was yeelded him forthwith in exchange for his prisoners. Then al∣so his sonne Howel brought all Gwentîs Coet (the castell onelie excepted) to his subiection, and tooke pledges of the inhabitants of the countrie. Also at this time Dauid ap Owen Gwyneth prince of North∣wales made warre against his brother Maelgon, which kept the Ile of Môn or Anglesey, & brought his people ouer Mênai, (for so that arme of the sea is called which separateth that Ile from the maine land) and chasing his brother out of the Ile to Ireland, brought all the Ile to his subiection. Also he expelled all his brethren and coosens out of Northwales, and tooke all their lands to himselfe, and taking his brother Maelgon as he came from Ireland, kept him in close prison: then Conan his brother died. 1175In the yeare 1175. Howel the sonne of Iorwerth ap Owen of Caerlhêon tooke his vncle Owen Pen∣carn prisoner, & putting out his eies gelded him, least he should beget children which should inhe∣rit Caerlhêon and Gwent. But God prouided a pu∣nishment for him, for vpon the saturdaie folowing there came a great armie of Normanes and Eng∣lishmen before the towne, and wan it, with the ca∣stell; manger Howel and his father, who was not priuie to his sonnes lewd deed.Matt. Paris. pag. 174. Also this yeare the elder king came to England: then William king of Scots, and Roger de Mobbray were taken priso∣ners at Alnewike by the Barons of the North,Fabian, par. 7. cap. 238. as they came to destroie England in the quarell of the yoong king: therefore the elder king put them in safe keeping with the Earle of Leycester, recei∣uing
Hugh Bygod Erle of Northfolke to his peace, and so returned to Normandie with a great armie of Welshmen,Hl. pag. 437. which were sent him from Dauid prince of Northwales, to whome the king gaue his sister Emme in mariage: then the king sent the Welshmen ouer the riuer of Sene, to cut away the victuall which came to his enimies campe: wher∣fore the French king came to a parlee, and shortlie they concluded a peace, so that all the brethren de∣sired the father forgiuenes. Also at this time Da∣uid prince of Northwales (being bold of the kings affinitie) did imprison his owne brother Roderike in boltes, bicause he desired part of his fathers lands. In the yeare folowing, both the kings came to England, and the Scottish king was set at libertie, who became liegeman vnto king Henrie, and sware fealtie to him with all the lords of Scot∣land spirituall and temporall, and deliuered the king the towns of Rocksburgh and Berwicke, and the castell of Maydens.Hol. pag. 440. Shortlie after died Regi∣nald Earle of Cornwall base sonne to king Henrie the first,The He∣rolds books saie that he died with∣out issue. and the king seased his lands in England, Wales and Normandie to himselfe, for Iohn his yoongest sonne, saue a small portion which he left to his daughter. Also about the same time died Ralph Earle of Kyme, and Philip his sonne was created in his steed. Shortlie after there died al∣so William Erle of Arundell at Wauerley, and was buried at Wyndham, whereof he was patrone. This yeare also Rees prince of Southwales came to the kings court at Glocester, and brought with him such lords of Southwales as had offended the king, to doo him homage, which pleased the king wōderfullie, whose names were these; Cadwalhon
ap Madoc of Melyenyth, Reeses coosen germane, E∣neon Clyt of Eluel, Eneon ap Rees of Werthrynion, which two had married two of his daughters,Grul. Camb. Morgan ap Caradoc ap Iestyn of Glamorgan, Gruf∣fyth ap Iuor ap Meyric of Senghennyth, Sitsylt ap Dy∣fnwal of higher Gwent, which three had maried his sisters: and Iorwerth ap Owen of Caerlhêon, whom the king receiued all to his peace, and restored to Iorwerth ap Owen Caerlhéon againe: and so they returned home with great ioy.1176 But shortlie after William de Bruse lord of Brechnock desired Sitsylt ap Dyfnwal,Hol. pag. 439. Geffrey his sonne, and a great num∣ber of the worshipfullest men of Gwent land to a feast at the castell of Abergeuenny (which he had receiued of them by composition) and they mistru∣sting no harme came thither; but he like a traitor and murtherer had a great number of armed men within the castell, which fell vpon this lord and the rest, and without mercie slew them all, and forthwith went to Sitsylts house (being not farre thence) and tooke his wife, and slew Cadwalader his sonne before his mothers face, and destroied the house, and this was a lamentable daie to all the land of Gwent, and a lesson for all men to take heed of their enimies. Matt. Paris. pag. 176.This William lord Bruse hauing the Welshmen within his castell of Abergeuenny, to séeke a quarell propounded vnto them certaine articles, to be by them kept and perfor∣med: and among other things, that none of them should at anie time carie about them in their iournies, either bow or sword: for the obseruing of the which he would haue had them to be sworne, which they refused to doo: wherevpon he falling out with them, called his men which were readie for that purpose and caused them all thus to be murthered: and
when that déed was doone (to cloake his treason with some reasonable excuse) he caused it to be reported abroad, that this he did in reuenge of the death of his vncle Henrie de Hereford, whom they on Easter euen before had slaine. In Northwales Roderike brake his brothers pri∣son, and escaping came to Anglesey, where all the countrie receiued him for their lord, bicause they abhorred the ingratitude of the prince, who vnna∣turallie disinherited all his brethren & coosens, vpō boldnes of his brother in law the king. This Rode∣rike also was receiued as lord and prince in all the countrie aboue the riuer of Conwey. Then prince Dauid fled ouer Conwey, and there remained for a time. This yere died Cadelh the son of Gruffyth ap Rees and brother to the lord Rees, after long sick∣nesse, and was buried honorablie at Stratflur. The next yeare died Dauid Fitzgerald bishop of Meneuia, and Piers was installed bishop in his place. This yeare the lord Rees prince of Southwales made a great feast at Christmas in the castell of Aberteiui,A feast. which feast he caused to be proclaimed through all Brytaine long before, and thither came manie strangers, which were honorablie receiued and worthilie intertained, so that no man departed discontented. And among deeds of armes and o∣ther shewes, Rees caused all the poetes of Wales, (which are makers of songs & recorders of gen∣tlemens petegrees & armes, of whome euerie one is intituled by the name of Bardh, in Latine Bar∣dus) to come thither, & prouided chaires for them to be set in his hall, where they should dispute to∣gither, to trie their cunning and gift in their fa∣culties, where great rewards & rich gifts were appointed for the ouercomers; amongst whome
they of Northwales wan the price, and among the Musicians Reeses owne houshold men were coun∣ted best. Shortlie after, Eneon Clyt and Morgan ap Meredyth were both slaine by treason of the Normanes which inhabited the marshes. At this time the lord Rees did build the castell of Rayder Gwy,Casteth Ray∣der Gwy. that is to saie, The fall of Wye: for the riuer Wye falleth there ouer a great and a high rocke. At that time the sonnes of Conan ap Owen Gwyneth made warre against him.1179 Then also Cadwalhon,Matt. Paris. page. 186. Hol. pag. 453. brother vnto Owen Gwyneth, and vncle to Dauid and Roderike, who had fled to the king for succour, as he was conueied home by the kings men, to enioy his patrimonie, was cruellie murthered by the waie, and found those whom he hoped to be his helpe and freends, to be in deed traitors and butchers. And about this time, Ione the daughter of king Henrie the elder was marri∣ed to William king of Sicile.Matt. Paris, page. 222. Matt. West. page. 66. Io. Cast. Ran. Cest. lib. 7. cap. 27. This yeare the bones of noble king Arthur and Gwenhouar his wife were found in the Ile of Aualon, (that is to saie, the Ile of Aples) without the Abbie of Glasten∣burie, fifteene foote within the earth, in a holow el∣der tree, and ouer the bones was a stone and a crosse of lead,All the wri∣ters here alledged, doo affirme this to haue beene about ten yeares after this time. with a writing turned towards the stone, wherein were ingrauen these words. Híc iacet sepultus inclytus rex Artburus in insula Aualonia. The bones were of maruelous bignes, and in the scull were ten wounds, of which one was great, and seemed to be his deaths wound: the Queenes haire was to the sight faire and yellowe, but as∣soone as it was touched it fell to ashes. This graue was found by meanes of a Bardh or Poet, whom the king heard at Penbrooke declare in a
song the worthie actes of that noble prince, and the place of his buriall.H. Lhoyd. Therefore let William Paruus and Polydore Virgil, with their complices, stoppe their lieng mouthes, and desist to obscure and darken the glistering fame & noble renowme of so inuincible and victorious a prince, with the enuious detraction and malicious slaunder of their reprochfull and venomous toongs, thinking that they may couer with the cloud of obliuion, and burie in the pit of darkenesse those noble acts and princelie deeds by their wilfull ignorance and dogged enuie, whereof the trumpet of fame hath sounded, not onelie in Brytaine, but also through out all Europe. But remitting the discouering and blazing of their cankered minds towards the ho∣nour and fame of the Brytaines, to such as can bet∣ter paint them in their colours, I will returne to my matter. King Henrie the elder forsooke his wife for certeine considerations, and kept hir in prison manie yeres.Girald. Cam. Hol. pag. 456 And about this time, Ranulph de Poer with a great number of Gentlemen, was slaine by certeine yoong men of Gwent land, in re∣uenge of their lords death. Girald. Cam.This Ranulph de Poer, was Shirife of Glocestershire, or (as Giraldus noteth) of Herefordshire, whose death the same author séemeth to impute vnto himselfe for his cruell and vnreasonable dealing against the Welshmen.Hol. pa. 460. But the king tooke the same verie gréeuouslie, who being sore incen∣sed against them, assembled a mightie armie, and came with the same vnto Worcester, meaning to inuade the eni∣mies countries. But the Lord Rees ap Gruffyth, fearing the kings puissance thus bent against him and his countri∣men, came by safe conduct vnto Worcester, where submit∣ting himselfe, he sware fealtie to the king, and became his
liegeman, promising to bring his sonne and nephues vnto him for pledges. But when according to his promise he would haue brought them, they (remembring how the o∣ther pledges before were vsed) refused to go with him, and so the matter rested for that time. 1183And the yeare 1183. Henrie duke of Saxonie being banished his countrie, came to king Henrie his father in law to Normandie.Matt. Paris. pag. 189. Also this yeare Henrie the yoong king died, and was buried at Roane.1184 The yeare ensuing, the duke of Saxonie came into England, and his wife was brought to bed of a sonne which was named William. About this time William de Mandeuile Earle of Essex went to Flanders with an armie to succour the Earle, against the Earle of Henald or Henagow. Shortlie after,Matt. Paris. page. 192. Matt. West. page. 58. Hol. pag. 462. Iohn the kings yoongest sonne was dubbed knight, and tooke his iournie to Ireland. At which time Hugh de Lacie lord of Meth was slaine by a sickman. Then Iohn returned home from Ire∣land at Christmas next folowing. Also Howel ap Ieuaf lord of Arustly died, & was buried at Stratflur. And the yeare 1186.1186 died Geffrey duke of Brytaine, the kings third son,Matt. Paris. pag. 192. leauing behind him a daugh∣ter and his wife great with child of a sonne, which afterward was named Arthur. Matt. Paris. page, 192.At this time Mawd the Empresse died, which was daugh∣ter to king Henrie the first, wife to Henrie the fourth Em∣perour of Almaine; then to Geffrey Plantagenet Earle of Aniow, and mother to the most noble king Henrie the se∣cond: vpon whose toombe this Epitaph was written. Ortu magna, viro maior, sed maxima partu, Hîc iacet Henricifilia, sponsa, parens. Also this time Cadwalader sonne to the Lord Rees was slaine priuilie in Westwales, and buried
in the Tuy Gwynn. The next yeare Owen Vachan the sonne of Madoc ap Meredyth was slaine in the castell of Carrecgona hard by Oswaldstree in the night time, by Gwenwynwyn and Cadwalhon the sonnes of Owen Cyuelioc: and shortlie after Lhe∣welyn sonne to Cadwalhon ap Gruffyth ap Conan, who was murthered by the Englishmen, was ta∣ken by his owne brethren, and had his eies put out. 1187About the yeare 1187. Baldwine Archbishop of Cantur∣burie, hauing in his companie Giraldus Cambrensis Arch∣deacon of Brechnock,Ran. Cest. lib. 7. cap. 24. visited Wales, being the first Archbi∣shop of Canturburie that euer visited that countrie: whom the Clergie of VVales began to resist,Giral. Camb. in Itin. Cam. alledging the liber∣ties and priuileges of their Metropoliticall Church of S. Dauids, but they preuailed not. In this visitation (which is described in writing by the said Giraldus in his booke which he calleth  or Itinerarium Cambriae) he procured and exhorted as manie as euer he could to take the crosse and to vow the viage against the Saracens: wherevnto he persuaded manie of the nobles of VVales, as appeareth by the said Giraldus. Also this yeare Maelgon sonne to the lord Rees brought his power against Tenbye,1188 and by plaine force wan the towne, and spoiling the same burned it to ashes. This lord was faire and comelie of person, honest and iust of conditions; beloued of his freends, and feared of his foes, against whom (especiallie the Flemings) he atchieued diuerse vic∣tories. In the yeare 1189.1189 Henrie the second sur∣named Curtmantel king of all Brytaine, duke of Ga∣scoine Gwyen and Normandie, passed out of this transitorie life, and was buried at Fonteuerard, & after him Richard his sonne was crowned in his
place, who receiued homage of William king of Scots,Matt. Paris. pag. 208. Matt. West. page. 63. and deliuered him againe the castell of May∣dens or Edenburgh, Roksburgh and Berwicke, which king Henrie had long kept. Also this yeare, the lord Rees gathered all his strength, and wan the ca∣stels of Seynclere, Abercorran, and Lhanstephan, and brought all the whole countrie to his subiection, taking Maelgon his sonne, in whom remained all the hope of Southwales, whome he kept in prison. In the yeare folowing, Rees did build the castell of Cydwely, and Gwenlhian his daughter died, the fairest and goodliest woman in all Wales.Matt. Paris. page, 208. About this time king Richard made the bishop of Durham Earle of Northumberland for a 1000. pound, and afterward he said in iest that he had made a yoong Erle of an old bishop. Shortlie after king Richard tooke his iournie to the holie land to make against the enimies of Christes faith.Matt. Paris. page. 210. Matt. West. pag. 65. Then the bishop of Elie the kings Chanceler and Uicegerent made a great ditch about the towne of London. At this time Gruffyth Maylor lord of Bromfield a noble man and a wise, and one that in liberalitie passed all the lords and noble men of his time, died and was buried at Myuot; he had by his wife Angharat the daughter of Owen Gwyneth prince of Northwales, a sonne called Madoc, who succeeded his father in that part of Powys called Powys Vadoc. About the same time diuerse noble men of England died at Acon,Matt. Paris. pag. 217. as Henrie Earle of Leycester, the Earle Fer∣rers, Ranulph de Fulgerijs, Ranulph de Alta ripa. In those daies VVilliam Marshall, Geffrey Fitzpeter, Hugh Bardulf and VVilliam Briwer, were the nobles that bare most rule in England in the kings ab∣sence. Then also Rees prince of Southwales wan the
castell of Dynevowr, and Owen his sonne died at Strata florida or Stratflur. About this time king Ri∣chard wan the kingdome of Cypres, and gaue it to Gwido king of Ierusalem, vpon condition that he should release to Richard his claime of Ierusalem, which he did. Then the king being at Cyprus ma∣ried Berengaria the daughter of the king of Na∣uarra. Shortlie after Maelgon the sonne of the lord Rees escaped out of prison, where his father had kept him a long time. But the lord Rees gat the ca∣stell of Lhanhayaden and the countrie about. At that time Gruffyth ap Cadogan died. Then king Richard, after he had atchieued (with his nobles, the Earle of Leycester, Bartholomew Mortimer,Matt. Paris. pag. 231. Matt. West. page. 66. Randulph de Malo leone, N. de Furnevale, Roger de Lacy, William de Stagno, Hugh de Neuel∣la, William de Porcell, and Henrie Duch his stan∣dardbearer) manie worthie deeds of arms against the infidels, in his returne homeward through Austrich was taken prisoner by Lupold the duke thereof,Or sold him rather. who presented him to Henrie the Empe∣rour, & he kept him vntill he had paid him 200000. markes for his ransome, laieng to his charge that he had spoiled the Ile of Sicilie in his viage to∣wards the holie land. The same yeare Roderike the sonne of Owen Gwyneth by the help of Gothrike king of Man, entred the Ile of Môn, and brought it to his subiection: but before the end of the yeare the sonnes of his brother Conan chased him out of the Ile, and got it themselues. At this time Mael∣gon the sonne of Rees prince of Southwales laid siege to the castell of Stratmeyric, and wanne it. Al∣so Howel (surnamed Says, that is to saie, Saxon or English, because he had serued in England) sonne to
the said prince Rees gat the castell of Gwys vpō the sudden, & tooke Philip de Gwys, his wife, & his two sonnes prisoners therein. Then because he had more castels than he could well defend, he determi∣ned to rase the castell of Lhanhayaden: but the Fle∣mings hauing vnderstanding thereof, gathered all their strength, and came thither the daie appoin∣ted to rase the castell, and set fierslie vpon the men of Howel and Maelgon, and slewe manie of them, putting the rest to flight. Neuerthelesse, they ga∣thered a great power shortlie after, and came thi∣ther againe, and rased the castell to the ground, without anie let or staie. Upon this, Anarawd the sonne also of prince Rees (moued with filthie ambi∣tion and couetousnesse of lands) tooke his two bre∣thren Howel and Madoc prisoners (vnder the co∣lor of freendship) and put out both their eies. 1194In the yeare 1194. king Richard came into Eng∣land, and being at dinner in his litle hall of West∣minster,Matt. Paris. page. 236. Matt. West. page. 69. hearing that the French king besieged Vernoyle, he sware that he would neuer turne his face till he had fought with him, if he did abide, & caused the wall to be broken before him, and so pas∣sed to Normandie, and receiuing his brother Iohn to mercie raised the siege: for the French king fled as soone as he heard of king Richards comming. This yeare Maelgon sonne to prince Rees gaue his brother Anarawd the castell of Stratmeyric for his prisoners, whom he set at libertie. Then Rees him∣selfe did reedifie againe the castell of Rayader Gwy: and his owne sonnes laid wait for him, and tooke their father prisoner, fearing least he would re∣uenge their cruell and vnnaturall deeds: but by the meanes of Howel his sonne which was blind,
he escaped out of his sonne Maelgons prison, and tooke the castell of Dineuwor which Maelgon kept, and destroied it. Also the sonnes of Cadwalhon ap Madoc of Melyenyth wan the castell of Rayder Gwy, and fortified it for themselues. At this time Lhewelyn the son of Iorwerth Drw∣yndwn, who was the eldest sonne of Owen Gwy∣neth prince of Northwales, remembring his right & title to his inheritance of Northwales (although his father had beene disinherited by his brother Dauid) called togither his freends by his mother (which was Marred the daughter of Madoc ap Me∣redyth prince of Powys) and also drew to his side his coosins the sons of Conan ap Owen Gwyneth, and so challenged the rule of Northwales, and en∣tred the countrie, to whom the people willinglie yeelded, and tooke him for their lord: and so with∣out bloodshed he receiued all Northwales to his sub∣iection, except three castels which his vncle Dauid kept by force of Englishmen, in whom was all his trust, because of his wife Emme aunt to the king of England. And thus Dauid lost his land, and Lhewe∣lyn began to rule, in the yeare of our Lord, 1194.1194
Lhewelyn ap Iorwerth. Lhewelyn the sonne of Iorwerth, the sonne of Owen Gwyneth, called Leolinus Magnus. AFter that Lhewelyn, the sonne of Iorwerth had gotten the rule of Northwales to him∣selfe, as right inheritour thereof, Roger Mortimer came with a great power to Melyenyth,Casteth. Cy∣maron. and built the castell of Cymaron, and so brought that countrie to his subiection, and chased awaie the two sonnes of Cadwal∣hon ap Madoc Lords of the countrie. About the same time Rees and Meredyth the sonnes of Prince Rees (being two lustie gentlemen) gathe∣red togither a number of wild heads of the coun∣trie, and came to Dineuowr, and got the castell
from their fathers garrison, and afterward they went to Cantre Bachan, where the whole countrie receiued them gentlie, and deliuered the castell to their hands. Wherwith their father was sore dis∣pleased, & laid priuie wait for them, and by treason of their owne men (which were afraid anie fur∣ther to offend their lord and prince) they were ta∣ken and brought to their father, who kept them in safe prison. The yeare ensuing,Matt. Paris. pag. 237. Matth. West. page. 69. there was a combat appoin∣ted betwixt the French king with fiue knights with him, and king Richard with fiue other, which should end all controuersies: of which fight king Richard was glad, but the French king like a snaile drew in his hornes and forsooke the battell. And in Wales prince Rees gathered a great armie, and laid siege to the towne and castell of Caermarthin, and in short time wanne them both, spoiling and destroieng the same, and then returned with great bootie. Then he lead his said armie to the marches before the castell of Clun, which after a long siege, and manie a fierse assault, he got and burned it, and from thence he went to the castell of Radnor, and likewise wanne it; to the defense whereof came Roger Mortimer and Hugh de Saye, with a great armie of Normanes and Englishmen well armed and tried soldiours. Then Rees, which had wonne the castell, determined not to keepe his men within the walles, but boldlie like a worthie prince, came into the plaine besides the towne, and gaue them battell, where his men (although for the most part vnarmed, and not accustomed to the battell) declared that they came of Brytaines bloud (whose title the noble Romane Emperours
did so much desire, as a token of manhood and wor∣thines) choosing rather to die with honour in the defense of their countrie, than to liue with shame, did so worthilie behaue themselues, that their e∣nimies forsooke the field, with great losse of their men, whom Rees pursued till the benefit of the night shadowed them with hir darknes, and forth∣with he laid siege to the castell of Payne in Eluel, & gat it. Thither came William de Bruse the owner thereof, and made peace with Rees, of whom he re∣ceiued the same castell againe.Ger. or. Not long after, the Archbishop of Canturburie (whom king Richard had substituted his lieutenant in England) came with an huge power towardes Wales, and laied siege to the castell of Gwenwynwyn,Matt. Park. page, 138. at the poole; but the garrison defended the hold so manfullie, that he lost manie of his men, and could doo no good. Therefore he sent for miners, and set them on worke to vndermine the wals; which thing when the garrison vnderstood, and knowing that their enimes were three to one, they were content to yeeld vp the castell, vpon condition that they might depart with their armour freelie: which offer the Archbishop tooke, suffering them to passe quiet∣lie, and fortifieng the castell againe stronglie to the kings vse, and placing therein a garrison for the defense thereof, returned to England. But im∣mediatlie Wenwynwyn or Gwenwynwyn laid siege to it againe, and shortlie after receiued it vpon the same conditions that his men had giuen it vp, and kept the same to his owne vse. The next yeare after there was a great and a terrible plague through all the Ile of Brytaine and France, of the which died a great number of no∣bles,
beside the common people. And the same yeare the fourth daie of Maie,Hol. pag. 534. Rees the sonne of Gruffyth ap Rees ap Theodor prince of Southwales died, the onelie anchor, hope and staie of all that part of Wales, as he that brought them out of thraldome and bondage of strangers, & set them at libertie, and had defended them diuerse times in the field manfullie, daunting the pride and courage of their cruell enimies, whom he did ei∣ther chase out of the land, or compelled by force to liue quietlie at home.Marwnad. Wo to that cruell destinie that spoiled the miserable land of hir defense and shield, who as he descended of noble and princelie blood, so he passed all other in commendable quali∣ties and laudable vertues of the mind; he was the ouerthrower of the mightie, and setter vp of the weake, poetica. Ran Cest. lib. 7. cap. 31. the ouerturner of the holdes, the separa∣tor of troopes, the scatterer of his foes, among whome he appeared as a wild boare among whelps, or a lion that for anger beateth his taile to the ground. In praise of this prince there is a long discourse in the Bry∣tish booke after the maner of the VVelsh poets, whose wor∣thie commendation is laid downe at large by Ranulph Monke of Chester in the seuenth booke of his Historie inti∣tuled Polychronicon the 31. chap. and Grafton in the life of Richard the first,Ri. Grafton, in his chro∣nicles of England. pag. 92. This prince had manie sonnes and daughters, as Gruffyth who succeeded his father, Cadwalhon, Maelgon, Meredyth and Rees; and of the daughters one called Gwenlhian was married to Ednyuet Vachan, who was ancester to Owen Theodor or Tuder that maried Queene Catharine the widow of king Henrie the fift, and the rest were maried to
other lords in the countrie. After the death of Rees, Gruffyth his sonne subdued all the countrie to himselfe, and enioied it in peace, vntill Maelgon his brother (whom his father had disinherited) made a league with Gwenwynwyn the sonne of Owen Cyuelioc lord of Powys, who both togither leui∣ed a number of men, & came suddenlie vpon Gruf∣fyth at Aberystwyth, and slaieng a great number of his men tooke him prisoner, and so recouered all the countrie of Caerdigan, with the castell. Thus Maelgon hauing taken his brother sent him to be imprisoned with Gwenwynwyn, who in despite de∣liuered him to the Englishmen. Then Gwenwyn∣wyn gathering a power, entred Arustly, and subdu∣ed the same to himselfe. Also about that time there was great warre in Northwales, for Dauid ap Owen of late prince, came with a great armie aswell Englishmen as Welshmen, purposing to recouer the land againe; but Lhewelyn his nephue, who was the right in∣heritor of the same, and then in possession thereof, came boldlie and met him, and gaue him battell, and putting his people to flight tooke him prisoner and kept him in safetie, and afterward enioied the countrie quietlie. Toward the end of this yeare, Owen Cyuelioc lord of the higher Powys died, and left his land to Gwenwynwyn his sonne, after whom that part of Powys was called Powys Wen∣wynwyn, for a difference from the other called Powys Vadoc, being the possession of the lords of Bromefield. At this time also died Owen the son of Gruffyth Maylor lord of Bromfield, and Brychtyr the sonne of Howel ap Ieuaf, likewise Maelgon the sonne of Cadwalhon ap Madoc lord of Melienyth.
About the same time Trahaem Vachan (a man of great power in the countrie of Brechnock) as he came to Lancors to speake with William Bruse lord thereof, was suddenlie taken, and (by the lords commandement) tied to a horse taile, and drawen through the towne of Aberhodny or Brechnock, to the galowes, and there beheaded, and his bodie hanged vp by the feete three daies. This crueltie shewed vpon no iust cause, made his brother his wife and his children to flee the land. The yeare ensuing Maelgon the sonne of prince Rees, after he had imprisoned his elder brother, got his castels of Aberteiui and Stratmeyric: also the youngest son of prince Rees wan the castell of Dyneuowr from the Normanes. The summer folowing Gwenwynwyn intending to extend the limits of Wales to their old meers,1198 gathered a great armie, & laid siege first to the ca∣stell of Payn in Eluel, which was of the possessions of William de Bruse: making a proclamation that assoone as he had won the castell, he would burne all the whole countrie to Seauerne without mer∣cie, in reuenge of the murther of Trahaern Vachan his coosen. But because he lacked engines and mi∣ners, he laie three weekes at that castell, and the murtherers sent for succours to England: where∣vpon Geffrey Fitzpeter lord chiefe Iustice of Eng∣land gathered a great power,Hol. pag. 537. Matt. Paris. pag. 259. & ioining with him all the lords Marchers came to raise the siege. And because the fortune of the battell is variable and vncertaine, he sent first to Gwenwynwyn to haue a treatie of peace concluded: but he and such as were with him would in no wise condescend to peace, whose answere was that they would at
that iournie reuenge their old wrongs. Where∣vpon the English lords did first enlarge. Gruffyth the sonne of prince Rees of Southwales, whom they knew to be an enimie to Gwenwynwyn, which Gruffyth gathered a great power, and ioined with the English lords, and so they came towards the castell, against whome Gwenwynwyn cam verie stoutlie, & there began a cruell battell with much slaughter on either part; but at the last the Eng∣lishmen gat the victorie, and Gwenwynwyn lost a great number of his men, among whom were A∣narawd sonne to Eneon, Owen ap Cadwalhon, Ri∣chard ap Iestyn, and Robert ap Howel; also Meredyth ap Conan was then taken prisoner with manie moe.H. Lhoyd. Matt. Paris. pag. 259. Matthew Paris saith, that this battell was fought before Mawdes castell, & that of the Welsh∣men there were slaine 3700. and after this victo∣rie the English lords returned home with much honor. And forthwith Gruffyth sonne to prince Rees recouered by force and good will of the people all his land, sauing two castels Aberteiui and Strat∣meyric, which his brother Maelgon by the aid of Gwenwynwyn had wrongfullie taken from him. Then his brother Maelgon (fearing his displea∣sure) tooke a solemne oth before noble and religi∣ous men, which were about to make peace be∣twixt them; that if his brother Gruffyth would giue him pledges for the assurance of his owne person, he would deliuer him by a day the castell of Aberteiui: whervpon Gruffyth did so. But assoone as Maelgon got the pledges, he fortified the castell, & manned it to his owne vse, and sent the pledges to Gwenwynwyn, who hated Gruffyth to the death, there to be kept in prison. But shortlie after, by
Gods helpe they brake the prison & escaped home. In the yeare 1199.1199 Maelgon sonne to prince Rees laid siege to the castell of Dynerth, and getting it, slew all the garrison which his brother Gruf∣fyth had left to defend it. But at the same time Gruffyth wan the castell of Cilgerran, and fortified it.Matt. Paris. pag. 261. Matt. West. page. 75. This yeare, as king Richard did vew the ca∣stell of Chaleus in the countrie of Lenuoyle, he was striken with a quarell and sore wounded, whereof he died the ninth of April, and left by his testa∣ment Iohn his brother inheritor of all his lands, hauing no respect to his brother Geffreys son Ar∣thur duke of Brytaine, who being the sonne of the el∣der brother was his right heire.Matt. West. page. 92. Then this Iohn, surnamed Without land, was crowned king of England with great triumph: wherfore the French king forth with made warre against him, to whom Arthur duke of Brytaine cleaued, thinking thereby to obtaine the crowne of England. Also the king of Scots by meanes of Hugh Bygod came to Yorke, and openlie sware fidelitie to the king of England. The yeare after, Gruffyth sonne to Conan ap Owen Gwyneth a noble man died, and was buried in a moonks cowle at the Abbey of Conwy,H. Lhoyd. and so were all the nobles (for the most part) of that time buried: for they were made to beleeue by the moonks and friers, that that strange weed was a sure defense betwixt their soules and hell, how so euer they died. And all this baggage and supersti∣tion receiued they with moonks and friers a few yeres before that out of England. For the first Ab∣bey or frier house that we read of in Wales, sith the destruction of the noble house of Bangor, which sa∣uored not of Romish dregges, was the Tuy Gwyn,
built the yeare 1146. and after they swarmed like bees through all the countrie: for then the Cleargie had forgotten the lesson that they had receiued of the noble Clerke Ambrosius Telesinus, who writing in the yeare 540. when the right Christian faith (which Ioseph of Aremathia taught at the Ile of Aualon) reigned in this land, before the proud and bloodthirstie moonke Augustine in∣fected it with his Romish doctrine, in a certaine Ode hath these verses: Taliefin. In those daies the Brytaines refused the doctrine of Augustine as erronius and cor∣rupt.Gwae'r offeiriad byd Nys angreifftia gwyd Ac ny phregetha: Gwae ny cheidw ey gail Ac ef yn vigail, Ac nys areilia: Gwae ny theidw ey dheuaid Rhae bleidhie, Rhufeniaid A'i ffon gnwppa. Which may thus be Englished almost word for word. Wo be to that priest yborne, That will not cleanlie weed his corne And preach his charge among: Wo be to that shepherd (I saie) That will not watch his fold alwaie, As to his office doth belong: Wo be to him that doth not keepe From Romish woolues his sheepe With staffe and weapon strong.
And because no man should doubt of them, I haue set them here as they were written by him that made them. Whereby it may be proued, that the Brytaines the first inhabiters of this realme did abhorre the Romish doctrine taught in that time, which doctrine (I am sure) is litle amended now in the church of Rome: and that may be to vs a mirrour to see our owne follie, if we doo degene∣rate from our forefathers the ancient Brytaines in the sinceritie of true religion, as we doo in other things. This yeare Maelgon ap Rees, seeing he could not well keepe Aberteiui, of verie spite to his brother and hatred to his countrie, sold it to the English∣men for a small summe of monie, being the keie and locke of all Wales. The same yeare Madoc the sonne of Gruffyth Maylor lord of Bromfild did build the abbie of Lhanegwest, called in English com∣monlie Vale crucis. This yeare also king Iohn made peace with the French king, and Arthur duke of Brytaine his nephue,Matt. West. pag. 78. and married Isabel daugh∣ter and heire vnto the Earle of Angolisme, which was before assured vnto Hugh de Brune Uicount of Carce: wherefore the said Hugh forsooke king Iohn, and became his enimie. This Hugh Brune Earle of March and Turyn had this Isa∣bel to wife after the death of king Iohn, by whome he had issue William de Valence, who in the right of Ione his wife daughter and heire of Warren Montchensey, and of Ione the eldest daughter and one of the heires of William Earle Marshall and Penbrooke, was Earle of Penbrooke, as in this historie hereafter doth appeare. The yeare 1201.1201 Lhewelyn ap Iorwerth prince of Northwales, being a lustie yoong man, banished
out of the land his coosen Meredyth the sonne of Conan ap Owen Gwyneth suspected of treason, and seased the Cantref of Lhyyn and Euyonyth to his owne hands, which were Conans land. Then shortlie after, Meredyth the sonne of prince Rees was slaine at Carnwilhion by treason, whose elder brother Gruffyth seased vpon his castell in Lhanym∣dhyfri and all his lands. This Gruffyth was a wise and discreet gentleman, and one that was like to bring all Southwales to good order and obedience, who in all things folowed his fathers steppes, whom as he succeeded in gouernment, so he did in all martiall prowes and nobilitie of mind; but cru∣ell fortune, which frowned vpon that countrie, suf∣fered him not long to enioy his land.1202 This prince died vpon S. Iames daie ensuing, and was buried at Stratflur with great solemnitie; he left behind him a son called Rees as right inheritor of South∣wales, whose mother was Mawd the daughter of William de Bruse.Matt. West. pag. 78. Also this yeare died Arthur duke of Brytaine at Roane not without suspicion of poi∣son ministred by his vncles meanes, who caused his sister Elianor to be conueied to England, and to be kept in prison miserablie in the castell of Bry∣stow as long as she liued. Then the French king got all Normandie, sauing Roane and two castels, by treason of the Normanes, who hated Iohn to the death. The next yeare after that, certeine lords of Wales got the castell of Gwerthrynion, which was Roger Mortimers, and made it plaine with the ground. Then Lhewelyn ap Iorwerth prince of Northwales calling to memorie his estate and title, and how all the other princes by the ordinance of Roderike
the Great, and after by the lawes of Howel Dha, ought of right to acknowledge the king or prince of Northwales as their liege lord, and hold their lands of him and of none other; notwithstanding that, of late yeares by negligence of his predeces∣sors they had not vsed their accustomed dutie: but some held of the king of England, other ruled as su∣preme powers within their owne countries. Therefore he called a Parliament of all the lords in Wales, which for the most part appeared before him, & swore to be his liegemen: but Gwenwynwyn lord of Powys would not come thither, nor take the oth of allegiance. Which disobedience the prince declared to all his lords, & they all thought that it was meete that Gwenwynwyn should be constrained by force to doo his dutie, or else to leese his lands. Yet one of his lords named Elise ap Ma∣doc would not agree to hurt Gwenwynwyn in anie case, but departed awaie suddenlie: then Lhewe∣lyn came with an armie to Powys; but by the meanes of certaine learned men, Gwenwynwyn and the prince were made freends, & Gwenwynwyn became the prince his liegeman,He had need to vse a caution in this oth, for he was sworne be∣fore to the king of England. H. Lhoyd. and confirmed that both by oth and writing. Then Lhewelyn re∣membring how Elise ap Madoc had serued him, seased vpon all his lands, and Elise fled the coun∣trie, but afterward yeelded himselfe to the princes mercie, who gaue him the castell of Crogen, and seuen towneships withall. And here I thinke it not vnmeete to declare the cause why the English∣men vse to call the Welshmen Crogens, as a word of reproch and despite: but if they knew the be∣ginning, they should find it contrarie. For in the viage that king Henrie the second made against
the Welshmen to the mountaines of Berwin, as he laie at Oswestree, a number of his men that were sent to trie the passages, as they would haue pas∣sed Offas ditch at the castell of Crogen, at which place there was & is at this daie a narrow waie through the same ditch, for that ditch appeereth yet to this daie verie deepe through all that coun∣trie & beareth his old name. These men, I saie, as they would haue passed this straite, were met withall, & a great number of them slaine, as ap∣peareth by their graues there yet to be seene,Adwy'r bedhev. whereof the strait beareth the name. Therefore the Englishmen afterward not forgetting this slaughter, vsed to cast the Welshmen in the teeth in all their troubles with the name of Crogen, as if they would signifie vnto them thereby, that they should looke for no fauour but rather reuengment at their hands: which word in processe of time grew to be taken in another signification. Now when Lhewelyn had set all these parties in good order, he returned to Northwales, & by the waie fortified the castell of Bala in Penlhyn. About the same time Rees sonne to Gruffyth ap Rees (by right prince of Southwales) got the castell of Lhan∣ymdhyfri vpon Michaelmas day.Matt. Paris. page. 279. Matt. West. pag. 79. This yeare king Iohn lost all Normandie, with Aniow, Mayne and Poytiers; and Hugh Gurnaie, Robert Fitzwater and Sayer de Quincie, who had a great part of these countries vnder their rule, deliuered all vp to the French king at the first summon; yet Roger Lacie kept his castels as long as he had any hope of suc∣cors.Matt. Paris. pag. 276. Polydor virg. lib. 15. About this time there was in England one called Simon de Thurnay, a great diuine and phi∣losopher, who diuerse times made his aduaunt,
that he knew all that was to be knowen, and sud∣denlie he fell to such ignorance that he cold nether read nor vnderstand one letter in the booke. Ran. Cest. lib. 7. cap. 33. Fabian.About this time Lhewelyn prince of Wales tooke to wife Ione the daughter of king Iohn, by Agatha the daughter of Robert Ferrers Earle of Derby, with whom the said king gaue him the lordship of Elsmere in the Marches of Wales. The yeare next ensuing the foresaid Rees ap Gruffyth ap Rees got the castell of Lhangadoc,1204 and fortified it to his owne vse; but shortlie after Mael∣gon his vncle with his freend Gwenwynwyn came with a strong power before the castell of Lhanym∣dhyfri & wan it, and from thence they remoued to Lhangadoc, got the same likewise, suffering the garrison to depart. From thence Maelgon went to Dinerth, and finished the castell which he had be∣gun there. About this time Dauid sonne to Owen Gwyneth, after that prince Lhewelyn (his nephue) had set him at libertie, fled to England, and got an armie to restore him to his ancient estate in Northwales, but all in vaine; for his nephue met him and ouerthrew him in the waie, then he re∣turning to England, for verie sorow died shortlie af∣ter. The next yeare to this, Howel the sonne of prince Rees, being blind, was slaine at Cemaes by his brother Maelgons men, and buried by his bro∣ther Gruffyth at Stratflur. Although this Maelgon in those daies bare all the rule in Southwales, yet his brother Gruffyths sonnes Rees and his brethren wan from him the chiefe defense of all his coun∣trie, to wit, the castels of Dyneuowr and Lhanym∣dhyfri. Then William Marshall Earle of Penbrooke laid siege to the castell of Cilgerran & wan it. Not long after, Maelgon ap Rees hired an Irishman to
kill Gadiuor ap Griffri, whose foure sons Maelgon tooke and put them to death. These were toward gentlemen, and came of a noble stocke: for their mother Susanna was daughter to the said Howel ap Rees by a daughter of Madoc ap Meredyth prince of Powys. The yeare 1205.1205 Maelgon did build a castell at Abereneon. At that time there came such abundance of fish to Aberystwyth, as the like was neuer seene before. Within the next three yeares after, the French king got manie townes in Gwy∣en. In those daies there fell a great debate in Eng∣land between the king & the clergie about the elec∣tion of the Archbishop of Canturburie: in so much that the yeare 1208.1208 the Pope denounced all Eng∣land accursed, & no seruice was vsed in anie church within England.Hol. pag. 566. & 570. This yere the king did banish out of the land William de Bruse with his wife, for dis∣pleasure that he bare to his son, and seased their lands to his owne hands, which William with his said wife and son fled to Ireland, & there remained for a while. This man was of great power in the Marches of Wales, but extreeme cruell and vniust. The same yeare Gwenwynwyn came to Shrewes∣burie to speake with the kings councell, and was there detained prisoner, wherevpon prince Lhewe∣lyn conquered all his countrie, with all the towns and castels therein, and kept the same to his owne vse. Which when Maelgon ap Rees vnderstood, and that Lhewelyn would make his voiage to Southwales, he ouerthrew his castels of Aberyst∣wyth Stratmeyric, and Dynerth, which he before had fortified, despairing to be able to withstand the prince: but the prince kept on his iournie to Aber∣ystwyth, and built the castell againe, & fortified it,
and seased to his owne hands the Cantref of Pen∣wedic, & the land betwixt Dyui and Aeron, which he gaue to Maelgons nephues the sonnes of Gruf∣fyth ap Rees, and so returned home with great ioy. Within a litle after Rees Vachan sonne to prince Rees laid siege to the castell of Lhangadoc, and wan it, not regarding his promise and league with the sonnes of his brother Gruffyth ap Rees, forgetting how worthilie they had serued him in his necessi∣tie. Therefore assoone as they heard of this, both Rees and Owen came before the said castell & wan it by assault, & slew or tooke prisoners all the garri∣son, and then burned the castell to the earth. The yeare 1210.1210 king Iohn made a voiage to Ireland,Matt. Paris. pag. 307. with an armie of great power, and wanne the countrie of Conacht, and tooke Cathol their prince prisoner. Matt. Paris. page. 303.In this voiage of King Iohn towards Ireland, as he was in his iournie in the borders of Wales, there was one ta∣ken and brought before him, who had killed a préest. The officer desired to vnderstand the kings pleasure what he would haue doone to him; Let him go, saith the king, for he hath slaine mine enimie. The churchmen of those daies persecuted king Iohn with booke, bell and candell, and therefore he little regarded the losse of some of them. Also he spoiled Hugh de Lacie Lord of Meth of his castels and lands, and tooke William de Bruse the yoonger, and Mawd de Saint Valerike his mo∣ther, and brought them both to England with him, and caused them cruellie to be famished in the ca∣stell of Wyndsor. Matt. Paris. pag. 303.The cause of the kings displeasure taken against this Wil∣liam de Bruse, Lord of Brecknock, as Matthew Paris re∣porteth the same, was this. When the Pope had excommu∣nicated
the realme of England. The king fearing a further inconuenience, tooke pledges of such of his nobles as he suspected would make anie stirre against him, & sending his messengers to the said William de Bruse, demanded his sons for pledges. Then Mawd the wife of the said William, (more malipart than manerlie, taking the word out of hir husbands mouth) answered roundlie, that the king, who had shamefullie slaine Arthur his nephue, whom he ought rather to haue kept and preserued, should haue none of hir children. These words being by the messengers signified vnto the king, put him in such a heat against the said Lord, that he sent certeine souldiours to take him; wherevpon he his wife and children were faine to flie into Ireland to saue their liues;Idem. pa. 308 where the said Mawd and hir sonne were now taken: but the father escaped and fled into France, where he died afterward, as the same author saith. This yeare the Earle of Chester reedified the castell of Dyganwy, which stood vpon the sea shore, East of the riuer Conwy, which prince Lhewelyn had before destroied. Also he fortified the castell of Treffynnon or S. Wenefride. Then prince Lhewelyn entered the Earles land, and destroied a great part thereof, and returned home with a great spoile. Also Rees Vachan sonne to prince Rees fea∣ring prince Lhewelyn, who defended his nephues the sonnes of Gruffyth in their right, went to the king for succours, which he receiued with good will, and by their aid he laid siege to the castell of Lhanymdhyfry. Now when the garrison sawe no hope of succours, they desired that they might de∣part bag & baggage, horsses & all, and so they did. Likewise Gwenwynwyn, whom the king held in prison, was set at libertie, and the king fearing the princes power, sent an armie with him, by whose means he receiued all his countrie againe in short
space. Maelgon also, when he heard the same, came to the kings court, & became the kings man, who returning home with a great number of Nor∣manes and Englishmen, ioined to them all the pow∣er he could make in Wales; and contrarie to the oth that he had made to his nephues Rees and Owen, began to spoile their countrie, and com∣ming to Cantref Penwedic, encamped at Cilkennyn, and laie there all night consulting vpon his voi∣age. In the meane time his nephues hearing this, hauing but a small power, not aboue 300. of chosen men, came and lodged hard by, vnknowing to their enimies. And when they vnderstood by their spies that all was in quiet in Maelgons campe, and how that his men mistrusting nothing behaued themselues careleslie, these two lords prosecuted boldlie the enterprise which they had taken in hand, and peaceablie entring the campe, did come where they thought Maelgon laie, & or euer they were espied they gaue ala∣rum, and slew a great number before they awoke: and the rest hearing the noise, halfe amazed, by means of the darkenesse escaped awaie, thinking some great power had beene there. But Maelgons men defended them manfullie, vntill such time as their lord had gotten vpon his feete, and escaped a∣waie by benefite of the night. Then his nephue Conan ap Howel and his chiefe counseller Gruffyth ap Cadogan were both taken, and Eneon ap Cara∣doc with a great number more slaine. About this time Gilbert Earle of Glocester for∣tified the castell of Buelht, where a litle before he had lost manie of his men. This yeare also Mawd de Bruse wife to Gruffyth ap Rees died, and was bu∣ried
in a moonks coule in Stratflur by hir husband. 1211The next yeare ensuing king Iohn had manie complaints made vnto him by the Marchers,Matt. Paris. pag. 307. Matt. West. page. 89. vpon prince Lhewelyn, how he entring their countrie burned and spoiled all as he went, and slew their men. Wherfore the king gathered a great armie through all England, and called to him such lords and princes of Wales as held of him, as Howel ap Gruffyth ap Conan ap Owen Gwyneth, whom Lhe∣welyn had banished: Madoc ap Gruffyth Maylor lord of Bromfield, Chirke and Yale: Meredyth ap Rotpert lord of Cydewen: Gwenwynwyn lord of Powys, Ma∣elgon and Rees Vachan the sonnes of prince Rees, rulers of Southwales. With this great armie he entred into Northwales by Chester, minding to de∣stroie all that had life within that countrie. Then the prince hearing of all this preparation against him, aswell of his owne countriemen as others, commanded all such as inhabited the Inland or Midle countrie (which is now part of Denbigh and Flynt shires) to remooue all their goods and cattels to Snowden hils for a time. And so the king came along the sea coast to Ruthlan, and so passed ouer the riuer Clwyd, and came to the castell of Tegan∣wy, and there remained a while: but Lhewelyn cut off his victuals behind him, so that he could haue none from England, and there cold not a man scat∣ter from the skirmishes vnfought withall: where the Northwales men alwaies, both for the aduan∣tage of the straits and knowledge of the places, had the vpper hand. At the last the English souldi∣ours were glad to taste horsse flesh for pure neede. Then, when the king saw no remedie, he returned home in great rage, leauing the countrie full of
dead bodies.1212 In August next ensuing he returned againe with a great armie,Matt. Paris, page. 309. Matth. West. page. 91. and the lords before named with him, & entred into Wales, at Blanch-monasterie now Oswestree, whereof Iohn the sonne of William Fitzalan was lord. At this time the king passing the riuer of Conwey, encamped there by the riuer side, and sent part of his armie with guides of the countrie to burne Bangor: who did so, taking Rotpert the bishop prisoner, who was af∣terward ransomed for 200. hawkes. Then the prince seeing all England and Wales against him, & a great part of his land won from him, thought it best to entreat with the king. And thervpon he sent Ione his wife the kings daughter to hir fa∣ther to make a peace, who (being a discreet wo∣man) found the meanes that vpon pledges giuen for safe conduct the prince came to the king, and made peace with him, and did him homage. Then giuing him pledges, he promised vnto him to∣wards his charges 20000. heads of cattell and fortie horsses. Moreouer he granted to the king the Inland for euer: wherevpon the king returned to England with great triumph, after that he had brought all Wales vnder his subiection, sauing Rees & Owen the sonnes of Gruffyth ap Rees. Ther∣fore at his departure he gaue straite commande∣ment to Foulke Vicount of Caerdyff (called Warden of the Marches, a cruell tyrant, but yet wel loued of the king) to take an armie with him, that he ioi∣ning with Maelgon and Rees Vachan, might com∣pell the aforesaid sonnes of Gruffyth to obeie him. Matt. . pag. 311. Matt. West. page. 99. This Foulke or Falcasius de Breant, a Norman borne and a bastard, being a cruell and a wicked man, was called by king Iohn to his aid against the Barons, who vsed himselfe
cruellie towards them, for which cause she said king gaue him in mariage Margaret de Riparijs an inheritrice of great possessions. This Foulke calling vnto him Maelgon and Rees came to the Cantref of Penwedic: then the yoong lords seing no remedie, sent to him for peace and safeconduct to passe to the court, which he gran∣ted them. When they came to the court, vpon their submission to the king, with the gift of all their lands betwixt Aeron and Dyui, they were re∣ceiued of him very gentlie, and curteouslie intrea∣ted, and after they had doone him homage, they re∣turned home againe. Then Foulke before his departure out of the countrie, fortified the castell of Aberystwyth, and manned it to the kings behoofe. But within a while Maelgon (as he was verie vnconstant) and Rees Vachan repented them of the peace they had made with the king, and therevpon laid siege to the castell of Aberyst∣wyth, & getting the same destroied it. When their nephues Rees and Owen sawe that their vncles had broken the kings peace, they made a roade vnto Maelgons countrie, and slew a great number of his men, and returned with a rich bootie. The next yeare prince Lhewelyn, being not able to abide the displeasures which the garrisons that the king left in his nephues castels in North∣wales did to his people, called to him Gwenwynwyn from Powys, Maelgon ap Rees from Southwales, Ma∣doc ap Gruffyth Maylor from Bromfield, Meredyth ap Rotpert from Cydewen, and opened to them this miserable case, how they which were woont to haue a prince of their owne nation, now (by their owne wilfulnesse) were brought in subiection to a
stranger, and declared also vnto them, how that if they would agree among themselues, they might defend their ancient estate still; which thing they all promised to do, & swore fealtie to prince Lhewe∣lyn, & forthwith gathered an armie, & wan all the castels sauing Ruthlan & Dyganwy: then comming to Powys,Casteth Ma∣thraual. they laid siege to the castell which Robert Vepont had made at Mathraual. But when the king was informed of all this, he leuied an armie, and came thither to raise the siege, and after caused the castell to be rased, & then returned home, hauing greater matters in hand betweene him & his no∣bles. Then being at Notingham,Matt. Paris. page. 309. & hering how the prince of Wales destroied all the Marches, he caused the pledges which he had receiued the last yere to be hanged, as Howel the son of Cadwalhon, Madoc the sonne of Maelgon,Hol. pag. 573. and others, to the number of 28. striplings. Also Robert Vepont did hang at Shrewesburie, Rees the sonne of Maelgon not being yet seuen yeares of age, and so cruellie murthered the innocent, to reuenge the offenses of others. In the meane while that the king remained at Notingham,Hol. pag. 574. Matt. Paris. page. 309. he receiued letters from the princesse of Northwales his daughter, declaring that his nobles had conspired with the French king a∣gainst him, and for proofe thereof she alledged, that Robert Fitzwater, Eustace de Vescy, and Stephan Ri∣dell were secretelie fled into France, and that the French king prepared an armie to come to Eng∣land, vnder the colour that the king was a rebell from the church, for that he would not condescend to the bishop of Romes requests. The yeare 1213.1213 Innocentius Pope of Rome did release prince Lhewelyn, Gwenwynwyn, and
Maelgon,This is not Euangelium pacis. Ex fructibus eorum cog∣nosceuseos. of those oths that they had made to king Iohn, and willed them vnder the paines of cursing to annoie and trouble him all that they could, as the enimie of the church. Wherevpon forthwith Lhewelyn receiued all the Inland countrie, which to this time was in the kings hands. But within a little after, the king by the persuasion of Pan∣dulph the legat, granted the Pope his request, and obteined absolution at his hands, and release∣ment of the interdiction vpon performance of his promises.Matt. Paris. page. 318. Then king Iohn hearing how the French king was in Flanders, and had a great nauie at Dam, purposing to bring the Earldome into his subiection,Annal. Fland Iac. Meyri. lib. 8. Hol. pag. 578. sent William de Longaspata Earle of Salisburie, Reginald Earle of Boleyn, and Hugh de Noua villa or Neuill thither with a great nauie, who ouerthrew the Frenchmen, and returned home with great spoile. Shortlie after king Iohn sailed to Rochell, where the Earle of those mar∣ches, and Geffrey de Landanamo were reconciled to him. Hol. pag. 586.The yeare folowing, king Iohn made peace with the French king, for fiue yeares. Then Rees son to Gruffyth ap Rees, which was heire to prince Rees, seeing he could haue no part of his fathers lands, but that his vncles did keepe all from him by force, made his complaint to the king. And the king pittieng his estate, sent to Foulke Vicount of Caerdyff (warden of the marches) and to the stew∣ard of Hereford, commanding them to take all Stratywy from Rees Vachan (whom other call Rees Gryc) vnlesse he would let his nephues enioie the castell of Lhauymdhyfry, with the territorie be∣longing thereto. And they sent to Rees to know
his mind, who answered them stoutlie, that they should not haue one foote of land of him. Therefore Foulke gathered a great armie, and met with yoong Rees at Talhwynelgain, where he looked for him with a number of men, that he had gotten in Brechnock, and thence they marched in three bat∣telles towardes Dyneuowr, of which, yoong Rees lead the first, Foulke the second, and Owen brother to Rees the third. Then Rees Vachan came boldlie and gaue them battell, where in the end he was put to flight, with the losse of a great number of his men. Then he went straight, and manned the castell of Dineuowr, and burned the towne of Lhan∣deilo vawr, keeping himselfe in the wild and rough places: then his enimies laid siege to the castell of Dyneuowr, and at the first assault, they wanne the first ward, so that they of the garrison were faine to take the Koxe for their defense, and defended the same manfullie; but they without made engines to cast in great stones, and began to vndermine the walles in such sort, that the captaine fell to that composition, that if he were not succoured by the next daie at noone, he would deliuer vp the ca∣stell, vpon condition that all his men might de∣part with their armour and weapons, and so they did, for they had no succours. Afterward they brought the Cantref Mawr to their subiection. Then Rees Vachan remooued his wife and children to his brother Maelgons countrie, and leaft the ca∣stell of Lhauymdhyfry well fortified and manned. After the departure of Foulke, yoong Rees came with an armie of Welshmen and Normanes to Lhauymdhyfry; but before they were encamped, the captaine deliuered vp the castell, the garrison
departing with their liues. And shortlie after Rees Vachan was taken at Caermarthyn, and com∣mitted to the kings prison. The Brytish booke of the Abbeie of Stratflur doth in this place set downe the earnest repentance of king Iohn, of all the extremities that he had vsed against the churchmen, and how that he called home againe such of them as were either expelled, or voluntarilie went out of the realme, and resto∣red to them all such things as his officers had taken from them. At what time also he made the kingdome of Eng∣land tributarie to the church of Rome, to be holden of the Pope, yéelding and paieng vnto him the summe of a thou∣sand markes yearelie for euer. At this time prince Lhewelyn laid siege to the castell of Dyganwy, and Ruthlan, and wanne them both, so that he leaft the king neither hold nor castell within his land. 1215In the yeare 1215. king Iohn with the Earles of Chester and Derbie tooke the crosse,Matt. Paris. pag. 339. but the re∣bellion of his barons staid his iournie; for they re∣quired of him certeine auncient lawes and cus∣tomes to be kept, which he denied to doo. There∣fore they were confederate with Lhewelyn prince of Wales, that he should stirre vpon his part, and they would vpon theirs:Matt. Paris. pag. 340. then gathering an army, they appointed Robert Fitzwater captaine, and came to Bedford, where William Beauchamp re∣ceiued them into the castell, and from thence they went to London, and were there ioifullie recei∣ued. Then the king leuied a power, with William Marshall Earle of Penbrooke, and laid siege to the castell of Rochester, which was manfullie defen∣ded three moneths by William de Abbineto, but at the last it was taken by force. And at that time
there were taken with the said William, William de Lancaster, VVilliam de Emmford, Thomas de Mo∣letun, Quince Gyfford, Odinel Bobi, and Odinel de Albineto, whom the king sent to the castell of Corff to be imprisoned sure. At this time the Pope curs∣sed all such as made warre against king Iohn. There is a bull of excommunication among the Records kept in the towre against Lhewelyn prince of Wales, and others, for making warre against king Iohn being vnder the protection of the church of Rome. Thus the Pope can blow hot and cold out of one mouth. A litle before he re∣leased prince Lhewelyn, the Barons and all the commons of the realme from their oth of obedience and subiection to king Iohn, commanding them vpon paine of cursse to make warre against him: and now hauing brought his purpose to passe, he cursseth them for doing of that which he commanded. So the Pope setteth at variance kings and princes at his pleasure to worke his owne commoditie, and when the same is brought about, he cursseth them with booke, bell, and candle, if they without consideration of their own gréefs will not agrée againe when he will: wheras fire being kindled is not easilie quenched, & hatred once stirred vp betwéene princes, and growne by displeasures to open war (wherin manie are slaine, other taken, & the most spoi∣led and vndoone) is not so soone put off with a Mandamus from Rome, and shaking of hands at the Popes pleasure. Neuerthelesse prince Lhewelyn leuied an armie and came to Shrewesburie, which towne and ca∣stell were deliuered to him without any resistance, and there he remained a while. In the mean time Giles de Bruse bishop of Hereford (and chiefe of this conspiracie) sonne to William de Bruse, sent his brother Reynold to Brechnock, and all the people receiued him as their lord, and so he got all his ca∣stels without gaine-saieng of anie man, to wit,
Abergeuenny, Penkelhy, Castelh Gwyn (or the White castell) Grosmont & the Ile of Cynuric. But when the bishop came thither himselfe, they deliuered him the castels of Aberhodny, Hay, Bnelht, & Blayn∣lhyfny, and he to strengthen himselfe in that coun∣trie promised castell Payn, Clune with all Eluel, to Walter Vachan the sonne of Eneon Clyd. In the meane time of this, yoong Rees sonne to Gruffyth ap Rees and Maelgon his vncle were made freends, and went both to Dyuet, where they recouered all the land to themselues sauing Cemais, and ouer∣threw the castell of Arberth & Maynclochoc. Then Maelgon and Owen brother to Rees went to North∣wales to prince Lhewelyn, and did to him homage: and yoong Rees gathered a great power and came to Cydwely, and brought it with all Carnwylheon to his subiection, and rased the castell there, and likewise the castell of Lhychwr. Frō thence he lead his armie to the castell of Hugh de Myles at Taly∣bont, and hauing taken the same by force, slew a great number of the garrison. Then the daie after he tooke his iournie to Senghennyth, where the garrison which laie there burnt the towne, and de∣parted. Therfore Rees laieng siege to the castell of Ystymlhwynarth, got the same the next daie folow∣ing, and burned it and the towne also, and so he got all the castels of Gwyrland within three daies after, and then returned home with victorie and triumph. At this time Rees Vachan (or Rees Gryc) vncle to yoong Rees, and sonne to the lord Rees was set at libertie by the king, leauing his sonne and two other pledges for him. This yeare also two Abbots were consecrated bishops, Ior∣werth of S. Dauids, and Cadogan of Bangor. Giles de
Bruse bishop of Hereford by the Popes commande∣ment went and made peace with the king, and di∣ed in his returne homeward at Glocester, whose inheritance descended to his brother Reginald, who maried the daughter of prince Lhewelyn. Shortlie after Lhewelyn prince of Northwales came with a great armie to Caermardhyn, and laid siege to the castell, which was yeelded vnto him the fifth daie after, which he rased to the ground, and so he did with the castels of Lhanste∣phan, S. Cleare, & Talacharn. From thence he went to Caerdigan, and winning the new castell in Em∣lyn, he subdued Cemaes, and got the castell of Tref∣draeth, (called in English Newport) and rased the same to the ground. Then the garrison, which kept the castell of Aberteiui deliuered the same vn∣to him vpon S. Stephens daie: and the daie after he had the castell of Cilgerran, from whence he retur∣ned to Northwales with great honor and triumph. In the which viage these lords accompanied him, to wit, Howel ap Gruffyth ap Conan, Lhewelyn ap Meredyth, Gwenwynwyn lord of Powys, Meredyth ap Rotpert, Maelgon and Rees Vachan the sonnes of prince Rees, Rees and Owen the sonnes of Gruffyth ap Rees, and the power of Madoc ap Gruffyth May∣lor lord of Bromfield. The winter after was the fairest winter that euer was seene. The yeare folowing the prince went to Aber∣teiui, to make an agreement betwixt Maelgon and Rees Vachan sonnes to prince Rees on the one side, and their nephues yoong Rees, and his brother Owen the sonnes of Gruffyth ap Rees on the other side: where he diuided Southwales betwixt them after this maner: to Maelgon he gaue three Can∣trefs
in Dyuet Gwarthaf, Penlhwynoc, Cemaes and Emlyn, with the castell of Cilgerran: two in Straty∣wy, Hiruryn and Malhaen and Maenor Bydvey, with the castell of Lhanymdhyfry, and two in Caerdigan Gwynionyth and Mabwyneon to yoong Rees and Owen his brother he gaue the castell of Aberteiui, and the castell of Nant yr arian (or siluer dale) and three Cantrefs in Caerdigan withall. And to Rees Vachan otherwise called Rees Gryc, the castell of Dyneuowr, the Cantref Mawr, and the Cantref Ba∣chan (except Hiruryn and Mydhuey & the Comotes of Cydwely and Carnwylhion) This diuision being accomplished, the prince returned homeward, to whom by the way it was signified that Gwenwyn∣wyn (contrarie to his oth and bonds in writing) had forsaken him, and became againe the kings subiect, which greeued the prince verie much, and therefore he sent vnto him bishops and Abbots to moue him to remember his oth and promise, and his pledges giuen to the prince, and to shew him his owne hand, and therevpon to see if he would come againe, and to promise him the princes fa∣uour; but he would in no case heare of reconcilia∣tion, wherefore the prince entred into Powys with fire and sword, and subdued the countrie to him∣selfe: wherevpon Gwenwynwyn fled to the Earle of Chester for succours, and there remained for a while. Matt. Paris. page. 377.At this time Lewys sonne to the French king be∣ing called by the Barons of England, landed at Te∣net, who receiuing to his hands all the holdes by the waie, came to London, and there receiued ho∣mage of the Barons, and from thence went to∣wards Winchester where king Iohn was, and by
the waie got the castels of Rygat, Guilford, and Fer∣nam, then comming to Winchester receiued the same with the castell. Wherevpon king Iohn fled to Hereford in the Marches of Wales, and sent to Reynold Bruse and to prince Lhewelyn, desiring freendship; but they would not heare him. There∣fore he destroied the castell of Radnor and Haye and came a long to Oswestree, which towne being of the possessions of Iohn Fitzalans, he burned to the earth, and departed from thence northward, lea∣uing power as he went, in whose companie were William de Albemarle the Earle of Glocester, Phi∣lip de Albineto, Iohn Marshall, Foulke de Breant a no∣ble good soldiour, to whom the king gaue in mari∣age the daughter of the Earle Riuers with the ca∣stell of Bedford, William Earle of Salisburie the kings brother, William Briwer, VValter Espec. Also he appointed gouernors of the North, Hugh Baliol, and Philip Halcots. He made gouernors of the citie of Yorke, Robert de Veipont, Geffrey Lucy, and Bryan de Lysle. Upon the other part Lewys coming from VVinchester, tooke the castell of Odyham and came to London with great triumph, where Geffrey Maundeuile Earle of Essex was slaine by misfor∣tune running at the tilte. And the Lords that mainteined the quarell were these: VVilliam Erle VVaren, VVilliam Earle of Arundell, VVilliam Erle of Salisburie, who forsooke the king at the end, VVil∣liam Marshall the yoonger, VVilliam de Maundeuile, Robert Fitzwater, VVilliam Huntingfield all southern men, and Robert de Rose, Peter de Bruse, and Richard Percie northern men.Matt. Paris. page. 383. And all this while Hubert de Burgh kept the castell of Douer worthilie to the behoofe of the king. But as king Iohn was ma∣king
preparation at Newerke, he fell sicke and di∣ed, and lieth buried at VVorcester. Matt. Paris, page. 386.After the death of king Iohn, Rondle Earle of Chester, VVilliam Marshall Erle of Penbrooke, Wil∣liam Earle Ferrers,Matth. West. page. 104. Philip de Albineto, and Iohn Mar∣shall crowned Henrie his sonne king of England at Glocester. In the meane while Lewys besieged the castell of Douer, but all in vaine. Then retur∣ning to London, where the citie was deliuered him, he proceeded and wan the castels of Hartford and Berkamstede. Wherevpon there was a truse concluded betwixt both princes for a while, then Lewys returned to France. This yeare Howel ap Gruffyth ap Conan died, and lieth buried at Con∣wey. 1217The yeare 1217. manie of the nobles of Eng∣land forsooke Lewys, whom they had called in be∣fore, and contrarie to their oth came to king Hen∣rie, as William de Albineto lord of Bealwere besides Notingham, who was imprisoned in Corff, & Wil∣liam Earle Warren, VVilliam de Albineto Earle of Arundell, William longa Spata Earle of Salisburie, William Marshall the yonger, and William de Can∣tilupo. Then Lewys shortlie after landed at Douer with a great armie, and laid siege to the castell, but he could doo no good: from thence he went and incamped before the castell of Windsore, and when he cold not get it,Matt. Paris. pag. 395. Matt. West. page. 104. he tooke his iournie to Lin∣colne, whither the armie of king Henrie came a∣gainst him, where a cruell battell was fought, wherein Lewys was put to flight, & a great num∣ber of his nobles taken, as Saere Quincy Earle of Winchester, Henrie de Bohune Earle of Hereford, Gilbert de Gaunt Earle of Lincoln, Robert Fitzwater,
Richard Montfytchet, Gilbert de Clare, William Mowbraye, William Beuchamp, VVilliam Mandit, Aemer Harcourt, Roger de Crescy, William de Col∣uile, William de Rosse, Robert Rippeley, and there were slaine Symon de Vescy, Hugh de Roch, Reynald Crescy constable of Chester,Matt. Paris. page. 398. Gerald de Furneuale, and manie other. Also Hubert de Burgh captaine of Do∣uer, Henrie de Turberuile, and Richard Sward gaue the French nauie (whereof Eustace a moonke was captaine) an ouerthrow. In this meane time, Reynald de Bruse did agree with the king, vnknowing to prince Lhewelyn, and contrarie to his promise. Wherefore yoong Rees and Owen his sisters sons (seeing that he in whom they trusted most deceiued them) rose against him, and wanne all Buelht from him sauing the castell. But when the Prince heard of this agreement, he was sore offended withall, and comming with an armie to Brechnock,Brecheinoc was the whole coū∣trie or lord∣ship of Brechnock: Aberhodny the cheefe towne. he laid siege to the town of A∣berhodny, where the burgesses of the towne came to him, and by meanes of yoong Rees, the Prince taking 100. markes and fiue pledges of them, raised his siege, and tooke his iournie ouer the blacke mountaines towards Gwyr, where he lost much of his cariages. And as he camped at Lhan∣gruc, Reynald Bruse came to him with sixe knights in his companie, and desired his father in law of pardon for his offense, who receiuing him gentlie, did not onlie forgiue him, but also gaue him the ca∣stell of Senghennyth, and Reynald committed the same to the custodie of Rees Vachan. Lhewelyn af∣ter he had set all things in good order in that coun∣trie marched to Dyuet, and being at Cefn Cynwar∣chan, the Flemings sent to him to desire peace, but
the Prince would not grant them their request. Then yoong Rees was the first that passed the ri∣uer Cledheu to fight with them of the towne. Wherevpon Iorwerth bishop of S. Dauids with all his clergie came to the Prince to desire peace to the Flemings, which after long debating was thus concluded. Articles of peace be∣tweene prince Lhe∣welyn and the Fle∣mings.First, that all the inhabitants of Ros and the land of Penbrooke should become the princes sub∣iects, and euer from thencefoorth take him for their liege Lord. Secondarilie, that they should paie him a 1000. markes towards his charges, before Michaelmas next cōming. Thirdlie, that for the performance of these, they should deliuer forthwith to the Prince twentie pledges of the best in all the countrie: which things they did. Then the prince, after he had brought all VVales to his subiection, returned to Northwales with much honour. Shortlie after, there was a peace concluded betwixt the king and Lewys the French kings sonne. Wherevpon the king promising the barons all their requests, Lewys returned toward France.The barons pacifieng France and England, do conspire against Wales. Then shortlie after, VVilliam Marshall Earle of Penbrooke got the towne of Caerlhêon, and made warre against the VVelshmen, whom contrarie to their promise the barons leaft out of the conclusion of peace. The barons were verie glad of the fréendship and aid of the prince of Wales, to serue their turne. But now in the gene∣rall conclusion of the peace, contrarie to their oth and pro∣mise, they reserue out Wales to kéepe them plaie withall, hoping to get some more land thereby. Therefore let men take héed how they build vpon Turne-seruing Freendship. Wherevpon Rees Vachan rased the castell of
Senghennyth, & all the castels he had in his custo∣die in that countrie, and banished all the English∣men that dwelled there with their wiues and children for euer, and diuided the countrie to the Welshmen, who haue kept it vnto this daie. The yeare ensuing, prince Lhewelyn put his garrisons in the castels of Caermardhin and Aber∣teiui. Then yoong Rees (by the princes consent) went to the king & did him homage for his lands. At this time William Earle of Arundell, Rondell Earle of Chester, William Ferrers Earle of Derbie and Bryan Lisle tooke their voiage toward the holie land. In the yeare folowing, Rees Gryc sonne to prince Rees married the daughter of the Earle of Clare; and Iohn de Bruse married Marret the daugh∣ter of prince Lhewelyn. At that time William Mar∣shall the elder died, leauing after him fiue sonnes and fiue daughters, which daughters were thus married. Mawd to Hugh Bygod, Ioane to Warren de Mount Chensey; Isabell to Gilbert de Clare; Sibill to William Earle of Derbie; and Eua to William de Bruse, betwixt which fiue all his great inheritance was after diuided, for all his sonnes died without issue, and were euerie one after another Erles of Penbrooke. The yeare 1220.1220 Lhewelyn prince of VVales lead an armie to Penbrooke against the Flemings, who contrarie to their oth and league had taken the castell of Aberteiui, which castell the Prince wanne and destroied, putting the garrison to the sword, rased the castell, & went thence to the land of Gwys, where he rased that castell, and burned the towne.1221 Also he caused all Hauerford to be bur∣ned
to the castell gates, and destroied all Ros and Daugledhau: and they which kept the castell sent to him for truse till Maie, which was concluded vpon conditions,Hol. pag. 619. Matt. Paris. pag. 416. Matt. West. pag. 110. & 111. Casteh Tre∣faldwyn. and so he returned home. Also this yeare certeine lords of Wales besieged the castell of Buelht, which was Reynalds de Bruse. Therefore the king came with an armie to the marches, and raised the siege, and came as far as Mountgomerie, and built a new castell there. As William de Albineto Earle of Arundell, Henrie de Bohune Earle of Hereford, and Sayer de Quincie Earle of Winchester were comming home from the holie land, they died by the waie. The yeare following there fell a great dissention betwixt prince Lhewelyn, and Gruffyth his sonne: for this Gruffyth enioied the Cantref of Merionyth without his fathers consent, and therefore his father sent for him to come vnto him, but he would not come: therefore the Prince sware that he would be re∣uenged vpon him and his complices for that dis∣honor, and then came with a great armie to Me∣rionyth: but his sonne fearing not the father, got his people in the field readie to abide the battell, but as they were in fight, there was a peace con∣cluded, and Gruffyth yeelded to his father, and cried him mercie. Then Lhewelyn although he forgaue his sonne his offense, yet he tooke Merionyth and Ardydwy from him, & building a castell there, re∣turned home againe. At this time yoong Rees for∣sooke prince Lhewelyn, bicause Aberteiui was not deliuered him (as the promise was at the diui∣ding of Southwales) and went to William Marshall Earle of Penbrooke: therefore Lhewelyn came to Aberystwyth, and seased the castell and all that ter∣ritorie
to his owne vse. Then yoong Rees hearing this went vnto the king to complaine vpon the Prince, and the king sent for the prince to Shrewes∣burie, and made him and Rees freends; the prince promising to deale with Rees for Aberteiui as he had done with Maelgon for Caermardhin. This winter Iohn de Bruse by the consent of prince Lhe∣welyn fortified the castell of Senghennyth: at that time also Isabell the kings mother maried the son of Hugh de Brune Earle of March, without ma∣king the king priuie thereto. William de Fortibus Earle of Albemarle about this time made an insurrection in Lincolneshire,Matt. West. page. 111. which was soone appeased: then the king seased into his hands certaine honors and castels that diuerse men kept in their possessions without iust cause: as Foulke de Breant kept the Earldoms of Northampton, Oxford, Bedford and Buckingham, with the castels and holdes. Peter de Malo lacu, the castels of Corff, and Shirburne with Somersetshire, and Dorcestershire, and the liberties and forrests. Philip de Marke, the castels of Peke and Notingham, Notinghamshire and Derbyshire. Gigelard de Sico∣nia kept Windsore and Odhiam, which for the most part the king receiued to his hands.Hol. pag. 619. Also Hubert de Burgh was created Earle of Kent, and chiefe Iustice of England, who tooke to wife the king of Scots sister. The yeare after, yoong Rees sonne to Gruffyth ap Rees departed out of this world, being a lustie gentleman, and endued with manie nota∣ble vertues, and was buried at Stratflur, whose in∣heritance Lhewelyn diuided betweene his brother Owen, and his vncle Maelgon. The yeare after Christes incarnation 1223.1223
William Marshall came from Ireland,Hol. pag. 622. and landed at S. Dauids with a great armie, and shortlie after laid siege to Aberteiui and got it, and from thence marched to Caermardhin, and likewise got the same. Matt. Paris. pag. 423. Matt. West. page. 114.Lhewelyn prince of Wales, at what time William Mar∣shall Earle of Penbrooke prosecuted the warres in Ireland against the kings enimies there, tooke by force two castels in Wales belonging to the said Earle, putting all his men which kept the same to the sword, and fortifieng the same with a garrison of his owne men in either of them, depar∣ted home againe: whereof when the said Earle was aduer∣tised, he returned from Ireland with all spéed, and recoue∣ring his castels againe, vsed the same courtesie towards Lhewelyns men that he had shewed to his: and then en∣tring further into the Princes countrie, destroied all be∣fore him as he went. These newes comming to Lhewelyns eares did sore offend him: wherevpon he sent Gruffyth his sonne with a power of men to staie the Earle for passing further. Then Gruffyth went to Cydweli, and vnderstanding that the Burgesses of the towne meant to betraie him, burned the towne, churches,Matt. Paris. pag. 423. and all to the earth. Then William Mar∣shall passed the riuer Tywy at Caermardhin, where Gruffyth met with him,Matt. Paris saith, that the Earle had the vic∣torie, and that there were slaine and taken of the Welshmen 9000. per∣sons. & gaue him battell, which was verie doubtfull and endured vntill night, and then either partie withdrew themselues, and the riuer betwixt. And after they had laien so certen daies, Gruffyth for lacke of victuals (for his men which were about 9000. persons) returned back, and the Earle went to Cilgerran, and began to build there a verie strong castell. Then receiuing letters from the king to come and speake with
him, he went to the court by sea, and left his armie to continue the worke he had begon. Then the king and the archbishop of Canturburie being at Ludlowe sent for the Prince, and would faine haue agreed him and the Earle: but it would not be, and so they departed. And when the Earle would haue passed to Penbrooke by lande, with the strength of the Earle of Derby, and Henrie Pygot lord of Ewyas, the Prince sent his son to keepe the passage at Carnwylhion, & he himselfe came as far as Mabedryd. Which when the Erle vnderstood he returned backe to England, & the Prince went to Northwales.Matt. Paris. page. 425. &. 427. Matth. West. page. 115. Certeine of the barons also misliking the rule of Hubert de Burgh conspired against the king and him: as Randulph Earle of Chester, VVil∣liam de Fortibus Earle of Albemarle, Iohn constable of Chester, Foulke de Breant, Hugh de Veteri ponte, Bryan Lysle, Patrike de Malo lacu, Philip Marke, and VVilliam lord de Cantilupo. But the matter was appeased,Matt. Paris, page. 428. Matt. Paris, page. 439. and the king got the castell of Bedford by long siege, wherein was William de Breant bro∣ther to Foulke. About this time died William de longa Spata Earle of Salisburie. The yeare folow∣ing, Sarancus de malo Leone deliuered Rochell to the French king. Also Foulke de Breant was at this time banished England, and came to such pouertie that he begged from dore to dore. The yeare 1226.1226 Rees Vachan sonne to Rees Gryc did take his father prisoner, and would not set him at libertie till he had deliuered him the castell of Lhanymdhyfri. At this time died Meredyth archdecon of Caerdigan, sonne to prince Rees,1228 and was buried by his father at S. Dauids. The yeere folowing king Henrie came with a great armie to Wales as farre as Ceri,Matt. Paris, pag. 468.
and incamped there, & vpon the other side prince Lhewelyn called to him all the power of Wales, and incamped not farre off, and there were diuerse great skirmishes, and chieflie vpon one daie the most part of both armies was in the field, and a great number slaine of the kings men. At which time William de Bruse sonne to Reynald was taken prisoner, who offered for his ransome the countrie of Buelht, and a great summe of monie beside: then there was a peace concluded betweene the king and the Prince, wherevpon the Prince came to the king, and did honor him, but not as his king and lord, and euerie partie returned home. Matt. Paris. page. 468.This historie is somewhat otherwise laid downe by Mat∣thew Paris, which I haue thus translated out of the same author. Matt. West. page. 124.About the same time, those souldiers which laie in garrison in the castell of Mountgomery, went out with some of their neighbours to amend a certeine passage in the high waie, leading through a great wood thereby, where the Welshmen were woont to rob and slaie such as trauelled that waie: and comming to the place, with their axes and other weapons began to fell the trées, and to cut downe the bushes; whereby the waie might be inlarged. Which thing when the Welshmen vnderstood, they came with a great power, and setting vpon their enimies, compelled them to take the castell for their defense, (certeine being slaine on both sides) and then casting a trench about the same, laid siege vnto it. This being quickelie certified vnto Hubert de Burgh chiefe Iustice of England, to whom a little before the same castell and honor was giuen: the king himselfe with conuenient spéed comming raised the siege, and when his whole armie came to him, (for few soldiours came with him thither) he went to the said wood, which was verie large, being fiue miles in length, and by
reason of the thicke growth of the same verie hard to be stocked: howbeit the king caused the same with great dili∣gence and trauell to be asserted and consumed with fire. Then leading his armie further into the countrie, he came to an abbeie of white moonks called Cridia, being a refuge for the Welshmen to flie vnto, which he caused to be burnt to ashes; where Hubert de Burgh (to whome the place see∣med verie fit for fortification) hauing the assent of the king, caused a castell to be builded. But or euer the worke was finished, manie were slaine on both sides: and William de Bruse a noble warriour, who went out to make prouision for the armie, was taken by the Welshmen, and cast in pri∣son: and diuerse other went out for the like purpose, where∣of one being knighted a few daies before, seing some of his felowes in danger and like to be distressed, rushed boldlie into the middest of his enimies, killing manie about him, who in the end with manie other of the kings men was there slaine. Manie also of the kings  soldiours being confederate with prince Lhewelyn, did verie faintlie de∣fend his cause with whom they came thither. Wherevpon the king wanting necessarie prouision, and perceiuing the double dealing of some of his owne men, was constrained to conclude a dishonorable peace with the Welshmen, gi∣uing his assent that the castell, which with so great expenses of men and monie was now almost finished, should be ra∣sed at his owne charges, taking of prince Lhewelyn thrée thousand pounds towards the same. The peace being thus confirmed both parties departed homeward. So the king of England, after that he had bestowed thrée moneths in the building of the said castell, and disbursed an infinite summe of monie in vaine, leauing William de Bruse one of his nobles in the Princes prison, returned home with great slaine of his honor. The name also which Hubert the chiefe Iustice had giuen to the castell at the beginning of the buil∣ding, calling it Huberts folie,Stultitia Huberti. did now mooue manie to laugh at the thing, who séeing that costlie and sumptuous
building, to be made equall with the ground, said that Hu∣bert was a prophet and more than a prophet. Thus farre out of Matthew Paris. Shortlie after this, there fell a great variance betweene the king and Richard Earle of Cornwale his brother, where great partaking was on ei∣ther side. These lords held with Richard, Randulph Earle of Chester, William Marshall Earle of Pen∣brooke, Gilbert Earle of Glocester, William Earle Warren, Henrie Earle of Hereford, William Earle Ferrers, and VVilliam Earle of Warwick. But this debate was soone taken vp and finished, the king and his brother being made freends. In the yeere 1230.1230 Henrie made a iournie to France, to recouer againe that which his father had lost:Matt. Paris. pag. 485. from whence he returned backe againe without dooing any good. At this time Lhewelyn the sonne of Ma∣elgon died in Northwales, and was buried at Con∣wey. Prince Lhewhelyn caused William Bruse to be hanged,Matt. Paris. pag. 488. Matt. West. pag. 128. being (as it was reported) taken in adul∣terie with his wife, who was the sister of king Henrie. Also Gilbert of Clare Earle of Glocester di∣ed, whose wife afterward married Richard Earle of Cornwale, and the king gaue the wardship of his sonne to the Earle of Kent. Likewise Maelgon sonne to prince Rees died at this time, and was bu∣ried at Stratflur, whose patrimonie yoong Maelgon his sonne inherited after his father.1231 The yeare ensuing, William Marshall Earle of Penbrooke died, and Richard his brother enioied his inheritance. Hol. pag. 638. Matt. Paris. pag. 492.This yeare the king lead a great armie to Wales, & after he had remained in the Marches a while, he returned to England, and left Hubert de Burgh Earle of Kent with his armie to defend the
Marches, & he by spies vnderstood where certeine VVelshmen entred the Marches to spoile, and set vpon them by Mountgomery, & slew a great num∣ber of them.Matt. West. page. 131. Then the Prince being therwith sore offended gathered an armie, and to reuenge his men, entring the Marches with fire & sword, slew all that withstood him, and burned the castels with the garrisons without mercie: and first the castell of Mountgomery, for the Earle withdrew himselfe for feare. Then the castell of Radnor, Aber∣hodni, Rayader Gwy, & so he went through Gwent∣land to Caerlhêon, and after long fight and losse of manie of his men, got the towne, and left nothing therein but ashes. The like he did with the castels of Neth and Cydwely.Matt. Paris. pag. 492. Therefore the king caused the Prince to be denounced accursed, and came to Hereford with a mightie armie, and sent a great number of his nobles with the most part of his armie to VVales, who using the direction of a frier of Cymer, met with a number of Welshmen, which at the first encounter fled, whome the Eng∣lishmen folowed to the straits, where the ambush∣ments laie, which fell vpon them and slew a great number of the best soldiours, and the rest escaped with fleeing.Matt. Paris. pag, 493. Therefore the king would haue bur∣ned the house of Cymer, but the Prior paid 300. markes, and the king returned to England after he had built the castell of Mawd. In the meane time of this, Maelgon the sonne of Maelgon ap Rees laid siege do Aberteiui and got the towne, and de∣stroied it to the castell gates, slaieng all the inha∣bitants. And shortlie after he returned with his coosen Owen sonne to Gruffyth ap Rees, with cer∣taine of the Princes captaines, and brake downe
the bridge vpon the riuer Teiui, and laid siege to the castell, and with engines and mines threw downe the same, and then returned home with much honor.Matt. Paris. pag. 502. The next yeare to this, prince Lhewe∣lyn entred into England, and returned with a rich spoile of goods, cattell, and men. Therfore the king feased a subsidie to subdue the Welshmen. Hubert de Burgh was at this time accused vpon certeine articles,Hol. pag. 640 Matt. Paris. pag. 507. and committed to prison. Randulph Earle of Chester and Lincolne died the same yeare, and Iohn his sister sonne (by the brother of the Scottish king) was Earle of Chester after him,Hol. pag. 622. who tooke to wife the daughter of prince Lhewelyn: and an other of his nephues had the Earldome of Lin∣colne. Also Ephraim bishop of Lhanelwy died. A∣bout the same time Iohn de Bruse falling off his horsse, his foote sticking fast in the sturope and the horsse taile, was drawen by his owne horsse till he died miserablie. The summer following Richard Earle of Cornwall fortified the castell of Radnor, which the Prince had latelie destroied. Shortlie after that, Prince Lhewelyn came with an armie to Brechnock, and destroied all the townes and castels in the countrie: and laie a mo∣neth at the siege of the castell of Brechnock, but yet went without it, and burning the towne, retur∣ned homeward with a great bootie. In his iour∣nie by the waie he burned the towne of Clunn, and recouered all the countrie called Dyffryn Teueidiat (which was of the possession of Iohn Fitzalan) but he cold not get the castell.1233 After that he ouerthrew the Reddecastell in Powys,Matt. West. page. 134. Matt. Paris. page. 517. and burned the towne of Oswestree, and so came home. About this time Richard Marshall Earle of Penbrooke fell at debate
with the king,Matt. Paris. pag. 518. who with Hubert de Burgh that brake out of the castell of Deuises came to VVales, and ioined with the Prince against the king. Matt. West. page. 137.Matthew of VVestminster doth write, that Hubert de Burgh then prisoner in the castell of Deuises, being admo∣nished that Peter bishop of Winchester purposed to famish him in the said castell, escaped ouer the wall and tooke san∣ctuarie; out of the which he was violentlie taken by the kée∣pers of the castell: but by the meanes of the bishop of Sa∣rum (within whose diocese the same was) he was restored againe to the sanctuarie, and within a while after fetched awaie by a power of armed men, being the fréends of the Earle Marshall, and brought into Wales, where he ioined himselfe to the kings enimies. Then the Earle with Owen ap Gruffyth ap Rees came to Meneuia or S. Dauids, and killed and spoiled all the kings seruants and freends within the towne. Also Maelgon & Rees Gryc, with the power of the prince ioined with them, who in that viage wanne all these castels, Caerdyff, Abergeuennie, Pencelhy, Blaynlhefyni, and Bwlch y Dinas, which they rased all, sauing Caerdyff. Then the king ga∣thered a wonderfull great armie aswell Flemings, Normanes, and Gascoines, as Englishmen, and en∣tred Wales, thinking to destroie the whole coun∣trie, and encamped at Grosmont, where the Earle with the power of Wales encamped hard by him. And as the kings men would haue entred further they were met withall, and lost 500. horsse, wher∣vpon the king had aduise to returne home, and so he did. After whose departure the Earle with the power aforesaid lay before Caermardhyn three mo∣neths; but it was so manfullie defended that they could not come by it. And at last there came in
the kings ships, and manned and victualed the towne afresh, wherefore they raised the siege and departed. Within a while after Rees Gryc sonne to the lord or prince Rees died at Lhandeilo vawr, and was buried honorablie besides his father at S. Dauids. Then Maelgon Vachan sonne to Maelgon ap Rees finished the castell of Trefilan which his fa∣ther had begon. Matt. Paris. page. 518.The Earle Marshall vnderstanding that the bishop of Winchester had with a thousand markes of monie wonne from him to the kings part the Earles of Chester and Lin∣colne, made a firme league with Lhewelyn prince of Wales, and other nobles of that countrie, swearing a∣mong themselues, that none of them should grow to anie agreement with the king without his confederats. Where∣vpon the king sent to Flanders and other countries beyond the sea for aid: to whom Baldwyn Earle of Gysnes came with a great armie to Glocester. Also manie Poictouins came to him by the procurement of the said bishop, who was that countrieman himselfe. 1231In the yeare of Christ 1234. Iohn lord Monu∣metensis a noble warrior, captaine of the kings ar∣mie, being made Warden of the Marches of Wales, leuied a power, and came against the Earle Mar∣shall and the Welshmen: but when he had once entred Wales he came backe in post, leauing his men for the most part slaine and taken behind him. Matt. Paris. pag. 526. Polydorus virg. lib. 16.This historie is laid downe by Matthew Paris after this manner. About the feast of S. Iohn Baptist, Iohn of Mon∣mouth a noble and expert warrior, who was with the king in his warres in Wales, gathered a great armie, meaning to inuade the Earle Marshall at vnawares; but he being certified of the same, hid himselfe in a certaine wood, by the
which laie the waie of his enimies,Fallere fal∣lentem non est fraus. intending to deceiue them, who went about to serue him after the same sort. When the enimies therfore came to the place where the am∣bush was, the Earle Marshals armie gaue a great shout, and so set vpon their enimies being vnprouided, and sud∣denlie put them all to flight, slaieng an infinite number of them aswell Poictouins, as other. Iohn of Monmouth him∣selfe escaped by flight, whose countrie with the villages, buildings, and all that he had therein the Earle Marshall did spoile and destroie with fire and sword, and left him no∣thing at all, and then returned with rich spoiles. Afterward,Matt. Paris. pag. 527. in the wéeke after the Epiphanie, Lhewelyn prince of Wales togither with the Earle Marshall ioining their powers, and entring the kings land, destroied all with fire and sword, from the confines of Wales vnto the towne of Salop, which they also tooke, and burnt a great part thereof, and then returned with great spoiles. The king of England, being all this while with the bishop of Winchester at Glocester, little regarding warre, who for want of suffi∣cient strength for the warre, durst not méete his enimies in the field, but being ashamed of the matter, departed to∣wards Winchester, leauing the Marches to be destroied by the enimies, as anie man might sée. The same yeare Richard Earle of Penbrooke,Matt. Paris. pag. 533. by the counsell of Geffrey de Marisco went with an ar∣mie to Ireland, where he was slaine in fight by treason of his owne men, after whom his brother Gilbert inherited his lands. In that time the king sent the Archbishop of Canturburie,Matt. Paris, page. 540. with the bishops of Rochester and Chester, to intreate with prince Lhewelyn for to make peace with the king, but they returned with∣out doing of anie good. Matt. Paris.Matthew Paris saith this. The king at this time going to méet Edmond Archbishop of Canturburie, and the other Bi∣shops
which he had sent to conclude a peace with Lhewe∣lyn prince of Wales, came to Woodstocke, where being cer∣tified of the death of the Earle Marshall (by certeine mes∣sengers which came from Ireland) he fell into great wée∣ping and sorrowe for the death of so valiant a knight: af∣firming withall, that he had not least his péere behind him in the realme.A peace concluded betwixt Lhewelyn and king Henrie. From thence he went to Glocester, where the said Archbishop and bishops comming to him, declared the treatie and forme of peace taken betwéene him and the said Lhewelyn: yet neuerthelesse vpon this condition, that the noble men of England, which were confederates with the said Lhewelyn, and by euill counsell were exiled, should first be reconciled to the king, whereby the said peace might be more firme and stable. Moreouer the Archbishop said, that with much a doo they had brought the matter to that passe, adding sometimes threatnings on the kings behalfe with his clergie, to the which threatnings the said Lhewelyn is reported to haue answered, that he more regarded the kings almes-déeds, and his godlie behauiour, than he did feare his warre with all his clergie.The barons called home and pardoned. Then the king (who wi∣shed peace with all his heart) caused by his letters all the nobles that were outlawed, to be called againe vnto him to Glocester, the sundaie before the Ascension daie next fol∣lowing, to haue their pardons, and to receiue their inheri∣tance which the king had seased into his owne hands. Then Hubert de Burgh Earle of Kent came to the king and ob∣teined his fauour, whom the king reuerentlie imbrased and kissed. Prince Lhewelyn also this yeare set Gruffyth his sonne at libertie, whom he had kept in prison sixe yeares for his disobedience. At the same time died Robert Fitzwater, who as Matthew Paris saith,H. Lhoyd. Matt. Paris. had a stone about his necke of such vertue, that he could not die as long as it was there. Also Roger de So∣merie died; and Cadwalhon ap Maelgon of Melie∣nyth. The yeare after died Owen sonne to Gruffyth
ap Rees, being a noble Gentleman, and verie well beloued, and was buried by his brother Rees at Stratflur. King Henrie about this time tooke to wife the second daughter of the Earle of Prouince called Elianor. And Frederike the Emperour ma∣ried Isabel sister to king Henrie. The yeare after, Madoc the sonne of Gruffyth Maylor lord of the lower Powys or Bromfield, Chirke, and Yale, a man verie iust and mercifull, died and was buried ho∣nourablie at the abbie of Lhan Egwest, or Vale Crucis, which he had built, and leaft behind him a sonne named Gruffyth to inherit his lands. Also Owen ap Meredyth ap Rotpert of Cydewen depar∣ted out of this world. The same yeare Gilbert Erle of Penbrooke by treason got the castell of Morgan ap Howel, called Marchen, and fortified it verie strong for feare of the Prince. Then the Earles of Cornewall and Penbrooke tooke the crosse.1237 The next spring died Ione daughter to king Iohn, prin∣cesse of Wales, and was buried vpon the sea shoare within the Ile of Anglesey, at Lhanuaes, as hir pleasure was, where the Prince did build a house of barefoote Friers ouer hir graue. Then also died Iohn Scot Erle of Chester without issue, therefore the king seased that Earldome to his owne hands.
Because the Earles of Chester were men of great possessions in Wales, and had much warre with the princes of Northwales, I thinke it conuenient for the better vnderstanding of this historie, to laie downe a briefe Catalog of the descents of the same Earles in or∣der, from the conquest to this Iohn Scot which was the last of them. HVgh Lupus the sonne of Richard Earle of Au∣ranges  Uicount of Abonica, and of Margaret the daugh∣ter of Harlowine a noble man in Normandie, who maried Ar∣let the daughter of a burgesse in Falois, which was also mother to William Conquerour, came to England with the said Con∣querour, and was by him created Erle of Chester, and sword∣bearer of England, with these words: Habendum & tenen∣dum dictum comitatum Caestriae sibi & haeredibus suis, ita liberè ad gladium sicut ipse rex totam tenebat Angliam ad coronam; that is, To haue and to hold the said countie of Chester to him and his heires by right of the sword, so fréelie as the king held the realme of England in the right of the crowne. Hugh being established in the possession of the Earl∣dome, with most large priuiledges and fréedoms, ordained vn∣der him (for the better gouernment of the said countie) foure Barons,Foure barons to wit: The first,Halton. Nigell or Neal his coosen Baron of Halton, Constable and Marshall of Chester, by condition of seruice to lead the Uauntgard of the Earles armie when he should make anie iournie into Wales; so as the said Baron should be the formost in marching into the enimies countrie, and the last in comming backe: of him the Lacyes Earles of Lincolne descended. The second,Nantwich. Piers Malebanke Baron of Nantwich. The Third,Malpas. Eustace Baron of Malpas. The fourth, Warren Vernoun Baron of Shipbrooke.Shipbroke. This Hugh Lupus conuerted the church of S. Werburgh to an Abbeie: and di∣ed An 1102. after he had ruled that Earldome fourtie years leauing issue behind him Richard, Robert Abbot of Burie, and
Otuell tutor to the children of king Henrie the first. Richard Lupus the sonne of Hugh Lupus, being the second  Earle of Chester after the Conquest, was but seuen yeare old when he was Earle, he maried Mawd the daughter of Ste∣phen Earle of Bloys Charters and Champaigne, being the si∣ster of king Stephen; he with his brother Otuell after he had béen Earle of Chester xvij. yeares was drowned at Godwin∣sands comming from Normandie with the children of king Henrie the first, in the yeare of Christ. 1120. Randulph Meschines alias de Bohun, the sonne of Iohn de  Bohun, and of Margaret the sister of Hugh Lupus, succéeded Richard in the Earledome of Chester as coosen & next heire of blood to him, being the third erle of Chester after the conquest: he maried Mawd the daughter of Aubrey de Vere Earle of Gisnes, by whom he had issue Randulph surnamed Vernounes (bicause he was borne at Vernoune castell) and died An. 1130. after that he had béene Earle about eight yeares. Randulph Bohun his sonne succéeded his father being the  fourth Earle of Chester after the Conquest, who maried Alicia the daughter of Robert Earle of Glocester base sonne to king Henrie the first, by whom he had issue Hugh Cyuelioc (so called of that countrie of Powys wherein he was borne) and died An. 1158. When he had béene Earle nine and twentie yeares. Hugh Bohun alias Keuelock or rather Cyuelioc, being the  fift Earle of Chester after the Conquest, maried Beatrice the daughter of Richard Lucie lord chiefe Iustice of England, by whom he had issue Randulph, and foure daughters; Mawd ma∣ried to Dauid Earle of Anguis and Huntington lord of Gallo∣way: Mabill maried to William Daubney Earle of Arundell: Agnes maried to William Ferrers Erle of Derby, and Hawys maried to Robert Quincy a Baron of great honor, who was in hir right after hir brothers death Earle of Lincolne, and after him she was maried to sir Warren Bostock. This Hugh was Earle of Chester 28. yeares, & died about the yeare 1182. Randulph Bohun alias Blandeuill, so called, bicause he was  borne in Powys, in a towne named Album monasterium, suc∣céded
his father being the sixt Earle of Chester after the Conquest: who was also Earle of Lincolne, as coosen and next heire vnto William Romare Earle of Lincolne, the se∣cond brother of Randulph Meschines the third Earle of Che∣ster after the Conquest. He was thrice maried, first to Con∣stance the daughter and heire of Conan Erle of Brytaine and Richmond, being the widow of Geffrey the third son of king Henrie the second, and the mother of Arthur Erle of Brytaine: from whom afterward he was diuorsed, and then maried a ladie named Clemence daughter to the Earle Ferrers: after whose decease he tooke to his third wife Margaret daughter to Humfrey de Bohun Earle of Hereford, Essex, and Constable of England. Nuerthelesse he neuer had issue by anie of those his wiues, and therefore the Earledome of Chester and his lands in Northwales after his death descended to Iohn surna∣med Scot, his sister Mawdes sonne by Dauid Earle of Anguis and Huntington. The manour of Barrow with 500. pound lands came to Mabill: the Earldome of Lincolne to Hawyse: the castell and manour of Chartley and (as I thinke) his pos∣sessions in Powys to Agnes. This Randulph atchieued manie enterprises against Lhewelyn prince of Wales, but one time méeting with the said Prince, and being too weake to encoun∣ter with him, he was driuen to retire backe to the castell of Ruthlan, wherein the said Prince besieged him: wherevpon he was faine to send to Roger Lacie Constable of Chester, to come to his succors in that extremitie. Lacie calling his fréends vnto him, requested them to make as manie men as they could, and to go with him, to deliuer the Earle out of the danger of his enimies: at whose request Ralph Dutton his son in law, being a lustie youth, assembled togither all the plaiers, musicians, and merie companions within the citie (being then the Faire time) and came to the Constable, who forthwith went to Ruthlan, raised the siege, and deliuered the Earle from danger. In recompense of which seruice, the Earle gaue vnto his Constable diuerse fréedoms and priuiledges, and granted vnto the said Dutton the ruling and ordering of all
the plaiers and musicians within that countie, which his heire enioieth euen to this daie. This Earle builded the castels of Charteley and Beeston, & the abbie of Dalacrosse. He died about the yeare of Christ 1232. when he had béene Earle 51. yeares. Iohn Scot was in the right of Mawd his mother the el∣dest  sister, and one of the heires of Randulph Blandeuile, the seuenth Earle of Chester, he had great warres with Lhewe∣lyn ap Iorwerth prince of Wales; but in the end peace being made betwixt them, the Earle for further confirmation of the same, maried Iane the Princes daughter, neuerthelesse he di∣ed without issue, leauing foure sisters his heires. Margaret maried to Alan de Galawey, by whom she had a daughter na∣med Derngold, the mother of Iohn Baliol king of Scotland: Isabel maried to Robert Breux: Mawd, who died without is∣sue, and Alicia maried to Henrie Hastings; to the which sisters the king gaue other lands, and tooke the said Earldome into his owne hands, Quia noluit tam praeclaram dominatio∣nem diuidi inter colos. In the yeare 1237.1237 Lhewelyn prince of Wales, called all the Lords and Barons of Wales before him to Stratflur, and there euerie one of them swore to be faithfull subiects, and did homage to Dauid Lhewelyns sonne. Matt. Paris. page. 584. Matt. West. page. 154.At this time Lhewelyn prince of Wales, being impotent (by reason of a palsie which had taken him) and sore vexed and disquieted by his sonne Gruffyth, sent Ambassadors to the king, to signifie vnto him, that for as much as his yeares were now welnigh spent, he was desirous to lead the rest of his daies in peace and quietnes: and therefore purposed now to submit himselfe to the gouernment and protection of the king of England, and that he would hold his lands of him: promising withall, that when soeuer the king should stand in néed of his aid, he would be readie to helpe him with men and monie, to the vttermost of his power. There were sent as mediators in this behalfe, the bishops of Here∣ford & Chester, who trauelled about the same, with the good
liking of many of the nobles of Wales, although some open∣lie gainsaid them, & in no case would accept anie such peace. Matt. Paris, page. 584.Then the said Dauid tooke from his brother Gruffyth, Arustly, Ceri, Cyuelioc, Mowthwy, Moch∣nant, and Caereneon,H. Lhoyd. Matth. West. page. 154. and let him onelie enioy the Cantref of Lhyyn. This Gruffyth was the elder brother and a lustie gentleman, but yet base borne. The summer folowing, the Earle of Cornwale, and William de longa Spata the yoonger tooke their viage towards the holie land, & Simon de Monte∣forti fled from France to England, to whom the king gaue the Stewardship of England, with the Erle∣dome of Leicester.Matt. Paris. pag 703. Matt. West. page. 154. This time Dauid sonne to prince Lhewelyn did contrarie to his oth, take his bro∣ther Gruffyth (being in safeconduct with the bi∣shop of Bangor) vpon whose promise he was con∣tent to speake with his brother, and imprisoned him in the castell of Crickieth. The yeare after Christs incarnation 1240.1240 Lhewelyn ap Iorwerth the most valiant and noble prince, which brought all Wales to his subiection, and had so often put his enimies to flight, and defended his countrie, enlarging the meares thereof further than they had beene manie yeares before, passed out of this transitorie life, and was honorablie buried at the Abbeie of Conwey, after he had gouerned Wales well and worthilie fiftie and sixe yeares. This prince left behind him one sonne called Dauid be∣gotten vpon his wife Ione daughter to king Iohn of England, by whom also he had a daughter called Gladys maried to six Ralph Mortimer. Also he had another sonne called Gruffyth, whom his bro∣ther wrongfullie kept in close prison as long as he liued, as shalbe hereafter declared.
Dauid ap Lhewelyn. Dauid the sonne of Lhewelyn. DAuid to whom al the Barons in Wales had made an oth of fideli∣tie, tooke the gouernment of Wales after his father, who within a moneth af∣ter came to the king to Glocester, and did him ho∣mage for the principalitie of Wales, and also all the Barons of Wales did the king homage for their lands. But forthwith the Englishmen began to trouble the Welshmen after their accustomed vse, for Gilbert Marshall came with an armie and fortified the castell of Aberteiui. At this time Earle Warren died. The yeare ensuing the king came with a great armie to Wales, and manie noble
men yeelded to him, bicause they hated Dauid, be∣traier of his brother and accursed of the Pope. Matt. Paris. pag. 764.When Richard bishop of Bangor sawe that Dauid dealt so hardlie with his brother Gruffyth, contrarie to his faithfull promise made vnto the said bishop, he excommunicated him, and then withdrawing himselfe out of Wales, made a grée∣uous complaint to the king vpon Dauid, most instantlie re∣questing the king to deliuer Gruffyth out of prison, least the rumor of that fact being notified in the court of Rome, and o∣ther countries out of the realme, should be some staine of the kings honor, if he should not withstand such outragious and wilfull dealings. The king therefore greatlie blaming Dauid his nephue for the abusing of his brother in such sort as he did: requested him with most pithie persuasions to set his brother at libertie, as well for the sauing of his owne credit and fame, as also for the auoiding of the said excommunication, and o∣ther imminent dangers which might ensue of that matter. To the which request of the king, Dauid answered plainelie that he would not deliuer his brother out of prison: affirming constantlie, that if his brother were inlarged, the countrie of Wales would be in great disquietnes. Whereof when Gruffyth was certified, he sendeth priuilie to the king, promising that if he would forceablie deliuer him out of his brothers prison, he would hold his lands of him, and paie him two hundereth markes yearelie: offering not onelie to be sworne vpon this, and to deliuer pledges for performance thereof, but also to aid the king to bring the rest of the Welshmen to his subiection. Further, Gruffyth Lord of Bromfield did assure the king of aid, if he would come to Wales with an armie, to chastise Da∣uid for his falsehood and iniurie vsed towards his brother. Moreouer, the bishop of Bangor (being more desirous to be re∣uenged vpon Dauid in an other mans matter, than carefull to feed his flocke in discharge of his owne dutie) sent to Rome, and there followed the matter so hard, that the Pope excom∣municated Dauid: which excommunication was denounced accordinglie, and his land interdicted. Now king Henrie be∣ing
allured with these promises on Gruffyths behalfe, leauied a puisant armie to go into Wales; straightlie commanding by his writs all such as ought him seruice in time of warre, to giue their attendance vpon him readie with horse and armor at Glocester the first daie of August folowing, to set forward against his enimies. Whither the king came at the daie ap∣pointed, and from thence went to Salop, and remained there fiftéene daies. During the kings abode at Salop,Matt. Paris. page, 841. diuers noble men were great suters vnto him in the behalfe of Gruffyth, as Ralph lord Mortimer of Wigmore, Walter Clifford, Roger de Mon∣te Alto steward of Chester, Maelgon the sonne of Maelgon, Meredyth ap Rotpert lord of Cydewen, Gruffyth ap Madoc lord of Bromfield, Howel and Meredyth the sonnes of Conan ap Owen Gwyneth, and Gruffyth the sonne of Gwenwynwyn lord of Powys. These wrought so with the king, that there was a league concluded betwéene him and Senena the wife of the said Gruffyth, in the behalfe of hir husband lieng then in his brothers prison, according to the articles comprised in this charter folowing. Conuenit inter dominum Henricum tertium regem An∣glorum illustrem ex vna parte,Articles a∣greed vpon betweene the king, & the wife of Gruffyth. & Senenam vxorem Gryffini, filij Leolini, quondàm principis Northwalliae, quem Dauid frater eius tenet carceri mancipatum, cum Owino filio suo, nomine eiusdem Gryffini ex altera, &c. Articles of agreement betweene Henrie the third of that name, king of England of the one partie, and Senena the wife of Gruffyth, the sonne of Lhewelyn, sometimes Prince of Northwales, whom Dauid his brother deteineth in prison, with Owen his sonne, in the name of the said Gruff∣yth of the other partie. IN primis, the said Senena vndertaketh, that the said Gruffyth hir husband will giue vnto the king sixe hundreth markes, vpon condition that the king doo cause the said Gruffyth and
Owen his sonne to be deliuered from the prison wherein they are kept, and will stand to the iudgement of the kings court, whether by law he ought to be imprisoned or no. Item the said Gruffyth and his heires will stand to the iudgement of the kings court, for and concerning that por∣tion of the inheritance of the said Lhewelyn his father, which of right ought to appertaine vnto him. Item the said Senena vndertaketh for the said Gruffyth and his heires, that the said Gruffyth and his heirs shall yéeld and paie yearelie to the king for the same lands, the summe of thrée hundreth markes. Whereof the first third part to be paid in monie, the second in kine, and the third in horses, by the estimation of indifferent men, and the same to be paid yeare∣lie at Michaelmas and Easter by euen portions, by the hands of the Shirife of the countie of Salop for the time being. Item the said Senena vndertaketh further for the said Gruf∣fyth and his heires, that they and euerie of them shall obserue the peace against the said Dauid, and suffer him quietlie to en∣ioy such portion of his fathers inheritance as to him shall be found to be due. Item the said Senena doth further vndertake for the said Gruffyth hir husband and his heires, that in case anie Welsh∣man hereafter shall happen to rebell against the king, they at their owne costes and charges shall compell the said offender to make satisfaction to the king for his disobedience. Item for the performance of the premisses, the said Senena will deliuer vnto the lord the king, Dauid and Roderike hir sonnes for pledges, with prouiso that if the said Gruffyth and Owen or either of them shall happen to die before their deliue∣rie out of the said prison, it shall be lawfull for the said Senena to haue one of hir sonnes released, the other remaining with the king for pledge. Item the said Senena hath sworne vpon the holie Euan∣gelist, that the said Gruffyth hir husband and his heires, and e∣uerie of them shall accomplish and performe all the premisses on their behalfe; & further vndertaketh that the said Gruffyth
hir husband, vpon his deliuerie out of prison, shall take the same oth. Item the said Senena in the name of the said Gruffyth hir  husband, submitteth hir selfe concerning the obseruation of the premisses vnto the iurisdiction of the reuerend fathers the bishops of Hereford and Lichfield, so that the said bishops or either of them at the kings request shall compell the said Gruf∣fyth and his heires to obserue all and singular the premisses on their behalfe, by sentence of excommunication vpon their persons, and interdiction vpon their lands. Lastlie, the said Senena both vndertake and promise (bona  fide) to sée and procure the full performance of all the pre∣misses, and that the said Gruffyth hir husband and his heires shall allow and performe the same, and thereof shall deliuer his instrument in writing to the king in forme aforesaid. To this charter both parties put their seales, Gruffyth and Senena to that part which remained with the king, and the king to that part which remained with Senena. Moreouer, for the sure performance of these articles, the said Senena, for and in the name of hir husband, put in for pledges the aforenamed noble men, to wit, Ralph Mortimer, Walter Clifford, Roger de monte alto, &c. Who bound themselues by their seuerall writings obligatorie to the king, in maner and forme following. Omnibus hoc scriptum visuris Rogerus de monte alto Senescallus Cestriae Salutem: Sciatis quòd ego me constitui plegium, &c. TO all and singular to whome this writing shall come, Roger de monte alto Steward of Chester sendeth greeting: Know yee that I haue constituted my selfe pledge for Senena the wife of
Gruffyth the sonne of Lhewelyn, sometimes prince of Northwales, and haue vndertaken for hir to our souereigne lord Henrie king of England, that the said Senena shall accomplish and performe all and singular those couenants and articles, agreed vpon betweene our said souereigne Lord and the said Senena, for and concerning the deliuerance of the said Gruffyth hir husband and Owen his son out of the prison of Dauid his brother, & the portion of inheritance due vnto the said Gruffyth, which the said Dauid keepeth from him by force. In witnesse whereof to this present writing I haue put my seale, Dated at Salop, the mundaie before the feast of the Assumption of the blessed virgin Marie, in the 25. yeare of the reigne of the said King. The like charters were made by euerie one of the other no∣ble men pledges, who bound themselues with the like words. Further, such of the said lords which fauored Gruffyths cause, as were out among themselues were now made fréends, as Morgan ap Howel lord of Kery, & Sir Ralph Mortimer which before were at variance.Matt. Paris. page. 842. Wherevpon Dauid being driuen to extremities, hauing most of the nobilities of Wales against him:Dauid in great per∣plexitie be∣ing ouer∣matched. especiallie Gruffyth ap Madoc lord of Bromfield, fauored him not, who being a man of great wisedome and power was entirelie loued of the king. Againe, the sentence of ex∣communication & the interdiction of his land did not a little vexe him. But the kings presence with so puisant an armie did so moue his spirits, that he could not be quiet, till he had sent to the king to desire peace, with this submissiō folowing.
The Charter of the Articles of Dauids submission to the King. Omnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos praesentes literae peruenerint Dauid filius Leolini salutem. Sciatis quòd concessi domino meo Henrico regi Angliae illustri, &c. TO all Christian people to whome these  present letters shall come, Dauid the sonne of Lhewelyn sendeth gréeting. Know yée that I haue granted and promised to deliuer vnto the lord Henrie the noble king of England, Gruffyth my brother with his sonne and heire whom I kéepe in prison, and all other prisoners, who by occasion of the said Gruffyth lie in durance. Item I shall stand to the iudgement of the kings court, aswell in that case, whether the said Gruffyth ought to be detai∣ned prisoner or no, as also for and concerning the part of the inheritance of the said Lhewelyn my father, claimed by the said Gruffyth according to the custome of Wales: so that the peace be maintained betwéene me and the said Gruffyth. Item I and the said Gruffyth, and either of vs shall hold  our portions of land, of our said soueraigne Lord the king in Capite, acknowledging him chiefe lord thereof. Item I shall restore vnto Roger de monte alto Steward  of Chester, his land of Montalt or Mould, with the appurte∣nances. Item I shall likewise restore to all other Barons, all such  lands, lordships and castels, as were taken from them si∣thence the beginning of the wars betwéene the lord Iohn king of England, and the said Lhewelyn prince of Wales my fa∣ther, sauing the right of all couenants and grants by writing, to be reserued vnto the iudgement and determination of the kings court. Item I shall giue and restore vnto our souereigne lord
the king all his charges in this present vsage laid out. Item I shall make satisfaction for all damages and iniu∣ries doone by me, or anie of my subiects vnto the king or his, according to the consideration of the kings court, and shall de∣liuer such as shalbe malefactors in that behalfe. Item I shall restore vnto the said lord the king all the homa∣ges, which the late king Iohn his father had, & which the said lord the king of right ought to haue, especiallie of all the noble men of Wales: and if the king shall set at libertie anie of his cap∣tiues, the possessions of that man shall remaine to the king. Item the land of Elsiner with the appurtenances shall re∣maine to the lord the king and his heires for euer. Item I shall not receiue or suffer to be receiued within my countrie of Wales, anie of the subiects of England, out∣lawed or banished by the said lord the king, or his barons of Mercia. Item for confirmation and performance of all and singu∣lar the premisses on my behalfe, I shall prouide by bonds and pledges, and by all other waies and meanes as the said lord the king shall award, and will accomplish the commande∣ment of the said king, and will obeie his lawes. In witnesse whereof to this present writing I haue put my seale: Dated at Alnet by the riuer of Elwey, in the feast of the decollation of S. Iohn Baptist, in the 25. yeare of the reigne of the said king. For the obseruations of these articles, the said prince Da∣uid and Ednyuet Vachan were sworne. Also the said prince Dauid submitted himselfe to the iurisdiction of the Archbishop of Canturburie, and of the bishops of London, Hereford, and Couentrie, for the time being. That all, or one of them whome the king shall appoint, may excommunicate him, and inter∣dict his land vpon breach of anie the said articles. And there∣vpon he procured the bishops of S. Bangor, and S. Asaph to make their charters to the lord the king, whereby they granted to execute and denounce all sentences, aswell of excommuni∣cation as of interdiction sent from the foresaid Archbishop,
bishops or anie of them. The said Dauid also sent priuilie to the king, to desire him that he would suffer him being his nephue, and the lawfull heire of Lhewelyn his father, to enioy the principalitie of Wales rather than Gruffyth, which was but a bastard, and no kinne vnto the king. Giuing him withall to vnderstand, that in case he did set Gruffyth at libertie, he should be sure to haue the warre renewed. Wherevpon the king knowing these things to be true, and vnderstanding also that Gruffyth was a valiant stout man, and had manie fréends and fauorers of his cause, inclined rather to assent vnto Dauids request than otherwise to be in danger of further troubles, and therefore willinglie granted the same. Shortlie after Dauid sendeth his brother Gruffyth vnto the king, and other pledges for himselfe, for performance of the said articles, which the king sent forthwith to the towre of Lon∣don, there to be safelie kept, allowing to Gruffyth a noble a daie for his finding.Man. Paris. page. 765. And within few daies after Michaelmas, prince Dauid came to the kings court and did his homage, and swore fealtie, who for so dooing, & in that he was the kings nephue, was sent home againe in peace. When Gruffyth saw how althings went, & that he was not like to be set at libertie, he began to deuise waies and meanes to escape out of prison. Wherefore deceiuing the watch one night, he made a long line of hangings,Matt. Paris. page. 830. couerings, and shéetes, and hauing gotten out at a window, let downe himselfe by the same from the toppe of the towre: but by reason that he was a mightie per∣sonage and full of flesh, the line brake with the weight of his bodie, and so falling downe headlong of a great height, his necke and head was driuen into his bodie with the fall: whose miserable carcase being found the morowe after, was a piti∣full sight to the beholders. The king being certified thereof, commanded Gruffyths sonne to be better looked vnto, and pu∣nished the officers for their negligence. Then the king fortified the castell of Dyserth in Flyntshire. Also the king gaue to Gruffyth sonne to
Gwenwynwyn lord of Powys his inheritance: and to the sonnes of Conan ap Owen Gwyneth their lands in Merionyth. Then shortlie after, Gilbert Marshall Earle of Penbrooke was slaine by misfor∣tune fighting at the Turnay at Hereford. The bi∣shop of Bangor came to the court to sue for the de∣liuerance of Gruffyth sonne to prince Lhewelyn, but the king knowing him to be a man of great cou∣rage, would in no wise grant him libertie. The yeare after, king Henrie went to France with an armie to succour Hugh de Brune his fa∣ther in lawe, meaning also to recouer some of that which his father had lost: but all in vaine, for the people fauoured the French king, therfore hauing lost a great number of his men, amongst whom was Gilbert de Clare, he returned home againe. Maelgon Vachan about this time fortified the ca∣stel of Garthgrugyn, Iohn de Mynoc also fortified the castell of Buelht, & Roger Mortimer the castell of Me∣lyenyth. The summer folowing, the king began to trouble the Welshmen verie sore, and to take their lands by force without iust title or rightfull cause. This yeare died Hugh de Albineto Earle of Arun∣dell, whose inheritance was diuided betwixt his foure sisters. Whereof Isabel the eldest had mari∣ed Iohn Fitzalan lord of Oswalstree and Clun, whose sonne named also Iohn Fitzalan was in the right of the said Isabel his mother created Earle of the Earledome of Arundell, in the which house it re∣mained to our time. Within a while after, Rees Mechylh sonne to Rees Gryc of Southwales died. This yeare prince Dauid sent to Rome to com∣plaine to the Pope, how the king of England com∣pelled him vniustlie to hold his lands of him.
Therefore the Pope sent to the abbots of Aber∣conwy and Cymer a commission to enquire of this matter. Records, An. 29. Henrie. 3.After the death of Gruffyth, king Henrie in the 29. yeare of his reigne (as appeareth by the records in the towre) intitu∣led his eldest sonne Edward to the principalitie of Wales: which thing when Dauid vnderstood, he put himselfe in ar∣mour to defend his inheritance and right,Matt. Paris. pag. 880. and knowing himselfe not able to withstand the kings force, he sent to Rome with great gifts to the Pope, complaining as is here mentioned; and declaring withall, that Lhewelyn his father had least him and the principalitie of Wales vn∣der the protection of the church of Rome. His sute therefore to the Pope was, that he would accept of the same, and that Dauid and his heires might hold it of the church of Rome, yéelding and paieng yearelie out of the same the summe of fiue hundreth markes, for paiment of which summe he bound himselfe and his successours by solemne oth and writing executed accordinglie. Which offer Pope Innocentius (ex super abundanti gratia) accepted: Quia ec∣clesia Romana nunquam claudit gremium talia offerentibus, and therevpon granted his letters of commission to the abbots aforesaid, to release Dauid from his oth of allegi∣ance to the king of England, and to inquire of the whole e∣state of the matter, and to certifie him of the same. These commissioners taking vpon them the authoritie, directed their Mandat to the king of England, commanding him to appeare before them at Creythyn in the church of Lhan∣gustenyn in the vigil of S. Agnes next comming, to an∣swer in the premisses. Wherevpon the king laughing at the presumption of these abbots, being greatlie offended with the Pope for his vnsatiable gréedines, Rom. Curiae. sent to Rome, and with greater summes of monie quieted all things a∣gaine: so that the Pope made his gaine at both hands. Sée Matthew Paris, page. 840. Then prince Dauid gathered all his strength
to be reuenged of the wrongs which the Erles of Clare and Hereford, with Iohn de Monmouth, and Roger de Monte Alto, and other Marchers did to his people. Whom all the lords in Wales obeied, and tooke for their souereigne, sauing Gruffyth son to Gwenwynwyn and Morgan ap Howel: which two shortlie were compelled to obey also. Wherefore the prince entred the land of March; spoiling and destroieng a great part thereof, with whome the said Earles fought diuerse times: and sometimes the one and sometimes the other had the uictorie. The yeare ensuing the Marchers and the Welsh∣men met,Matt. Paris. page. 884. not far from Mountgomery where was a cruell fight, and 300. of the Welshmen slaine, and a great number of Englishmen, among whome there was slaine a noble knight called Hubert Fitz∣matthew. Wherevpon the king being wearie of these domesticall troubles,Matt. Paris. page, 891. gathered a huge armie of Englishmen and Gascoynes, and entred North∣wales, intending to destroie the countrie: but the Prince met with his people in a straict, & fought with them, and put them to flight. There the king lost a great number of his most worthie soldiours and nobilitie,Matt. Paris. pag. 927. & the most part of all his Gascoynes, therefore seeing he cold doo no good, he sent for the Irishmen, which landed at the Ile of Môn or Angle∣sey, and spoiled a great part thereof, till the inha∣bitants of the Ile gathered themselues together and met with them, being loden with spoile, whom they chased to their ships: then the king manned and victualed his castels, and returned to England. Of this viage a certeine noble man, being then in the kings campe, wrote thus to his fréends about the end of September, 1245.
The king with his armie lieth at Gannock,Matt. Paris. pag. 924. fortifieng of that strong castell, & we lie in our tents thereby, watching, fasting, praieng, & fréezing with cold: we watch for feare of the Welshmen, who are woont to inuade and come vpon vs in the night time. We fast for want of meat, for the halfpe∣nie loafe is woorth fiue pence. We praie to God to send vs home againe spéedilie, wée starue for cold wanting our winter garments, and hauing no more but a thin linnen cloath betwixt vs and the wind. There is an arme of the sea vnder the castell where we lie, whereto the tide commeth, and manie ships come vp the hauen thither, which bring victuals to the campe from Ireland and Chester. This arme of the sea lieth betwixt vs and Snowdon, where the Welsh∣men abide now, and is about a slight shoote ouer when the tide is in. There came to the mouth of that hauen a cer∣teine ship from Ireland with victuals to be sold, vpon mon∣daie before Michaelinas daie, which being negligentlie loo∣ked vnto, was set on drie ground at the low ebbe on the further side of the water, ouer against the castell: which thing when the Welshmen saw, they came downe from the hilles and laid siege to the ship being now vpon drie ground: wherevpon we on the other side beholding the same,The lords of Brom∣field and Powys held with the king in all these wars. sent ouer by boates thrée hundreth Welshmen of the borders of Cheshire and Shropshire, with certeine archers and armed men to the rescue of the said ship. Then the Welshmen with∣drew themselues to their accustomed places in the rockes and woods, whom our men followed as far as two miles, being a foote, bicause they brought no horsses ouer with them, and slew manie of them. But our men in their re∣turne being ouergréedie and couetous, spoiled the abbey of Aberconwey, and burned all the houses of offices belong∣ing to the same. Which doings caused the Welshmen to come togither, who like desperate men set vpon our soldi∣ours being loden with spoiles, and slew a great number of them, following the rest to the waterside, of whom some gat to the boates and so escaped, and some cast themselues into
the water, and were drowned, and such as they tooke they hanged or headed euerie one. In this conflict we lost ma∣nie of our men, speciallie of those that were vnder the con∣duct of Richard Earle of Cornewal, as Sir Alan Buscell, Sir Adam de Maio, Sir Geffrey Estuemy, and one Ra∣mond a Gascoine, whom the king greatlie fansied, and di∣uers other, beside a hundreth of common soldiours. In the meane time Sir Walter Bisset worthilie defended the said ship, vntill the tide came, and then came awaie with the same manfullie, wherein there were thréescore tunnes of wine beside other prouision, &c. Many other things are con∣teined in the said writing, of the hard shifts that were made in the kings campe for victuals, and the great dearth of all things that were to be eaten. This yeare died Walter Marshall Earle of Pen∣brooke and Anselme his brother without issue, whose inheritance descended to their fiue sisters. To the intent the reader may vnderstand to whom the lands and lordships in Wales of the Earle Marshall and Penbrooke came: I thought it conuenient here so laie downe how these fiue sisters were bestowed. 1 Ione the eldest maried Warren Mountchensey, whose daughter and heire named also Ione was maried to Wil∣liam de Valence, halfe brother to king Henrie the third, who in hir right was Earle of Penbrooke, whose two daughters (after the death of Aymēr de Valence) were his heires, to wit: Isabel maried vnto Iohn lord Hastings and Aberge∣uenny, whose daughter named Elizabeth maried Reynold lord Gray of Ruthyn, to the which familie afterwards the in∣heritance fell: and Ione married to Iohn lord Comyn, who had issue Elizabeth maried to Richard lord Talbot: and Ione maried to Dauid Earle of Athell. 2 Mawd the second daughter of the Earle Marshall and Penbrooke was maried to Hugh Bygod Earle of North∣folke, father of Ralph Bygod, whose daughter and heire Isa∣bel
was maried to Sir Gilbert Lacy, who had issue Marge∣rie and Mawd his daughters and heires: Margerie ma∣ried to Iohn L. Verdon, of whom the Earle of Shrewesburie and the Earle of Essex are descended. Mawd maried Gef∣frey Geniuill father to Peter Geniuill, whose daughter and heire was maried to Roger Mortimer lord of Wigmor, and the first Earle of March. 3 Isabel the third daughter of the Earle Marshall & Pen∣brooke was maried to Gilbert de Clare Earle of Gloce∣ster, of whose issue mention is made before pag. 129. and after his death she was maried to Richard Earle of Corn∣wal, and king of the Romanes. 4 Sibylla the fourth daughter was maried to VVilliam Ferrers Earle of Ferrers and Derby. 5 Eua the fift daughter was maried to VVilliam Bruse, lord Bruse of Gower. Likewise manie nobles died without issue male at this time,Matt. Paris. page. 930. as the Earle of Arundell, the Earle of Chester, the Earle of Essex, the Earle of Hunting∣ton, and diuerse others. In the beginning of the yeare 1246.1246. Dauid prince of VVales,Matt. Paris. pag. 933. after he had gotten the loue of his subiects, and atchieued manie notable victo∣ries, passed out of this life, and was buried at Conwey by his father, after he had ruled Wales fiue yeares, leauing no issue of his bodie, to the great discomfort of the land.
Lhewelyn ap Gruffyth. Lhewelyn and Owen the sonnes of Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn. WHen all the Lords & Barons of wales vnderstood of the death of the prince, they came togither, & called for Lhewelyn, and Owen Goch, the sonnes of Gruffyth son to prince Lhewelyn brother to Da∣uid, as next inheritors, (for they esteemed not Roger Mortimer sonne to Gladys sister to Dauid, and right inheritor by the order of law) and did them homage, who diuided the principalitie betwixt them two. Then the king hearing of the death of the prince, sent one Nicholas de Myles as Iustice of
Southwales to Caermardhyn, and with him in com∣mission Meredyth ap Rees Gryc and Meredyth ap Owen ap Gruffyth, to disinherite Maelgon Vachan of all his lands: wherefore the said Maelgon fled to the princes to Northwales for succour, with Howel ap Meredyth (whom the Earle of Clare had by force spoiled of all his lands in Glamorgan) a∣gainst whome the king came with a great armie, who after he had remained a while in the coun∣trie, and cold doo no good, returned home againe. This time died Ralph de Mortimer, who had ma∣ried Gladys dhu daughter to prince Lhewelyn and sister to Dauid: whose inheritance descended to Sir Roger Mortimer his sonne, who also should of right haue beene prince of VVales. The Prince of Northwales was the superiour Prince of all Wales, to whom the other princes of Southwales and Pow∣ys did paie a certeine tribute yearelie, as appeareth by the lawes of Howel Dha, and in diuers places of this historie: and was the right heire of Cadwalader, as is euident by all writers, whose line of the heire male from Roderi Mawr endeth in this Dauid the sonne of Lhewelyn, the sonne of Iorwerth, the sonne of Owen Gwyneth, the sonne of Gruffyth, the sonne of Conan, the sonne of Iago, the sonne of Edwal, the sonne of Meyric the sonne of Edwal Voel, the sonne of Anarawd, the sonne of Roderi Mawr, the sonne of Esylht, the daughter and sole heire of Conan Tindaythwy, the sonne of Roderike Molwynoc, the sonne of Edwal Y∣wrch, the son of Cadwalader the last king of the Brytaines. Lhewelyn ap Iorwerth, Prince of Northwales, father to Dauid married two wiues, whereof the first was Ione, the daughter of king Iohn, by whom he had issue Dauid and Gladys. His second wife was Eua the daughter of Foulke de Breant, by whom he had no issue. Dauid succeeded his fa∣ther in the principalitie of Wales, and died without issue:
after whose decease the right of the inheritance descended and fell to his sister of the whole blood Gladys, the wife of Ralph lord Mortimer of Wigmor, who had issue Roger Mortimer, of whom mention is made in this place, Peter Iohn a Frier preacher, and Hugh lord of Chilmersh.. Roger Mortimer lord of Wigmor (and by right of inheri∣tance Prince of Wales) married Mawd de Bruse daughter of William de Bruse lord of Brechnocke, by whom he had is∣sue Edmond, Roger lord of Chirkeland, VVilliam and Geffrey: and two daughters, Margaret maried to the son of the Earle of Oxenford, and Isabel maried to Iohn Fitz∣alen Earle of Arundell. This Roger died An. 1282. and was buried in the abbie of VVigmor. Edmond Mortimer lord of VVigmor maried Margaret Fendles, and had issue Roger, Iohn slaine in a Turnie at VVorcester, Edmond, Hugh and VValter; and two daugh∣ters, Mawd married to Theobald lord Verdon, of whom the Earle of Sherewsburie and the Earle of Essex are des∣cended: and Ione who died without issue. He lieth buried in the said abbie at VVigmor. Roger Mortimer lord of Wigmor married Ione the daughter and heire of Sir Peter Geniuill, and had issue Ed∣mond Mortimer lord of Wigmor, Sir Roger Mortimer, and Geffrey lord of Cowich, called in stories Comes Iubinen∣sis; and seauen daughters: Catharine married to Thomas Beauchamp Earle of Warwicke: Ione married to Iames lord Audely: Agnes countesse of Penbrooke: Margaret married to Thomas lord Berkeley: Mawd married to Iohn Charleton lord Powys: Blanch married to Sir Peter Graunson knight: and Beatrice married to Edward sonne & heire of Thomas Brotherton Earle Marshall, and after his death to Thomas de Bruse. This Roger Mortimer esca∣ped out of the Towre, and fled into France, and afterward returned againe with Quéene Isabel the wife of king Ed∣ward the second, and Edward the prince hir sonne, by whom (after the putting downe of the said king) he was created
Earle of March, and was afterward attainted. Edmond Mortimer lord of Wigmor,This Elia∣nor had is∣sue by the Earle Bo∣hune, who inherited hir part afterward. married Elianor late widow of William de Bohune Earle of Northampton one of the daughters and heires of Bartholomew Badels∣mer, lord of Leedes in Kent, and by hir had issue Roger, and Iohn who died without issue. He died in the castell of Lud∣lowe, and lieth buried in the said abbie of Wigmor. Roger Mortimer lord of Wigmor was by king Edward the third An. Regni sui. 29. restored to the Earledome of  March, and all his grandfathers inheritance, honors and possessions, the said attaindour being repealed and made void. He had issue by Philippa his wife, the daughter of VVilliam Mountague Earle of Sarum, Edmond Earle of March, and died at Roueraie in Burgundie, the 26. of Fe∣bruarie, Anno. 1359. whose bones were afterward tran∣slated to the abbie of VVigmor. Edmond Mortimer Earle of March and lord of Wig∣mor maried Philippa the daughter & sole heire of Leonell duke of Clarence, in whose right he was Earle of Vlster, he had issue Roger, and Edmond that was taken by Owen Glyndoure; and two daughters, Elizabeth married to Sir Henrie Percy knight sonne and heire to Henrie Percy Earle of Northumberland; & Philippa maried first to Iohn Hastings Erle of Penbrooke, and after his death to Richard Earle of Arundel, and last to Iohn lord S. Iohn. He died in the citie of Corke in Ireland, An. 1381. and lieth buried in the said abbie of Wigmor. Roger Mortimer Earle of March and Vlster lord of  Wigmor, Trym, Clare, and Conaght, maried Elianor the eldest daughter and one of the heires of Thomas Holand Earle of Kent, by whom he had issue Roger and Edmond, who both died without issue; and two daughters, Anne ma∣ried to Richard Plantagenet Earle of Cambridge; and E∣lianor Countesse of Deuon, who died without issue. The said Richard and Anne had issue Richard duke of  Yorke, and Isabel maried to Henrie Bourchier Earle of Es∣sex,
of whom the Earle of Essex now liuing is descended. This Earle of Rutland was slaine in the bat∣tell of Wakefield by the lord Clyfford.Richard Plantagenet duke of Yorke maried Cicilie the daughter of Ralph Neuill Earle of Westmerland, and had issue Edward the fourth king of England, Edmond Erle of Rutland, George duke of Clarence, & Richard duke of Glo∣cester, afterward king of England by the name of Richard the third; and thrée daughters, Margaret maried to Charles duke of Burgundie, Elizabeth maried to Iohn de lapoole duke of Suffolke, and Anne maried to Henrie Holand duke of Excester, and after to Sir Thomas Saintleger knight. Edward the fourth king of England maried Elizabeth the daughter and one of the heires of Richard Wooduile Earle Riuers, and had issue king Edward the fift, who died without issue, and Elizabeth maried to king Henrie the se∣uenth, and mother to king Henrie the eight of famous me∣morie, father to the QVEENES Maiestie that now is: who by lineall descent is the right inheritrice of the Prin∣cipalitie of Wales. By these Petegrées it is euident, that the title which Owen Glyndoure pretended to the principalitie of Wales was altogither friuolous: for he was not descended of the house of Northwales by his father,See before, page. 213. but of a yoonger brother of the house of Powys: whose portion by inheritance is laid downe by me in the description of the lordship of Powys be∣fore, page 213. which was but a verie small thing. There be diuerse gentlemen euen at this date in Wales, which are come of the house of Northwales lineallie: but I know none which are lawfullie descended of Lhewelyn ap Ior∣werth, called by Matthew Paris, Leolinus Magnus, but such are come out of the house of Mortimer, in the which house by order of descent the right of the inheritance lieth. Matt. Paris. pag. 938.About this time Harold king of Man came to the court and did homage to king Henrie, and he dubbed him knight. The summer folowing, Rees Vachan son to Rees Mechyl got the castell of Carrec
Cynnen, which his mother of meere hatred con∣ceiued against him, had deliuered to the English∣men. The Abbots of Conwey and Stratflur made sute to the king for the bodie of Gruffyth ap Lhe∣welyn, which he granted vnto them, and they con∣ueied it to Conwey, where he was honorablie bu∣ried. Then also VVilliam Ferrers Earle of Derbie and his wife died, being either of them a hundreth yeares of age. Not long after, William de longa Spata Earle of Salisburie was slaine in the holie land, leauing one daughter behind him, maried to Henrie Lacy Earle of Lyncolne. The same time likewise died Gladys daughter to prince Lhewelyn, and wife to Sir Ralph Mortimer in the castell of VVyndsore. The yeare next folowing was so drie, that there fell no raine from the eleuenth daie of March, to the Assumption of our ladie. In the yeare 1254.1254 there arose a great debate betweene the princes of VVales: for Owen could not be con∣tent with halfe the principalitie, but got his yoon∣ger brother Dauid to him, and they two leuied a great power to disinherite Lhewelyn, who with his men met with them in the field, and after a long fight gaue them an ouerthrowe, where he tooke them both prisoners, & then seased all their lands into his owne hands, enioieng alone the whole principalitie of Wales. The yeare ensuing, all the lords of Wales came to prince Lhewelyn, and made their complaints to him with weeping eies, how cruellie they were handled by prince Edward and others of the no∣bles of England, their lands being taken from them by force: and if at anie time they did offend, they were punished with extremitie, but where
they were wronged they found no remedie. Ther∣fore they protested before God and him, that they would rather die in the field in defense of their right, than to be made slaues to strangers: wher∣vpon the Prince pitieng his estate and theirs, de∣termined togither with them, vtterlie to refuse the rule of the Englishmen, and rather to die in li∣bertie than to liue in thraldome, shame and oppro∣brie. And gathering all his power, first recoue∣red againe all the Inland countrie of Northwales, and afterward all Merionyth, and such lands as Edward had vsurped in Caerdigan, which he gaue to Meredyth the sonne of Owen ap Gruffyth, and Buelht he gaue to Meredyth ap Rees, chasing awaie Rees Vachan out of the same, and so honorablie di∣uided all that he wan amongst his Barons, that he kept nothing to himselfe but the perpetuall fame of his liberalitie. Then also he recouered Gwerthryneon from Sir Roger Mortimer. The summer folowing prince Lhewelyn made warre a∣gainst Gruffyth ap Gwenwynwyn (who serued the king) and wan all Powys from him saue the castell of Pole, and a little of Caereneon and the land by Seauerne side. Rees Vachan ap Rees Mechylh meaning to reco∣uer his lands againe, obtained of the king a great armie, where of one Stephen Bacon was captaine, and came to Caermardhyn by sea, and marching from thence towards Dyneuowr, laid siege to the castell: but the princes power came with his coo∣sins to raise the siege; where there was fought a bloudie battell as euer was fought in VVales of so manie men, and in the end the Englishmen were put to flight, and lost of their men aboue 2000.
soldiours, from thence the princes armie went to Dyuet, and burned all the countrie, and destroied the castels of Abercorran, Lhanstephan, Maen∣clochoc, & Arberth, and then returned home with much spoile.1256 And forthwith not being able to a∣bide the wrongs that Geffrey Langley Lieute∣nant to the Earle of Chester) did to them,Matt. Paris. page. 1251. the Prince entred the Earles lands,Ibid. 1252. Tho. Walsh. Hypodigma pag. 61. and destroied all to the gates of Chester on either side the water. Wherevpon Edward the Earle fled to his vncle, (who was then chosen king of Romanes) for suc∣cour, and returning backe with an armie, durst not fight with the Prince,Matt. Paris. page. 1253. who had 10000. ar∣med men, euerie one sworne to die in the field (if need required) in the defense of their countrie, yet Gruffyth ap Madoc Maelor, commonlie surnamed lord of Dinas Brân (which is a castell standing vpon a verie high mountaine, of situation impregnable in the lordship of Chirke) forsooke the Prince, and serued the Earle with all his power,Matth. West. page. 277. which Earle was counted a cruell and vniust man, hauing no regard to right, promise, or oth. The next yeare prince Lhewelyn seasing to his hands Cemeys, and making peace betwixt Rees Gryc and Rees Vachan his brothers sonne, got the castel of Trefdraeth or Newport, with all Ros sauing Hauerford. Then destroieng the countrie in his waie towards Glamorgan, he rased the castell of Lhangymwch, and returning to Northwales, met with Edward Earle of Chester by the waie,Matt. Paris. pag. 1260. whom he caused to retire backe, and then destroied the lands of the said Gruffyth lord of Bromfield. There∣fore the kings of England & Almaine wrote to him gentlie, to depart home, which he refused to doo;
but diuiding his armie into two battels, in eue∣rie of the which (as Matthew Paris saith) there were 1500. footemen, and 500 horsmen well ap∣pointed. Wherevpon Edward sent to the Irishmen to come to his succours:Matt. Paris. page. 1268. whereof the Prince be∣ing certified, made readie his ships, and sending them to the sea, with sufficient power, to resist the comming of his enimies that waie, preuented him: so that the Irishmen were ouercome and sent home with great losse.Matt. Paris. page. 1271. Wherefore the king with his sonne (being in a great rage) gathered all the strength of England, from S. Michaëls Mount to Twede, & came to Northwales as far as Teganwy: but the Prince caused all the victuals to be remoo∣ued ouer the riuer of Conwey, and kept all the straictes and passages so narrowlie that the king was compelled to retire to England with great losse. Then prince Lhewelyn calling to him all the power of Southwales, came to the marches, where Gruffyth Lord of Bromfield yeelded himselfe to him, (bicause the king could not defend his lands) & sea∣sing to his owne hands all the lands in Powys,Matt. Paris. pag. 1272. he banished the lord Gruffyth ap Gwenwynwyn, and wanne the castels of Gilbert de Clare Earle of Glo∣cester, where also he gaue the Englishmen an ouer∣throwe, and slew a great number of the worthiest soldiers and such as the king loued well. There∣fore the king called his strength to him, and sent to Gascoine and Ireland for succours,Matt. Paris, page. 1275. & 1276. and then comming to VVales in haruest time, destroied all the corne that was in his waie: yet he went not farre beyond Chester, but returned backe with∣out dooing any notable act, for God (as Matthew
Paris saith) defended the poore people,Matt. Paris. page. 1274. Matt. Paris. page. 1279. that put their whole confidence in him. The lord Iames Au∣deley (whose daughter Gruffyth lord of Bromfield had married) brought a great number of horsse∣men frō Almaine, to serue against the VVelshmen, who with their great horsses and vnaccustomed kind of fight ouerthrew the VVelshmen at the first encounter. Wherefore the VVelshmen short∣lie after minding to reuenge that displeasure, made road into the said lord Audleys lands, where the Almaines set vpon them, pursuing hard such as fled to the straits, who (vsing that flight for a policie) returned againe so suddenlie and so fears∣lie vpon the Almaines, that they being not able to retire vpon the sudden were almost all slaine. At this time there was great scarsitie in England of beefes and horsses, whereof they were woont to haue manie thousands yeerelie out of VVales, and all the marches were made as a desolate and de∣sart place. The next spring all the nobles of VVales came togither, and sware to defend their countrie to the death, and neuer to forsake one a∣nother, and that vpon paine of cursing; but short∣lie after Meredyth ap Rees of Southwales not re∣garding his oth serued the king.Matt. Paris, page. 1287. Then the king called a Parliament for a subsidie to conquere Wales, when he had so manie losses, and of late all the countrie of Penbrooke burnt and spoiled,1258 wher the Welshmen had found salt plentifullie which they lacked.Matt. Paris. page. 1288. In the which Parliament William de Valentia accused the Earles of Leycester and Glocester, as the workers of all this mischiefe: wherevpon the Parliament broke without the grant of anie subsidie.
Ibidem, page, 1294 & 1297. Matt. West. page. 277.Againe shortlie after, the same Parliament by prorogation was holden at Oxford, where the king and Edward his sonne were sworne solemnlie to obeie the lawes and statutes of the realme, but the kings brethren Gwy and William with Henrie son to the king of Almaine, and Iohn Earle War∣ren forsooke the oth, and departed awaie. And there the lords of Wales offered to be tried by the lawe for any offense they had committed against the king vniustlie:Matt. Paris. pag. 1301. To this Patrike the lordship of Cydweli was giuen, if he could winne the same and keepe it. Matt. Paris. pag. 1307. but Edward would not heare of it, but sent one Patrike de Canton as Lieutenant for the king to Caermardhin, and with him Mere∣dyth ap Rees, and this Patrike desired to speake (v∣pon peace) with the princes councell. Wherevpon the prince meaning good faith, sent his brother Dauid whom he had set at libertie, with Meredyth ap Owen and Rees ap Rees to Emlyn to intreat with them of peace, but Patrike meaning to intrap them, laid an ambushment of armed men by the waie, and as they should haue met, these men fell vpon the Welshmen, and slew a great number of them, but the lords which escaped raised the coun∣trie forthwith,Matt. West. pag. 278. and folowed Patrike and slue him and the most part of all his men. And after this, the Prince desirous of peace and quietnesse to re∣deeme the same, and to end all troubles and to purchase the kings good will, offered the king 4000. markes, and to his sonne 300. and to the Queene 200. to haue peace, but the king answe∣red; What is this to our losses? and refused it. It appeareth by the Records in the Towre, that about this time, to wit, An. 43. H. 3. There was a commission to William bishop of Worcester, Iohn Mansel treasurer of Yorke the kings Chaplaine, and Peter de Montfort: to
conclude a peace with the Welshmen: but it is like that there was nothing doone to anie effect in that behalfe, for the warre continued still.Matt. West. pag 284. Notwithstanding, I find by Matthew Westminster that there was a certeine truce a∣gréed vpon betwéene the king and the Welshmen for a yeare.pag. 287. I read also in the same author, that the bishop of Bangor was this yeare about Michaelmas sent from Lhe∣welyn the prince, and all the Barons of Wales, to the king to desire peace at his hands, & to offer vnto him the summe of 16000. pound for the same, so that he would grant the Welshmen to haue all their matters heard and determi∣ned at Chester, as they were woont to haue, and to suffer them to enioy the lawes and customes of their owne coun∣trie: but what answere the bishop brought againe, the said author maketh no mention. The yeare 1260.1260 prince Lhewelyn destroied the lands of Sir Roger Mortimer, bicause he con∣trarie to his oth mainteined the kings quarell, and tooke from him all Buelht, sauing the castell which the Princes men gatte by night without bloodshed, and therein much munition, and so after the Prince had passed through all Southwales, he returned to his house at Aber, betwixt Conwey and Bangor. The yeare folowing died Owen ap Me∣redyth lord of Cydewen. And this summer certeine of the Princes men tooke vpon a sudden the castell of Sir Roger Mortimer in Melienyth, and slew the garrison, taking Howel ap Meyric the captaine thereof, with his wife and children, and the prin∣ces Lieutenant came and destroied it: then Sir Roger Mortimer hearing this came with a great strength of lords and knights to Melienyth, where the Prince came also, and Sir Roger kept himselfe within the wals of the broken castell, & sent to the prince for licence to depart without hurt. Then
the prince hauing his enimie within his danger, tooke compassion vpon him, bicause he was his coo∣sen, and suffered him to depart with his people without hurt. From thence the prince went to Brechnocke at the request of the people of that countrie, which swore fidelitie vnto him, and so re∣turned to Northwales. Matt. Paris. pag. 1333. Tho. Wals. Hypodig. page. 63.Prince Lhewelyn being confederate with the Barons against the king, destroied the Earldome of Chester, and rased two of Edwards castels, Ty∣gannwy and Diserth, and thither came Edward and did nothing to speake of. This yeare Iohn Strange the yoonger being Constable of Montgomery came with a great number of Marchers by night, through Ceri to Cydewen: which thing when the countrie men vnderstood, they gathered them∣selues togither, and slew 200. of his men, but he escaped with the rest backe againe. Shortlie af∣ter, the Marchers and the Welshmen met besides Clun, where the Englishmen had the victorie, and slew a great number of Welshmen. At this time Dauid the princes brother (whom he had set at li∣bertie) forsooke him, and succoured his foes with all his power. Then Gruffyth ap Gwenwynwyn got the castell of Molde and rased it. At this time died Meredyth ap Owen the defender of Southwales The yeare ensuing king Henrie lead a great armie to∣wards Wales,1268 and by meanes of Orobonus the Popes legate,Matt. Paris. pag. 1341. Matt. West. page. 347. there was a peace concluded be∣twixt the king and the Prince at the castell of Montgomery vpon Calixtus daie, for which peace the prince gaue the king 30000. markes, and the king granted the prince a Charter, to receiue from thenceforth homage and fealtie of all the
nobilitie and Barons of Wales sauing one: so that all the foresaid Barons should euer after hold of the prince, as their liege lord; and he to be called and written from thenceforth prince of Wales. And in witnesse of this, the king put his seale and hand to the said Charter, which was likewise confirmed by the authoritie of the Pope. The yeare after this died Grono ap Ednyuet Vachan, a noble man and chiefe of the princes councell. In the yeare 1270.1270 died Gruffyth lord of Bromfield, and was buried at Vale Crucis. Here endeth the Brytish copie. That which foloweth vnto the death of this Prince was collected by Humfrey Lhoyd Gentleman. AT this place leaueth the Brytish booke,H. Lhoyd. and writeth no further of the end of this prince, but leaueth him at the highest and most honorable staie that anie prince of Wales was in, of manie yeares be∣fore: the writer (peraduenture) being abashed or rather ashamed to declare the vtter fall and ruine of his countrie men, wherevnto their owne pride and discord did bring them, as it doth euidentlie appeare to him that searcheth out their histories. But I intending to finish the historie during the gouernment of the Brytaines, haue sought out in o∣ther Chronicles written in the Latine toong, spe∣ciallie in the Chronicle of Nicholas Triuet (who wrote from the beginning of the reigne of king Stephen, to the coronation of Edward the second) and such other, asmuch as I could find touching
this matter. The yeare 1270.1270 Iohn Earle Waren slew Alan Le Souch lord chiefe Iustice in West∣minster hall. The yeare folowing Edward with his brother Edmund went to the holie land, where at Acon he was in danger to be slaine by a villaine (vnder the colour of deliuering of a letter) who gaue him fiue wounds with a knife. 1272And the yeare 1272. died Henrie king of Eng∣land, and Edward his sonne comming from the ho∣lie land, two yeares after was crowned at West∣minster king of England,1274 to which coronation the prince of Wales refused to come,Tho. Walsh. although he was sent for, laieng for his excuse that he had offended manie noble men of England, and therefore would not come in their daunger, without he had for pledges the kings brother, with the Earle of Glo∣cester, and Robert Burnell cheefe Iustice of England, wherewith the king was sore offended, but he dis∣sembled his displeasure for that time. King Edward could neuer brooke prince Lhewelyn, sithence the time that he was driuen to slight by him, at their mée∣ting in the marches, whereof mention is made before, page 321. On the other side, Lhewelyn liked no better of the king than the king did of him. Againe those noble men, which for their disobedience were disinherited by Lhewelyn, were receiued and intertained of king Edward: which things caused the Prince to feare some euill practice by those and other such as hated him, if he should haue béen at the kings coronation to doo his homage and fealtie, according to the writ directed vnto him in that behalfe: as appeareth by an instrument sent by the said Prince to Robert Kilwarby, Archbishop of Canturburie, the Archibishop of Yorke, and other bishops sitting then at their conuocation in the new Temple at London, Anno. 1275. Wherein the causes of this warre are contained: which instrument it selfe (as it
was then sent) is extant at this daie, written in parchment with the Princes great seale therevnto appendant, which I haue séene and copied out of the originall verbatim, being then in the custodie of Thomas Yale doctor of lawe, of late Deane of the arches (a great searcher and preseruer of the antiquities of Wales) which I thought conuenient here to laie downe for the fuller vnderstanding of this historie. Reuerendissimis in Christo patri∣bus ac D.D. Roberto Dei gratia Archie∣piscopo Cantuar. totius Angliae Primati, & Archiepiscopo Eborum, ac eorum Suffra∣ganeis, &c. TO the most reuerend fathers in Christ and Lords, Robert by the grace of God Archbishop of Canturburie, primate of England, and the Archbishop of Yorke, and their Suffraganes, being now togither at London in councell: their deuout sonne Lhewelyn Prince of Wales and lord of Snoudon, greeting with due obedience, reuerence, and honor in all things. Be it knowen to your reuerend Fatherhoods, that where heretofore contention and discord (wherof warre followed and long continued) arose betwixt the king of noble memorie Henrie king of England of the one partie, and vs of the other partie: the same contentions and strife were at the last ap∣peased by authoritie of the sea Apostolike, and
means of the reuerend father lord Otobonus, Dea∣con and Cardinall of S. Adrian Legate into Eng∣land: as it appeareth in the forme of treatie and peace betwixt the said king, and Edward his first begotten son, lord Edward now king of England, and their successors on the one partie: and vs and our successors on the other partie, by the corporall othes of both parties assured. Which forme of peace was committed to writing by the said Legate, with the seale of the said king, and the seale of the said lord Edward now king, and with our seale also. In the which peace it is conteined amongst other things (which you doo well know as we be∣leeue) that we and our successors should hold of the king and his successors the principalitie of Wales. So that all Welsh Barons should hold their Baro∣nies and lands of vs and our successors in Capite, and should doo homage and fealtie to vs and to our heires (one Baron excepted) for the which we and our successors should doo homage and fealtie to the lord the king and his successors. It is further con∣teined in the same peace, that neither the said king nor his successors, should receiue anie of our eni∣mies, nor anie running awaie from vs, or our suc∣cessors, nor should helpe or maintaine anie such a∣gainst vs or our successors. The which all are con∣teined in the forme of peace, the tenor whereof the
reuerend Fathers of Strata Florida, and Aber∣conwey bearers hereof can shew you. But see reuerend Fathers, the lord Edward now noble king of England, after the said peace taketh into his hands certeine Barons lands of Wales, of which they and their ancestors haue beene long possessed, and keepeth a Baronie in his hands which should be ours by the forme of peace: other Barons of our land being from vs fugitiues, running to him, he keepeth, helpeth and maintei∣neth; as Dauid ap Gruffyth, and Gruffyth ap Gwenwynwyn, who purposed our death and de∣struction. Notwithstanding that since their de∣parture they haue robbed within our land, com∣mitted slaughter, and burning of houses, and doo still dailie commit the like against the peace afore∣said: & although we haue often sent our greefes & complaints by our solemne messengers, to the said noble lord Edward, as well before he was king, as since, yet vnto this daie he neuer did anie redresse therein. Also that which is more perilous, he cal∣led vs vnto a place (not to vs safe) amongst our deadlie enimies, our fugitiues and felons and their spies and murderers, to doo him homage and feal∣tie: to the which place we can no waies come with∣out danger of our bodie: especiallie seeing our eni∣mies aboue said be in that place at the kings table,
and sometime in counsell, and openlie brag them∣selues. And though lawfull and reasonable ex∣cuses were alledged by our messengers, before the king and his councell, why the place was not safe nor indifferent, yet he refused to allow or ap∣point anie other place indifferent for vs to doo our homage and fealtie: which we were and are rea∣die to doo vnto him, in anie safe place by him to be appointed, if he will appoint anie: and to performe the other articles of the peace concluded and sworne. And for that it pleased him not to come to anie place, where we could with safetie do him homage, we were suiters to him, to send anie from him to receiue our oth and homage, vntill it plea∣sed him to appoint a place, where we shall doo our homage to him personallie, the which thing he vt∣terlie denied to doo. We therfore beseech your Fatherhoods earnest∣lie, that it please you to consider what danger should happen to the people both of England and of Wales, by reason of the breach of the couenants of peace aboue said: if now warres and discord should follow, which God forbid: attending and calling to remembrance the prohibition of the holie father the Pope latelie in the councell at Lions, that no warre should be mooued amongst Christians: least thereby the affaires of the holie land should be
neglected: that it would please you also to helpe with your counsell with the lord and king, that he would vse vs and order vs according to the peace agreed vpon, the which we will no waie infringe. And if he will not harken to your counsell therein (which God forbid) that you will hold vs excu∣sed, for we will no waies as much as in vs lieth procure the trouble or disquietnes of the Realme. And if it may please you to giue credit to our messengers (which we doo send to the king at the daie by him vnto vs appointed) to alledge our lawfull excuses in those things, which they by mouth shall on our part shew vnto you: resting to doo your will and pleasure, if it please you to write againe. Dated at Talybont the 6. daie of Octo∣ber, An. 1275. Shortlie after, the king came to Chester, wil∣ling the Prince to come thither and doo him ho∣mage, which when the Prince detracted to doo, the king gathered an armie to compell him thereto. The yeare folowing, the countesse of Leycester,1277 wife to Symon Montfort (which remained at a Nunrie in Montargis in France) sent hir daughter to Wales to marie the Prince,Tho. Walsh. page. 6. Matt. West. pag. 364. as it was agreed betwixt them in hir fathers time, and with hir came hir brother Aemerike, and a goodlie compa∣nie: who fearing the coast of England, kept their course to the Iles of Sylle, where by chance they met with foure ships of Bristowe, which set vpon
them and tooke them, and brought them to the king, who intertained the ladie honourablie, sen∣ding hir brother to be kept prisoner in the castell of Corff, from whence he was remooued to the ca∣stell of Shirburne.Tho. Wals. page. 6. Then the king prepared two ar∣mies, whereof he lead one himselfe to Northwales, as farre as Ruthlan, and fortified that castell. And the other he sent with Paganus de Camurtijs a wor∣thie soldiour to Westwales, who burned and de∣stroied a great part of the countrie. And this yere it rained blood in diuers places in Wales. The yeare ensuing the lords of Southwales came to the kings peace, and did him homage, and deliuered the castell in Stratywy vnto the kings lieutenant Paganus de Camurtijs.Matt. West. page, 365. Tho. VVals. page. 7. Then the prince vnderstan∣ding this, and seeing that his owne people had for∣saken him, sent to the king for peace, which was a∣greed  vpon these conditions. First, that all those which the Prince kept prisoners of the kings freends, and for his cause, should be set at libertie.  Item that the Prince should paie to the king for his fauour and good will 50000. markes, to be  paid at the kings pleasure. Item that foure Can∣treds should remaine to the king and his heires for euer, which Cantreds I thinke were these: Can∣tref Ros, where the kings castell of Teganwy stood: Cantref Ryuonioc where Denbigh is: Cantref Te∣gengl where Ruthlan standeth: and Cantref Dyffryn  Clwyd where Ruthyn is. Item that the lords Marchers should quietlie enioy all the lands that  they had conquered within Wales.N. Triuet. Item that the prince should paie yearelie for the Ile of Môn or Anglesey 1000. marks, which paiement should begin at Michaelmas then next ensuing, & that
also he should paie 5000. marks out of hand, and if the Prince died without issue the Ile should re∣maine to the king and his heires. Item that the  Prince should come to England euerie Christmas to doo the king homage for his lands. Item that  all the Barons in Wales should hold their lands of the king sauing fiue in Snowdon, who should ac∣knowledge the Prince to be their lord. Item that  he should for his life enioy the name of Prince, and none of his heires after him: so that after his death the foresaid fiue Barons should hold of the king and of none other. Item that for the perfor∣mance  of these articles the Prince should deliuer for hostages ten of the best in VVales, without im∣prisoning, disinheriting, or time of deliuerance de∣termined; & also the king to choose twentie within Northwales, which should take their othes with the Prince to performe all these articles: and if the Prince should swarue from anie of them, and being thereof admonished would not amend and redresse the same, they should forsake him and be∣come his enimies. The Prince was also bound, to let his brethren enioy their lands in VVales: of whom Dauid had long serued the king,N. Triuet. Tho. VVals. page. 7. whom the king had made knight contrarie to the maner of VVales, and had giuen him in mariage the daugh∣ter of the Earle of Derby, whose first husband was latelie deceased: to whom the king gaue Denbigh in Northwales, and a 1000. pound lands there∣with. His other brother Roderike was latelie fled to England out of prison: and Owen the third was deliuered at this composition. N. Triuet. Hol. pag. 787.This peace was concluded in the kings absence, who ap∣pointed one of his Commissioners, to wit, the lord Robert
Tiptoft to take an oth for him, and authorized the said Ro∣bert, Anthonie Beke, and William de Southampton Prior prouinciall of the Friers preachers, Commissioners no∣minated on his behalfe, to receiue the like oth of the said Lhewelyn: for whose part Theodor or Tuder ap Ednyuet and Grono ap Heilyn were Commissioners. N. Triuet. Tho. Walsh. page. 8.At this time the king builded a castell at Aber∣ystwyth, and returned to England with much honor: vnto whom the people granted a subsidie of the twentie part of their goods towards his charges in this warre.1278 The yeare folowing, the mariage was celebrated at VVorcester betwixt Elianor daughter to Symon Montfort and prince Lhewelyn,Matt. West. page. 367. Tho. Walsh. pag. 8. where the King & the Queene, and the most part of the nobilitie of England were present. Also the yeare after, Roger Mortimer set vp at Killingworth a round table for a hundreth knights, to be exercised in the feats of armes, and thither resorted manie knights from diuerse countries.N. Triuet. At this time the king of Scots did his homage to king Edward, and obtained the kings letters that his succors in the last warres of VVales were not done by the name of seruice,N. Triuet. Polydo. li. 17. but of good will. And at this time a ge∣nerall inquisition was made, how and by what ti∣tle euerie man held his lands and liberties, and the first that was called was the Earle VVaren, who drawing out an old sword said, By this war∣rant mine ancestours wanne their lands, and by this I doo and will hold mine. And all the Barons applied to this answere, and the Quo warranto was no more talked of. The peace concluded betwéene the prince of Wales and the king of England did not long continue, by reason of the se∣uere and stricte dealing of such officers as the king ap∣pointed
rulers in the Marches and the Inland countrie of Wales: who hunting after their owne gaines oppressed the inhabitants, burthening them with new exactions contra∣rie to the customes of the countrie; and also shewing them∣selues too much affectionate in matters of controuersie be∣twéene partie and partie, especiallie when anie English∣man had to doo in the matter: which poling and parcialitie did altogither alienate the harts of the people from the king of England, so that they had rather die than liue in such thraldome. Wherevpon assembling themselues togither, they so moued Dauid lord of Denbigh to be at vnitie with prince Lhewelyn, and to take pitie vpon their affliction and miserie, that he being agréed with his brother, be∣came their captaine. Not long after Dauid lord of Denbigh being reconciled to his brother the Prince,1281 vpon condi∣tion he should neuer after serue the king of Eng∣land as he had done before, but become his vtter e∣nimie, laid siege to the castell of Hawarden, and tooke Roger Clifford (a noble knight) slaieng all that resisted, and after spoiling all the countrie, he with his brother the Prince laid siege to the ca∣stell of Ruthlan, the king hearing of this hasted thi∣ther with a great armie to raise the siege, then the Prince retired backe with his armie. Also the same time Rees the sonne of Maelgon, and Gruffyth ap Meredyth ap Owen, with other noble men of Southwales, tooke the castell of Aberystwyth, and di∣uerse other castels in that countrie, spoiling all the kings people that inhabited there abouts. Therefore the king sent the Archbishop of Can∣turburie to talke with the Prince and his brethren, which returned without doing anie good; and by the kings commandement denounced them and all their complices accursed.
This Archibishop here mentioned was Iohn Peckham, who was sent from king Edward to prince Lhewelyn, as this author thinketh: but he himselfe affirmeth, that he tooke that enterprise in hand of his owne motion, contrarie or beside the kings mind: to the which assertion of his Nicho∣las Triuet and Thomas Walsingham séeme to agrée. His whole dooings in this matter are to be found in the records of Canturburie, the copie of the which records being collec∣ted, and for the most part translated out of Latine into English by Doctor Thomas Yale, chanceller to that wor∣thie prelate of reuerend memorie Matthew Parker Archbi∣shop of Canturburie (whose carefull search, painfull trauell, and chargeable setting out of the antiquities of this land, euerie man that loueth his countrie cannot choose but commend and thankefullie accept and take in good part) I thought necessarie here to set downe for the laieng open of the truth to the view of all men, which▪ heretofore was ei∣ther maliciouslie concealed, or negligentlie omitted by all the writers of this historie. 1281Articles sent from the Archbishop of Cantur∣burie, to be intimated to Lhewelyn, Prince of VVales, and the people of the same countrie. BIcause we came to those parts for the spirituall and temporall health of them whom we haue euer loued well, as diuers of them haue knowne. 2. That we come contrarie to the will of our Lord the king, whom our said comming (as it is said) dooth much offend. 3 That we desire and beséech them▪ for the bloud of our lord Iesus Christ, that they would come to an vnitie with the En∣glish people, and to the peace of our lord the king, which we in∣tend to procure them so well as we can. 4 We will them to vnderstand, that we cannot long tar∣rie
in these quarters. 5 We would they considered, that after our parting out of the countrie, they shall not perhaps find anie that will so tender the preferring of their cause, as we would doo, if it plea∣sed God (with our mortall life) we might procure them an ho∣nest, stable and firme peace. 6 That if they doo contemne our petition & labour, we in∣tend foorthwith to signifie their stubbernes to the high bishop, and the court of Rome: for the enormitie that manie waies hapneth by occasion of this discord this daie. 7 Let them know, that vnlesse they doo quickelie agrée to a peace, that warre shall be aggrauated against them, which they shall not be able to sustaine, for the kings power increa∣seth dailie. 8 Let them vnderstand that the realme of England is vn∣der the speciall protection of the sea of Rome:The grea∣ter cause the more loue. that the sea of Rome loueth it better than anie other kingdome. 9 That the said sea of Rome will not in anie wise sée the state of the realme of England quaile, being vnder speciall protection. 10 That we much lament to heare that the Welshmen be more cruell then Saracens: for Saracens, when they take chri∣stians they kéepe them to be redéemed for monie. But (they saie) that the Welshmen by and by doo kill all that they take, and are onelie delighted with blood, and sometime cause to be killed them whose ransome they haue receiued. 11 That whereas they were euer woont to be estéemed, and to reuerence God & Ecclesiasticall persons, they séeme much to reuolt from that deuotion: moouing sedition and warre, and committing slaughter, and burning in the holie time. Which is great iniurie to God, wherein no man can excuse them. 12 We desire, that as true christians they would repent, for they cannot long continue their begun discord, if they had sworne it. 13 We will that they signifie vnto vs, how they will or
can amend the trouble of the kings peace, and the hurt of the common wealth. 14 That they signifie vnto vs how peace and concord may be established: for in vaine were it to forme peace, to be dai∣lie violated. 15 If they saie that their lawes or couenants be not ob∣serued, that they doo signifie vnto vs which those be. 16 That granting it that they were iniured, as they saie, (which we no waies doo know) they which were Iudges in the cause might so haue signified to the kings maiestrie. 17 That vnlesse they will now come to peace, they shall be resisted by decrée and censure of the church, besides warre of the people. ¶ The answere of the Prince Lhewelyn, to the aboue written Articles. Reuerendissimo in CHRISTO Patri Domino Iohanni, dei gratia Cantuar. Archiepiscopo, totius Angliae Primati, suus humilis & deuotus filius Lhewelyn Princeps VValliae & Dominus Snow∣den, salutem & filialem dilectionaem, &c. CVm omnimoda reuerentia, submissione, & ho∣nore, sanctae paternitati vestrae, pro vestro labore quem in∣tollerabilem assum sistis ad praesens pro dilectione quam erga nos & gentem nostram geritis, omni qua possumus deuo∣tione regratiantes vobis assurgimus: & eò ampliùs, quòd contra domini Regis voluntatem venistis. Caeterùm, quod nos rogastis, vt ad pacem do∣mini Regis veniamus, scire debet vestra sanctitas, quòd ad hoc prompti sumus, dummodo idem dominus Rex pacem debitam & veram nobis & nostris velit obseruare. Adhaec, licet gauderemus de mora vestra in Wallia, tamen per nos non eritis impediti, quin pax fiat, quam in nobis optamus per vestram industriam magis quàm alterius alicuius roborari, & speramus: necper Dei gratiam erit oportunum propter nostram perti∣naciam
aliquid scribere domino Papae. Net vestras paternas preces ac graues labores spernimus, sed ea amplectimur omni cordis affectu, vt tene∣mur: nec erit opus, quòd dominus Rex aggrauet contra nos manum, cùm promptisimus sibi obedire, iuribus nostris & legibus (vt praemittitur) reseruatis. Et licèt regnum Angliae sit curiae Romanae specialiter sub∣iectum & dilectum, tamen cùm dominus Papa necnon & curia Romana audierint, quanta nobis per Anglos mala sint illata: viz. Quòd pax priùs firmata, non fuit nobis seruata, nec pacta: deinde Ecclesiarum vasta∣tiones, combustiones, & Ecclesiasticarum personarum interfectiones, Sa∣cerdotum, viz. & inclusorum & aliarum religiosarum personarum passim, mulierum & infantium vbera sugentium, & in vtero portantium, combustiones etiam hospitalium & aliarum domorum religiosarum, ho∣micidiorum in coemiterijs, Ecclesijs & super altaria, sicut expressiùs eadem in alijs rotulis conscripta vobis transmittimus inspicienda. Speramus in primis quòd vestra pia & sancta paternitas clementer nobis compatietur, necnon & curia supradicta. Nec per nos regnum Angliae vacillabit, dum (vt praemissum est) pax debita nobis fiat, & seruetur. Qui verò sanguinis effusione delectantur, manifestum est ex factis: nam Angli nulli hacte∣nus sexui vel aetati seu languori pepercerunt, nulla Ecclesiae, vel loco sacro, detulerunt, qualia, vel similia Wallenses nunquam fecerunt. Super omnia autem, quòd vnus redemptus fuit interfectus, multùm dolemus, nec occiso∣rem manutenemus, sed in syluis vt latro vagatur. De eo quòd incoeperunt guerram aliqui tempore indebito, illud ignorauimus vsque ad praesens factum: & tamen ipsi asserunt, quòd nisi in eo tempore hoc fecissent, mortes & captiones eis imminebant, nec audebant in domibus se fidere, nec nisi armati incedere, & sic praetimore tali tempore id fecerunt. De eis verò quae facimus contra dominum, vt verè Christiani per Dei gratiam poenite∣bimus; nec erit ex parte nostra, quòd bellum continuetur, dum simus in∣demnes, vt debemus: ne tamen exhaeredemur, & passim occidamur, oportet nos defendere vt valeamus. Cùm verò iniuria & damna hinc inde considerentur, & ponderentur, parati sumus emendare pro viribus quae ex parte nostra sunt commissa; dum de praedictis iniurijs & damnis nobis factis & alijs emenda nobis fiat. Et ad pacem firmandam & stabiliendam similiter sumus prompti: quando tamen Regalis charta & pacta inita nobis non seruantur, sicut nec hucùsque sunt obseruata, non potest pax stabiliri: nec quando nouae & inauditae exactiones contra nos & nostros
quotidie adinueniuntur: vobis autem transmittimus in rotulis damna & iniurias nobis illatas, non secundum formam pacis priùs factam. Quòd autem guerrauimus, necessitas nos cogebat: nam nos & omnes Wallenses eramus adeo oppressi, suppeditati, spoliati, & in seruitutem redacti per re∣gales Iusticiarios & Balliuos, contra formam pacis & omnem iustitiam, non aliter quàm si Sarraceni essemus vel Iudaei. Et saepe domino Regi de∣nunciauimus haec, sed nullam emendam habere potuimus, sed semper mit∣tebantur Iusticiarij & Balliui ferociores, & crudeliores. Et quando illi erant satiati per suas iniustas exactiones, alij de nouo mittebantur, ad po∣pulum excoriandum, ita, quòd populus malebat mori quàm viuere: nec oportet contra nos militiam ampliorem conuocare, nec contra nos moueri sacerdotium, dummodo nobis fiat pax & seruetur modis debitis, vt superiùs est expressum. Nec debetis sancte pater omnibus verbis credere aduersa∣riorum nostrorum, sicut enim nos factis oppresserunt & opprimunt, ita & verbis defamant, nobis imponentes quae volunt; ipsi vobis saepe sunt prae∣sentes & nos absentes, ipsi opprimentes & nos oppressi, & ideo, propter do∣minum, fidem eis in omnibus non adhibeatis, sed facta potiùs examinetis. Valeat Sanctitas vestra ad regimen Ecclesiae per tempora longa. Data apud Garth Celyn in festo Sancti Martini. To the most reuerend Father in Christ, the lord Iohn by gods grace Archbishop of Canturburie, Primate of all England, his humble and deuout sonne Lhewelyn prince of VVales and lord of Snowdonsen∣deth greeting. WIth all reuerent submission and ho∣nor we yeeld our most humble and hartie thanks vnto your fatherhood, for the great and greeuous paines which at this present for the loue of vs and our nation you haue sustained: and so much the more we are beholden vnto you, for that besides the kings pleasure you would venture to come vnto vs. In that you request vs to come to the
kings peace, we would haue your holinesse to know that we are most readie and willing to the same, so that our lord the king will duelie and trulie obserue and keepe the peace towards vs and ours. Moreouer, al∣though we would be glad of your continuance in VVales, yet we hope there shall not be any delaie in vs but that peace (which of all things we most desire and wish for) may be forthwith established, and rather by your trauell and procurement than by any other mans: so that it shall not be needefull to complaine vnto the Pope of our wilfulnes: neither do we despise your fa∣therhoods requests and painefull trauell, but with all hartie reuerence according to our dutie do accept the same. Neither yet shall it be needefull for the lord the king to vse anie force against vs, seeing we are redie to obeie him in all things, our rights and lawes (as afore∣said) reserued. And although the kingdome of Eng∣land be vnder the speciall protection of the sea of Rome, and with speciall loue regarded of the same: yet, when the lord the Pope and the court of Rome shall vnderstand of the great damages which are done vnto vs by the Englishmen, to wit, the articles of the peace concluded and sworne vnto, violated and broken, the robbing and burning of churches, the murthering of ecclesiasticall persons, aswell religious as secular; the slaughter of women great with child, and children suc∣king their mothers brests: the destroieng of hospitals, and houses of religion, killing the men and women professed in the holie places, and euen before the al∣tars: we hope that your fatherhood, and the said court of Rome will rather with pittie lament our case, than with rigour of punishment augment our sorow. Nei∣ther shall the kingdome of England be in anie wise dis∣quieted or molested by our meanes (as is affirmed) so
that we may haue the peace dulie kept and obserued to∣wards vs and our people. Who they be, which are deli∣ted with bloodshed and warre, is manifestlie apparant by their deedes and behauiour: for we would liue qui∣etlie vpon our owne if we might be suffered, but the Englishmen comming to our countrie did put all to the sword, neither sparing sex, age or sicknesse, nor any thing regarding churches or sacred places, the like whereof the VVelshmen neuer committed. That one hauing paid his ransome was afterward slaine, wee are right sorie to heare of it, neither do we maintaine the offender, who escaping our hands keepeth himselfe as an outlaw in the woods and vnknowne places. That some began the warre in a time not meete and conue∣nient, that vnderstood not we of vntill now: and yet they which did the same do affirme, that in case they had not done as they did at that time, they had beene slaine or taken themselues, being not in safetie in their owne houses, and forced continuallie for safegard of their liues to keepe themselues in armour: and there∣fore to deliuer themselues from that feare, they tooke that enterprise in hand. Concerning those things which we commit against God: with the assistance of his grace, we will (as it becommeth Christians) repent and turne vnto him. Neither shall the war on our part be continued, so that we be saued harmlesse and may liue as we ought: but before we be disinherited or slaine we must defend our selues as well as we may. Of all in∣iuries and wrongs done by vs, we are most willing and readie (vpon due examination and triall of all trespasses and wrongs committed on both sides) to make a∣mends to the vttermost of our power: so that the like on the kings side be performed in like maner towards vs and our people: and to conclude and stablish a peace
we are most readie: but what peace can be established when as the kings charter so solemnlie cōfirmed, is not kept and performed? Our people are dailie oppressed with new exactions: we send vnto you also a note in writing of the wrongs and iniuries which are done vn∣to vs contrarie to the forme of the peace before made. VVe haue put our selues in armour, being driuen there∣vnto by necessitie: for we and our people were so op∣pressed, troden vnderfoote, spoiled, and brought to sla∣uerie by the kings officers, contrarie to the forme of the peace concluded against iustice, none otherwise than if we were Saracens or Iewes: whereof we haue often times complained vnto the king, and neuer could get any redresse: but alwaies those officers were afterwards more fierce and cruell against vs. And when those of∣ficers through their rauine and extortion were enrich∣ed, other more hungrie than they were sent afresh to flea those whom the other had shorne before: so that the people wished rather to die than liue in such op∣pression. And now it shall not be needefull to leuie a∣nie armie to war vpon vs, or to moue the prelats of the church against vs, so that the peace may be obserued duelie and trulie, as before is expressed. Neither ought your holie fatherhood to giue credit to all that our ad∣uersaries do allege against vs: for euen as in their deeds they haue and do oppresse vs, so in their words they will not sticke to slander vs, laieng to our charge what liketh them best. Therefore, for asmuch as they are alwaies present with you, and we absent from you, they oppressing, and we oppressed, we are to desire you euen for his sake from whom nothing is hid, not to credit mens words but to examine their deeds. Thus we bid your holines farewell. Dated at Garth Celyn, in the feast of S. Martine.
Certeine greefes sent from Lhewelyn, to the Archbishop: translated word by word out of the records of the said Archbishop. WHere that it is conteined in the forme of the peace, con∣cluded as foloweth. 1 If the said Lhewelyn will claime anie right in a∣nie lands occupied by anie other than by the lord the king, without the said foure Cantreds, the said lord the king shall doo him full iustice, according to the lawes and customes of those quarters or parts, where the said lands doo lie. Which arti∣cle was not obserued in the lands in Arustly, and betwixt the waters of Dyui and Dulas, for that when the said Lhewelyn claimed the said lands before the lord the king at Ruthlan, and the king granted him the cause to be examined according to the lawes and customes of Wales, and the aduocates of the parties were brought in, and the Iudges which vulgarlie they call Ynnayd, before the king, to iudge of the said lands accord∣ing to the lawes of Wales. And the defendant appeared and answered so, that the same daie the cause ought to haue béene fullie determined according to the appointment of our lord the king. Who at his being at Glocester, had assigned the parties the said daie: and though the same cause was in diuers pla∣ces often heard and examined before the Iustice, and that the lands were in Northwales, and neuer iudged but by the laws of Wales, neither was it lawfull for the king but according to the lawes of Wales to proroge the cause; all that notwithstan∣ding he proroged the daie (of his owne motion) contrarie to the said lawes. And at the last the said Lhewelyn was called to diuers places, whither he ought not to haue béene called: nei∣ther could he obteine iustice, nor anie iudgement, vnlesse it were according to the lawes of England, contrarie to the said article of the peace. And the same was doone at Montgomery, when the parties were present in iudgement, and a daie ap∣pointed to heare sentence, they proroged the said daie contra∣rie
to the foresaid lawes: and at the last the king himselfe at London denied him iustice, vnlesse he would be iudged accor∣ding to the English lawes in the said matter. 2 All iniuries, trespasses and faults on either part doone, be clearelie remitted vnto this present daie. This article was not kept; for that as soone as the lord Reginald Gray was made Iustice, he mooued diuers and innumerable accusati∣ons against the men of Tegengl & Ros, for trespasses doone in the time of king Henrie: when they bare rule in those parties, wherby the said men dare not for feare kéepe their own houses. 3 Where as it was agréed that Rees Vachan ap Rees ap Maelgon shall enioie his possessions, with all the land which he now holdeth, &c. After the peace concluded he was spoiled of his lands of Geneu'rglyn which he then held, with the men and cattell of the same. 4 Also our lord the king granteth, that all tenants hold∣ing lands in the foure Cantreds, and in other places which the king holdeth in his owne hands, shall hold and enioie the same, as fréelie as they did before the time of the warres, and shall vse the same liberties & customes, which they vsed before. Contrarie to this article, the lord Reginald Gray hath brought manie new customes against the forme of peace aforesaid. 5 All controuersies mooued, or to be mooued betwixt the Prince and anie other, shall be decided after the lawe of the marches (if they haue their beginning in the marches) and after the lawes of Wales, such as in Wales haue their begin∣ning. Contrarie to this article, the king dooth and sendeth Iu∣stices to Anglesey, who presume to iudge there the men and subiects of the Prince: setting fines vpon them, contrarie to the lawes of Wales, séeing neither this nor anie like was e∣uer heard in times past; imprisoning some, outlawing others, when the Prince is at all times readie to doo iustice to all men that complaine vpon anie of his men. 6 Where it is in the peace, that Gruffyth Vachan should doo homage to the king for the land in Yale, & to the Prince for the land in Ederneon, the kings iustices brought the ladie of May∣lor,
into all the said lands of Edeyrneon. The knowledge of which cause onelie pertained to the Prince, and not to the said Iustices: and yet for peace sake, the Prince did tollerate all this, being at all times readie to minister iustice to the said Ladie. 7 And though the said Prince submitted himselfe vnto vs and our will, yet we neuerthelesse will and grant, that our will in no case goo furder, than is conteined in those arti∣cles. Contrarie to this article, gold was exacted for the Quéenes workes at euerie paiment made to the King: which gold was neuer demanded in time of king Henrie, or anie o∣ther king of England. Which gold yet for quietnes sake the Prince paid, though it were not spoken of or mentioned in the peace. And now further it is exacted for the old Quéene the kings mother that now is (for the peace concluded with king Henrie) 2000. marks and a halfe: and vnlesse it be paid, the king threatneth to occupie the goods and lands of Lhewelyn and his people, which he could find in his realme; and sell men and beasts vntill the said summe were paid. 8 Item when the king inuited the Prince to his feast at Worcester, promising with verie faire words, that he would giue his kinsewoman to him to wife, and enrich him with much honor: neuerthelesse when he came thither, the selfe same daie they should be maried before Masse, the king requi∣red a bill to be sealed by the Prince; conteining amongst o∣ther things that he would neuer kéepe man against the kings will, nor neuer mainteine anie, whereby it might come to passe, that all the Princes force should be called from him. The which letter sealed, he deliuered the king by iust feare, which might mooue anie constant man; yet was not this conteined in the peace, whereas the conclusion of the peace was, that the king should require nothing that was not conteined in the same. 9 Item where in the said peace all customes be confirmed to the said Prince, as his ancestors of long and dailie obser∣ued custome haue receiued to their owne vse, all wrecks hap∣ning
vpon his owne lands: the Iustice of Chester tooke a di∣stresse of the Prince for goods of shipwrecke receiued by him before the warres, contrarie to the forme of the said peace. By the which all trespasses of either side were remitted; and con∣trarie to the customes before said: and if in case it were forfei∣ted, yet he tooke such a distresse, fiftéene pounds of honie, and manie horsses, and imprisoned his men. And this he tooke of the Princes owne proper goods, and further tooke booties of Bagiers which came to Lyrpoole with merchandize, and neuer redeliuered the same, vntill he had taken so much monie for the same, as it pleased him. 10 Item when certeine men of Geneurglyn had taken certeine goods of some of their neighbors of Geneurglyn, when they were in the dominion of the prince in Meyreon, the kings men of Lhanbadarn did take awaie the said goods out of the said dominion of the Prince: and when the Prince his men came thither, and asked the cause why they tooke the said preie: the kings men killed one of them, and wounded other, and the rest they did imprison, neither could the prince get anie iustice for the said goods to this daie. 11 And where it is conteined in the peace, that all things committed in the Marches, should be redressed in the Marches; yet the kings men would no where heare the princes men, but put them in the castell of Lhanbadarn: which is against the peace afore said. In these articles and diuers others, the king standeth sworne to the prince, and to his people. And although the prince as well by himselfe as by his people, haue often re∣quested the king to cause the said peace to be kept, yet was it in no point kept, but dailie the kings Iustices doo more and more heape iniuries and griefs vpon the people of those parts. So that it cannot be blamed, if the Prince did assent to them that first began the wars, séeing the oth which the lord Robert Typtost sware for the king, was kept in no point: and chéeflie séeing the Prince was forewarned, that he should be taken so soone as the king came to Ruthlan, as he had béene in déede if the king had come thither after Christmasse, as he purposed.
These greefes folowing were done by the king and his officers, to the lord Dauid ap Gruffyth. WHen the said Dauid came to the lord Edward then Earle of Chester, and did him homage, the said lord Edward did giue by his letters patents to the said Dauid, two Cantreds, Dyffryncluyd, and Ceinmeyrch, with all the appurtenances: afterward when he was made king he confirmed the said gift to the said Dauid, and gaue him possession of them. Then afterward Guenlhian Lacy died, who held some townes in the said Cantreds for terme of life: which after hir decease apperteined to Dauid, by force of the foresaid grant, which townes yet the king tooke from him, contrarie to his letters patents. 2 Item, when the said Dauid did hold of the lord the king the villages of Hope and Eston in Wales, of the which he ought to answere no man, but according to the lawes of Wales, yet the Iustice of Chester caused the said Dauid to be called to Chester, at the sute of one William Vanable an Eng∣lish man: to answere for the title of the said villages. And al∣though the said Dauid did often & instantlie desire him the said Iustice not to procéed against him iniuriouslie in the countie of Chester, where he was not bound to answere by the forme of the peace: yet he plainlie denied him to be iudged either in Wales or after the lawes of Wales. 3 Item, the said Iustice of Chester to the iniurie of the said Dauid, did cut downe his wood of Lhyweny, and his woods at Hope, as well by the dwellers of Ruthlan, as others: and yet the said Iustice had no iurisdiction in those parts. And not be∣ing contented to get timber there, for building, as well for Ruthlan as other places in the countrie, but also destroied the said woods, sold it, and carried it into Ireland. 4 Item, where the said Dauid tooke certeine outlawes and rouers in the woods, and caused them to be hanged: yet the
said Iustice accused Dauid to the king, for succoring and main∣teining the théeues aforesaid: which was not like to be true séeing he caused them to be hanged. 5 Item, it is prouided in the peace, that all Welshmen in their causes should be iudged after the lawes of Wales. This was in no point obserued with the said Dauid and his people. Of these foresaid gréefs the said Dauid required often amends, either according to the lawes and customes of Wales, or of speciall fauour: but he could neuer obteine anie of them both at his hands. Further, the said Dauid was warned in the kings court, that assoone as Reginald Gray should come from the court, the said Dauid should be taken and spoiled of his castell of Hope, his woods should be cut downe, and his children taken for pledges: who séeing he had taken much paines and perill for the king in all his warres as well himselfe as his people, both in England and in Wales, and had lost therebie the most part of the nobilitie of his countrie, and yet neuerthe∣lesse could obteine neither iustice, amends, nor fauour at his hands, hauing such great wrongs offred vnto him, and fea∣ring his owne life and his childrens, or else perpetuall prison, being enforced, as it were against his will, began to defend himselfe and his people. Greefs and iniuries offered by the king and his officers to the men of Ros. THis is the forme of peace, which the king of England did promise the men of Ros before they did him homage, which he promised them to ob∣serue inuiolablie. That is to saie, the king should grant to eue∣rie of them their right and iurisdiction, as they had in time of king Henrie, according as the said men doo report that they had in the time of king Henrie. 2 Item the lord the king did promise the said men, that they should haue iustice in their sutes: after granting of the which articles, the said men did homage to the king. And then the
king promised them with his owne mouth faithfullie to ob∣serue the said articles. This notwithstanding, a certeine no∣ble man passing by the kings hie waie, with his wife in the kings peace, met certeine English laborers and Masons go∣ing to Ruthlan where they did then worke: who attempted by force to take awaie his wife from him, and while he defended hir as well as he could, one of them killed the wife, and he who killed hir with his fellowes were taken: and when the kinred of hir which was slaine required law at the Iustice of Chesters hands (for their kinswoman) they were put in prison, and the murtherers were deliuered. 3 Item, a certeine man killed a Gentleman who had kil∣led the sonne of Grono ap Heilyn and was taken: but when certeine of the kinred required iustice before the Iustice of Chester, certeine of them were imprisoned, the offender set at libertie, and iustice denied to the kinred. 4 Item, certeine Gentlemen claimed some lands, and offered the king a great péece of monie, to haue iustice by the verdict of good & lawfull men of the countrie (then the lands be∣ing adiudged to the claimers) Reginald Gray tooke the same lands, corne, goods, and all vpon the ground, so that they lost their lands, monie, corne and cattell. 5 Item, it is our right that no stranger should cut our woods without our leaue: yet this notwithstanding there was a proclamation at Ruthlan, that it should be lawfull for all o∣ther men to cut downe our woods, but to vs it was forbidden. 6 Item, where diuerse honest men had lands of the gift of the said Dauid, the Iustice taketh the said mens lands awaie. 7 Item, when anie commeth to Ruthlan with merchan∣dize, if he refuse whatsoeuer anie English man offereth, he is forthwith sent to the castell to prison, and the buier hath the thing, and the king hath the price: then the soldiours of the ca∣stell first spoile and beate the partie, and then cause him to pay the porter, and let him go. 8 Item, if anie Welshmen buie anie thing in Ruthlan, and anie English man doo méet him, he will take it from him,
and giue him lesse than he paid for it. 9 Item, the king contrarie to his promise made to the men of Ros, hath giuen the territorie of Maynan, Penmayn and Lhysuayn. 10 Item, certeine Gentlemen of the Cantred of Ros bought certeine offices, and paid their monie for the same: yet the Iustice of Chester tooke the said offices from them without cause. 11 Item, Grono ap Heilyn tooke to farme of Godfrey Mar∣liney,See this ar∣ticle again pag. 359. the territorie of Maynan and Lhysuayn, for the terme of foure yeares: yet Robert de Cruquer with horses and armes and foure and twentie horssemen, came to vexe the said Gro∣no, so that he had no safe going, neither to Ruthlan nor Che∣ster, without a great garrison of his kindred and fréends. 12 Item, certeine Gentlemen were arrested for trespasses doone before the warres and imprisoned, and could not be deli∣uered vntill they had paied xvj. markes, which was contrarie to the peace concluded. 13 Item, our causes ought to be decided after the custome of our lawes; but our men be compelled to sweare against their consciences, else they be not suffered to sweare: further∣more we spent thrée hundreth markes in going to the king for iustice in the foresaid articles. And when we beléeued to re∣couer full iustice, the king sent to our parties the lord Regi∣nald Gray, to whom the king hath set all the lands to farme, to handle the men of the said Cantreds as it pleaseth him: who compelled vs to To sweare by his hand whereas we should sweare by the hand of the king. sweare in his name, whereas we should sweare in the kings name. And where the kings crosse ought to be erected, he caused his crosse to be erected, in token that he is the verie true lord: and the said lord Reginald at his first comming to those parts of Wales, sold to certeine seruants of the king, offices for lx. markes, which the said seruants bought before of the king for xxiiij. markes: which offices ought not to be sold at the choise of the lord. 14 Item, the king gaue Meredyth ap Madoc a captaine∣ship for his seruice, Reginald Gray tooke it from him: neither
could he get anie remedie at the kings hands for the same. 15 Item, one of the councell of the said Reginald, Cynwrie Vachan told vs by mouth, that as soone as the said Reginald Gray returned to Wales, he would take xxiiij. men of euerie Cantered, and either behead them or imprison them perpetu∣allie. 16 Item, whereas we paid our taxes and rents in old mo∣nie halfe a yeare before the comming of new monie, they in∣forced vs to paie new monie for the old. These gréefes and the like, the said Reginald offered vs, and threatned that if we would send anie to the king to complaine he would behead them: and when we sent anie to the king, he could neuer speake with the king, but spent vs much monie in vaine. For which gréefes we beléeue our selues frée before God, from the oth which we haue made to the king. These greefes folowing, the king and his Iustices offered to Rees Vachan of Stratywy. AFter that the said Rees gaue the king his castell of Dyneuowr, sithence the last peace, the said Rees then being in the tent of the lord Payne de Ga∣dersey, at the same time there were slaine sixe Gentlemen of the said Reeses men, for whom they neuer had amends, which was to him great gréefe and losse. 2 Item, Iohn Gifford claimed the said Reeses inheritance at Hiruryn, and the said Rees requested the lawe of his coun∣trie of the king, or the lawe of the countie of Caermardhen, in the which countie the ancestors of the said Rees were woont to haue lawe; when they were of the peace of the Englishmen, and vnder their regiment: but the said Rees could haue no lawe, but lost all his lands. They would haue had him to an∣swer in the countie of Hereford, where none of his ancestors euer answered. Further in the lands of the said Rees were
such enormities committed, which doo most apperteine to the state ecclesiasticall: that is to saie in the church of S. Dauid, which they call Lhangadoc, they made stables, and plaid the harlots, and tooke awaie all the goods of the said church, and burning all the houses, wounded the préest of the said church before the high altar, and left him there as dead. 3 Item, in the same countrie they spoiled and burnt the churches of Dyngad, Lhantredaff, and other churches in other parts: they spoiled their chalices, bookes, and all other orna∣ments and goods. These be the greefes which the king and his Iustice gaue to Lhewelyn ap Rees and Howelap Rees. AFter that a forme of peace was concluded betwixt Henrie then king of England, and the prince of Wales, the said king granted & confirmed by his charter to the said Prince the homage of the said noble men, so long as they stood fréends with the prince, according to the said gift & confirmation: but Edward now king disherited the said Gentelmen of their lands, so that they could not haue their owne lands, neither by law nor by fauour. These be the greefes doone by the English∣men, to the sonnes of Meredyth ap Owen, AFter that the King had granted the Gentelmen their owne inheritance of Geneur∣glyn and Creuthyn, he contrarie to the peace disherited the said Gentelmen: denieng them all lawes and customes of Wales, and of the countie of Caer∣mardhyn. 2 The said king in his countie of Caerdigan by his said Iustices compelled the said Gentelmen to giue iudgement
vpon themselues: where their predecessors neuer suffered the like of Englishmen. 3 The said Iustices of the king haue taken awaie the courtes of the noblemen in Wales, and compelled the people to satisfie before them for trespasses: when as they ought to haue satisfied by the said nobles. 4 When a wrecke hapneth vpon anie of the grounds of the noble men, whose ancestors had wrecke, they should haue the same: yet the king forbiddeth them, and the said king by co∣lor of that shipwrecke contrarie to their custome and law did condemne them in eight markes, and tooke away all the goods of the shipwrecke. 5 That none of our men of the countie of Caerdigan dare come amongst the Englishmen, for feare of imprisonment: and if it had not béene for feare of hurt, the nobles would ne∣uer haue stirred. The complaints of the noble men of Strata∣lyn, of the wrongs and greefes doone to them, by Roger Clifford, and Roger Scrochill deputie to the said Roger Clifford: contrarie to the priuilege, iustice and custome of the said noble men, as they saie and prooue. WHen the said Rogers compelled the said men of Stratalyn to giue them (to haue their customes and priuileges) twentie marks starling, and after the paiement of the monie, they brake by and by after this sort, to put vpon twelue men according to the lawes of England, which was neuer the manner nor custome of the said countrie. 2 Item, Madoc ap Blethyn was condemned in foure markes vniustlie, contrarie to the lawes and vse of the coun∣trie. 3 Item, Grono Goch was likewise condemned in fiue
marks and twelue beasts, contrarie to the custome of the countrie. 4 Item, the said Rogers tooke the lands of the men of the countrie as forfeit: and for one foote of a stag found in a dogs mouth, thrée men were spoiled of all that they had. 5 Item, Ithel ap Gwysty was condemned in a great sum of monie, for the fact of his father done fourtie yeares before. 6 Item, the said Rogers laid vpon vs the finding of all the English soldiours, whereof before there was but one halfe. 7 Item, we were giuen to maister Maurice de Cruny, and were sold to Roger Clifford: which was neuer séene in our pa∣rents time. 8 Item, the widow of Robert of the Mowld asked of the king the third part of the land in the Mowld in ward: where∣as it was iudged before the king, that the said lands were ne∣uer giuen in ward. These be the Articles of greefes doone to the men of Penlhyn, by the constable of Henrie Chambers of the white Abbie, and his men. CYnwric ap Madoc was spoiled by them in time of peace, of eight pound, foure oxen, corne the worke of one plough for two yeares, and to the value of thrée pound, of thrée of his men, and they had the worth of xvj. pound for the said eight pound, and did beate him besides: which was more wrong, for then he was the princes constable at Pen∣lhyn. And all the cause that they pretended to make this spoile, was onelie that they said they had found foure and twentie sheafes of tyth in the house of a seruant of the said Cynwric. 2 Item, Adam Criwr was condemned in eight shillings eight pence, and a mare, price twentie shillings, and was ta∣ken and beaten, for that he had taken the stealer of that mare,
and brought him bound with him, the which théefe was forth∣with deliuered. 3 Item, Iorwerth ap Gurgeneu was condemned in foure pound, for that he had scaped out of their prison in time of the warres, and was found in the said towne in the time of peace, and this is directlie against the peace concluded betwixt the king and the Prince. 4 Item, Caduan Dhu seruant to the constable of Penlhyn was condemned, bicause he would not receiue the old monie for new. 5 Item, Gruffyth ap Grono the Princes man was spoiled of an oxe, price eleuen shillings eight pence, and after that the constable had plowed with the said oxe seuen moneths, he paid to the said Gruffyth for the said oxe, thrée shillings foure pence. 6 Item, two seruants of one named Y Bongam were spoi∣led of two pounds, for that they tooke a théefe that robbed them by night, and yet the théefe was deliuered. 7 Item, Eneon ap Ithel was taken, beaten, and spoiled of two oxen, price foure & twentie shillings & two pence, for this cause onelie, that the said oxen went from one stréete to an other in the towne. 8 Item, Guyan Maystran was spoiled of his monie, because a certeine merchant of Ardudwy owed them certeine things, and yet the said merchant was not of their bailiwicke. The greefes of Grono ap Heilyn. A Tenant of Grono ap Heilyn was called to the kings court without anie cause: then Grono came at the daie appointed to defend his tenant, & de∣manded iustice for him, or the law which the men of his coun∣trie did vse: all this being denied, the said tenant was con∣demned in seuen and twentie pound, j.d. ob. Then the said Grono went to London for iustice, which was promised him, but he could neuer haue anie, where he spent in his iournie fif∣téene markes.
2 A certeine Gentelman was slaine, who had fostered the sonne of Grono ap Heilyn, and he that killed him was taken and brought to Ruthlan castell: then the said Grono and the kindred of him that was slaine asked iustice, but some of them were imprisoned, and the killer discharged. Then Grono went againe to London for iustice which the king did promise him, but he neuer had anie, but spent twentie markes. 3 The third time Grono was faine to go to London for ius∣tice in the premisses: where he spent xviij. marks, vj.s. viij.d. And then likewise the king promised him that he should haue iustice: but when he certeinelie beléeued to haue iustice, then Reginald Gray came to the countrie and said openlie, that he had all doings in that countrie by the kings charters: and tooke away all Bailiwicks, which the king had giuen the said Grono and sold them at his pleasure: then the said Grono asked iustice of the said Reginald, but he could not be heard. 4 The said Grono tooke to farme for foure yeares of God∣frey Marliney, Maynan and Lhysfayn, then Robert Cru∣quer came with his horsses, and armes to get the said lands by force, and for that Grono would not suffer him to haue the said lands before his yeares came out, he was called to the law, and then the said Reginald Gray came with xxiiij. horsse∣men, to take the said Grono. And for that they could not that daie haue their purpose, they called Grono the next daie to Ruthlan: and then Grono had counsell not to go to Ruthlan. Then they called him againe to answere at Caerwys, but the said Grono durst not go thither, but by the conduct of the bi∣shop of S. Asaph, for that Reginald Gray was there and his men in harnesse. 5 For these gréefes for the which he could get no iustice, but labour and expenses of liiij. markes and more, and for that he durst not in his owne person go to the court, he sent letters, one to the king, an other to his brother Lhewelyn, to signifie to the king that he should loose all the fauour of the countrie, if he kept no promise with them, and so it came to passe, because the men of Ros and Englefild could get no
iustice, the king neglecting the correction of these things, lost the whole countrie. Humblie sheweth to your holines, lord Arch∣bishop of Canturburie, primate of all England, the noble men of Tegengl: that when the said noble men did their homage to the lord Edward, king of England, the said king promised them to defend them and their goods; and that they should vse all kind of right, priuilege, and iuris∣diction, which they did vse in time of king Henrie, of the graunt of the said king, whereof they were after spoiled. FIrst they were spoiled of their right and priuileges and customes of the countrie: and were compelled to be iudged by the lawes of England, wheras the tenor of that their priuilege was to be iudged ac∣cording to the lawes of Wales at Tref Edwyn, at Ruthlan, and at Caerwys, and the best men of the countrie were taken, bi∣cause they desired to be iudged at Tref Edwyn, according to the tenor of their priuileges, by the lawes of Wales. 2 Whatsoeuer one Iustice dooth, his successor dooth reuerse the same: for in Dauids cause Reginald Gray reuoked that, which his predecessor confirmed and allowed. 3 If he doo take anie Gentleman of the countrie, he will not let him go vpon suertie, which he ought to doo. 4 If anie Gentleman be brought to the castell of the Flynt, vpon small accusation, and his cattell withall; they can neither be deliuered, nor haue delaie, vntill they giue the con∣stable an oxe, and vntill they paie thrée pound fées to Cynwric for the hauing of the delaie. 5 Reginald Gray gaue the lands of the men of Merton to the Abbot and couent of Basingwerke, against the lawes of Wales and the custome of the countrie, and contrarie to the forme of the peace betwixt prince Lhewelyn and the king;
that is to saie, xvj. Caratatasterrae. 6 The noble and best of the countrie be iniured for that the king builded the castell of Flynt vpon their ground: and the king commanded the Iustices to giue the men as much and as good ground or the price. But they are spoiled of their lands, and haue neither other lands nor monie. 7 Reginald Gray will not suffer men to cut their owne wood, vntill he haue both monie and reward, and vntill they paie for it also; but permitteth others to cut it downe fréelie, which they ought not to doo by the lawes and customes of Wales. 8 Where the men of Cyrchynan couenant with the king to giue the king halfe a medow, of condition the king should not suffer the woods to be cut downe, Howel ap Gruffyth being present: yet Reginald Gray hath broken the same, permitting euerie man to cut their woods, and spoile them also of their medowe. 9 The sonne of Cynwric ap Grono was taken at Ruthlan, and put in prison without anie cause at all: neither would the kings officers deliuer him, vnlesse he would redéeme the gage of a certeine woman, for the which he was constrained to paie much more than the pawne laie for. 10 When the bailiffe of Ruthlan was at a feast, Hicken le Maile wounded a Gentleman cruellie in the presence of the said bailiffe: by the occasion of which wound, Hicken was con∣demned in eight pound, and when he which was hurt would haue demanded the said eight pound, he was put in prison with Hicken. 11 The messengers of Reginald Gray attempted an ab∣surditie not heard of, requiring the people of the countrie to plow his ground, and sowe the same: and the messengers were Cynwric Says and Hicken Lemayl, and the said Cyn∣wric sware openlie before the whole companie, that vnlesse all men should plow Reginald Grayes ground, they should shortlie repent it: then the people feared much, as in that case anie constant man would feare.
12 The heires of Tegengl bought their offices for xxx. markes of the king. But afterward Reginald Gray spoiled them of their offices and monie, against the lawes and cus∣tomes of England. 13 Seauen Gentlemen were wrongfullie killed by the Englishmen, but as yet the parents of the Gentlemen can haue no amends: and though the offenders were taken, yet the said constable let them go without punishment. 14 The constable of Ruthlan kept two of the kings soldi∣ours in prison, for that they tooke an Englishman, who had wounded a man. All these things conteined in these articles are contrarie to the priuilege, libertie and right of the said men, and contrarie to the lawes and customes of Wales: neither dare the inhabi∣tants send their complaints to the king for feare of Reginald Gray (which feare anie constant man might haue) because the said Reginald Gray said openlie, that if he could come by anie such their messengers, he would cut off their heads, as it is cer∣teinelie told vs by one of his counsell: further neither toong can expresse, nor penne can write, how euill the men of Te∣gengl haue béene ordered. Humblie complaineth vnto your lordship, my lord Archbi∣shop of Canturburie Primate of all England,Lhewelyn ap Gruffyth ap Madoc. Lhewelyn ap Gruffyth ap Madoc, of the constable of Oswaldes Crosse, the king and of the men of that towne, who haue spoiled the said Lhewelyn of the third part of a towne called Lhedrot, and his fathers house without any law, or right, or custome of the coun∣trie. Further the said Constable and his complices haue a∣gainst the lawes and the custome of the countrie spoiled the said Lhewelyn of the common and pasturage, which he and his predecessors haue had and vsed time out of mind: and further condemned the said Lhewelyn for the said pasture in lxx. markes. And further the king of England granted certeine letters to a bastard called Gruffyth Vachan of Cynlhaeth, to law with the said Lhewelyn for his whole lordship and posses∣sions; by the occasion of the which letters, the said Lhewelyn
hath spent two hundreth pound of good monie. Also the said Constable compelled the said Lhewelyn to send two of his Gentlemen to him, whom when they came to him he caused to be hanged, which Gentlemen ought not by right to haue béene hanged, whose parents had rather haue gi∣uen him thrée hundreth pound. Afterward the said Constable imprisoned thréescore of the men of the said Lhewelyn (no cause alledged) but that a cer∣teine Page spake a word: who could not be deliuered out of prison, vntill euerie of them paid ten shillings. When the men of the said Lhewelyn came to the said towne to sell their oxen, the said Constable would cause the beasts to be driuen to the castell: neither would he restore the beastes nor monie for them. Further, the said Constable and his men tooke awaie the cattell of the said Lhewelyn from his owne ground, and did their will with them. Further the kings Iustices compelled the said Lhewelyn, contrarie to the law and custome of Wales, to deliuer to the sonnes of Encon ap Gruffyth, a certeine towne which both he and his ancestors euer had held. The said Constable tooke the horsse of Lhewelyns Bailiff: when the said Bailiff owed him nothing, who could neuer get his horsse againe, nor anie satis∣faction for it. Furthermore when the said Lhewelyn should haue gone to a towne called Caerlhêon to appeare there as he was appoin∣ted, the sonnes of Gruffyth ap Gwenwynwyn, and the soldi∣ours of Roger Strainge, by the counsell of the said Roger, tooke the said Lhewelyn and his men, and imprisoned them, to their great damage; which the said Lhewelyn would not for 300. pound starling, who could by no meanes be deliuered, vntill they had found sufficient suerties. The Archbishop receiuing these and other articles, came to the king, and requested him to consider these wrongs, and to cause amends to be made, or at the least excuse the Welsh∣men hauing so iust cause of gréefe. Who answered that the Welshmen were to be excused: yet he said he was euer readie
to doo iustice to all them that complained. Wherevpon the Archbishop besought the king againe, that the Welshmen might haue frée accesse to his Grace to declare their gréefes, and to séeke remedie: the king answered they should fréelie come and depart, if it should séeme that by iustice they de∣serued to depart. The Archbishop hearing this, went and came to the Prince of Wales in Snowdon, that he might mooue him and his bro∣ther Dauid, and the other companie to submit themselues: whereby he might incline the king to admit them. Which af∣ter much talke and conference with the Archbishop, the Prince answered that he was readie to submit himselfe to the king, reseruing two things: that is to say, his conscience, which he ought to haue for the rule and safegard of his people:Conscientia de salute po∣puli. and also the decencie of his state and calling. Which answere the Archbishop brought,2. Decorum. and reported to the king. At the which the king said, that he would not anie other treatie of peace, than that the Prince and his people should simplie submit themselues. But the Archbishop (knowing well that the Welshmen would not submit themselues but in the forme a∣foresaid, or in other forme to them tollerable and of them li∣ked) requested the king, that he might haue conference in this matter with all the noble Englishmen then present: who after such conference agréed all to these articles following. The which articles the Archbishop did send in writing to the Prince, by Iohn Wallensis. These are to be said to the Prince before his councell. FIrst that of the foure Cantreds and the lands by the king giuen to his nobles, and the Isle of Anglesey, he will haue no treatie of. 2 Item, of the tenants of the foure Cantreds if they will submit themselues, he purposeth to doo as becom∣meth
a kings maiestie: and we verelie beléeue he will deale with them mercifullie, and to that end we will labour and trust to obtaine. 3 As touching the lord Lhewelyn we can haue none other answer, but that he shall submit himselfe simplie to the king: and we beléeue certeinlie he will deale mercifullie with him, and to that end we trauell all we can, and verelie beléeue to be heard. These following are to be said to the Prince in secret. FIrst, that the nobilitie of England haue conceiued this forme of fauorable peace, that the lord Lhewelyn should submit himselfe to the king: and the king should honorablie prouide for him a thou∣sand pound starling, and some honorable countie in England. So that the said Lhewelyn would put the king in quiet pos∣session of Snowdon: and the king will prouide honorablie for the daughter of Lhewelyn, according to the state and conde∣cencie of his owne bloud, and to these they hope to persuade the king. 2 Item, if it happen that Lhewelyn marrie a wife, and to haue by hir anie heire male, they trust to intreate the king, that the same heire male and his heires for euer shall haue the same thousand pound and countie. 3 Item, to the people subiect to the said Lhewelyn the king will prouide, as becommeth their estates and condition, and to that the king is well inclined. These are to be said to Dauid brother to Lhewelyn in secret. FIrst, that if for the honor of God (Iuxta de∣bitum crucis assumptae) he will go to the holie land, he shall be prouided for according to his degrée;
so that he doo not returne, vnlesse he be called by the king: and we trust to entreat the king, to prouide for his child. 2 And these things we tell our selues to the Welshmen, that a great deale greater perill dooth hang ouer them, than we told them by mouth when we were with them: these things which we write séeme gréeuous, but it is a great deale more gréeuous to be oppressed with armes, and finallie to be rooted out, bicause euerie daie more and more their danger dooth increase. 3 Item, it is more hard to be alwaies in warre, in anguish of mind, and danger of bodie, alwaies sought & besieged, and so to die in deadlie sinne, and continuall rancor and malice. 4 Item, we feare (whereof we be sorie) vnlesse you doo agrée to peace, we most certeinlie will aggrauate the sentence Ec∣clesiasticall against you for your faults: of the which you can not excuse your selues, whereas yée shall find both grace and mercie, if you will come to peace. And send vs your answer of these in writing. Reuerendissimo in CHRISTO Patri ac Domi∣no Iohanni, dei gratia Archiepiscopo Cantuar. ac totius Angliae Primati, suus in Christo debitus filius, Lhewelinus Princeps VValliae, Dominus Snowdon, salutem. CVm desiderijs beneuolentiae filialis, ac reueren∣tijs multimodis, & honoribus Sancte Pater, sicut vosmet consuluistis, ad gratiam Regiam parati sumus venire: sub forma tamen nobis secura & honesta. Sed quia forma con∣senta in articulis and nos missis, nec secura est, nec honesta, prout nobis & concilio nostro videtur, & de quamultùm admirantur omnes: quòd plùs tendit ad ruinam & destructionem nostram, & populi nostri, quàm ad nostram securitatem & honestatem, nùllo modo possumus con∣sensum nostrum in eam praebere; sivellemus, alú{que} nobiles & populus nobis subiectus nullo modo consentirent, ob indubitatam destructionem & dissi∣pationem,
quae inde eis possit euenire. Tamen supplicamus vestram san∣ctam paternitatem, quatenus ad reformationem pacis debitae, honestae, & securae (ob quam tot labores assumpsistis) prouidè laboretis: collationem habentes ad articulos quos vobis mittimus, in scriptis. Honorabilius est & magis rationi consentaneum vt de domino Rege teneamus terras in quibus nos habitamus, quàm nos exhaeredari, & eas tradere alijs. Datae apud Garth Celyn. To the most reuerend Father in Christ, the lord Iohn by gods grace Archbishop of Canturburie, and Primate of all England, his obedient sonne Lhe∣welyn prince of VVales and lord of Snowdon sendeth greeting. MOst hartily with all reuerence and ho∣nor we are content and readie holie father as you haue counselled vs, to submit our selues vnto the kings Grace, so it be in that forme that shall be safe and honest for vs: but be∣cause that forme of submission conteined in the arti∣cles which were sent vnto vs, is neither safe, nor honest, as we and our councell do thinke (at the which articles all men do maruell:) tending rather to the destruction of vs and our people, than anie securitie and honest dealing, we may in no wise yeeld our assent vnto it, and if we should so doo, our nobles and people would not agree to the same, knowing the mischiefe and inconue∣nience that is like to ensue thereof. Neuerthelesse, we beseech your holie fatherhood, that for the reforma∣tion of a decent, honest and firme peace (for the which you haue taken so great paines) you doo circumspect∣lie prouide, hauing respect vnto the articles which we send vnto you in writing. It is more honorable for the
king more agreable to reason that we should hold our lands in the countrie where wee dwell, than that wee should be disinherited, and our lands giuen to other men. Dated at Garth Celyn. The Answers of the VVelshmen. FIrst, though the lord the king will haue no treatie of the foure Cantreds the lands that he gaue his nobles, nor the Isle of Anglesey: yet the Princes councell will no peace to be made, vnlesse treatie be had of them. For that the foure Cantreds be of the more tenure of the Prince, where alwaies the Princes of Wales had more right, since the time of Camber the sonne of Brutus: so that they be of the principalitie of Wales. The confirmation of the which the Prince obtained by Octobonus the Popes legate in England, by the consent of the king and his father: as it doth appeare by the letters patents. And more iust and equall it is, that our heires doo hold the said Cantreds of the king for monie and vsed seruice, than the same to be giuen to stran∣gers, which abuse the people by force and power. 2 All the tenants of all the Cantreds of Wales altogither doo saie, that they dare not submit themselues to the king, to doo his pleasure. First, for that the king kept neither coue∣nant, nor oth, nor grant by charter from the begining, to the Prince or his people. Secondlie, for that the kings men doo cruellie exercise tyrannie towards the Church and Church∣men. Thirdlie, that they be not bound to anie such matter, séeing they be the Princes tenants: who is readie to doo vsed and accustomed seruice, and to obey the king, with and by the said seruice. 3 To that which is said, that the Prince should simplie commit himselfe to the kings will, it is answered, that none of vs all dare come to the king, for the causes aforesaid,
we altogither will not suffer our Prince to come in that ma∣ner. 4 Item, where the great men of England would procure a prouision of a thousand pounds a yeare in England: let it be answered, that such prouision is not to be accepted, for that it is procured by them, who go about to disinherit the Prince to haue his lands in Wales. 5 Item, the Prince ought not to dismisse his inheritance, and his predecessors in Wales, since the time of Brutus, and confirmed by the sea apostolike, as is aforesaid, and to take lands in England, where he knoweth neither toong, maners, lawes nor customs, wherein he shall be soone trapped by his neighbours the Englishmen, his old malicious enimies, wher∣by he should lose the land too. 6 Item, séeing the king goeth about to depriue him of his ancient inheritance, it is not like that he would suffer him to possesse lands in England, where he claimeth no right; séeing that the Princes lands in Wales of his owne inheritance is but barren and vntilled, it is lesse like the king would suffer him to enioie good fertile ground in England. 7 Item, the Prince should giue the king possession of Snow∣don for euer. Let it be answered, that séeing that Snowdon is of the appurtenances of the principalitie of Wales, which the Prince and his predecessors held since the time of Brute (as it is before said) his councell will not suffer him to renounce that place, and to take in England a place lesse due vnto him. 8 Item, the people of Snowdon doo saie, that although the Prince would giue the king possession of it, yet they would neuer doo homage to strangers: of whose toong, maners, and lawes they should be ignorant. For so they should be for e∣uer captiued and cruellie handled, as the Cantreds haue béene by the kings bailiffes and other the kings men handled more cruellie than Sarracens, as it dooth well appeare by the notes of their gréefes, which the men of the Cantreds sent to you holie father.
These are to be answered for Dauid, the Princes brother. WHen he is disposed to see the holie land, he will doo it for Gods sake uoluntarilie, not by such in∣forcement against his will: for he intendeth not to go on pilgrimage after that sort. Bicause he knoweth enfor∣ced seruice not to please God; and if he hereafter shall for de∣uotion sée the holie land, that is no cause for euer to disinherit his offspring, but rather to reward them. And for that neither the Prince nor his people, for countrie nor for gaines, did mooue warre, inuading no mans lands, but defending their owne lands, lawes, and liberties; and that the king and his people of inueterate hatred, and for co∣uetousnes to get our lands inuading the same, mooued warre: wée therefore sée our defense is iust and lawfull, and herein we trust God will helpe vs, and will turne his reuenge vpon destroiers of churches; who haue rooted vp and burned chur∣ches, and taken out both all sacraments and sacred things from them, killing préests, clarkes, religious, lame, dombe, deaffe, yonglings sucking their mothers paps, weake & im∣potent, both man and woman, and committing all other e∣normities, as partlie it appeareth to your holinesse. Wherefore God forbid that your holinesse should fulminate sentence a∣gainst anie, but such as hath doone such things. We who haue suffered all these things at the kings officers hands, doo hope at your hands remedie and comfort: and that you will punish such church robbers and killers, who can defend themselues no waies, least their impunitie because and example for others to do the like. Uerie manie in our countrie doo much maruell that you counselled vs to leaue our owne land, and to go to an other mans lands among our enimies to liue: for séeing we cannot haue peace in our owne land, which is our owne right, much lesse should we be quiet in an other mans, amongst our
enimies. And though it be hard to liue in warre and perill, harder it is to be vtterlie destroied and brought to nothing: especiallie for christians, séeking else nothing but to defend our owne, being by necessitie driuen therevnto, & the gréedie ambition of our enimies. And your holinesse told vs, that you had fulminated sen∣tence against all that for hatred or gaines doo hinder the peace. And it appeareth euidentlie who doo war for these causes, the feare of death, the feare of imprisonment, the feare of per∣petuall prison, the feare of disinheriting, no kéeping of pro∣mise, couenant, grant, nor charter, tyrannicall dominion, and manie more like compell vs to be in warre, and this we shew to God and to your lordship, desiring your godlie and chari∣table helpe. Furthermore, if anie in England haue offended the king (as manie doo offend him) yet none of them be disinherited: so if anie of vs haue offended the king, let him be punished and make satisfaction, as he maie, without exhereditating. As we trust in you, we praie you holie Father to labour to this end. If they laie to vs that we breake the peace, it appeareth eui∣dentlie that they and not we breake the same, who neuer kept promise, nor couenant, nor order, made anie amends for trespasses, nor remedie for our complaints. Thus farre out of the records of Iohn Peckam Archbishop of Cant. written about three hundreth yeares past, which are extant this daie to be seene. When the Archbishop could not conclude a peace,N. Triuet. he denounced the prince & his complices ac∣cursed: then the king sent his armie by sea to the Ile of Môn or Anglesey,Hol. pag. 791. which they manne, & slew such as resisted them, for the chiefest men serued the king, as their oth was, so they came ouer a∣gainst Bangor, where the arme of the sea called Mênay (which diuideth the Ile from the maine
land) is narowest, and the place called Moel y donn, and there made a bridge of boates and plankes o∣uer the water,Cor. Tacitus in vita Agri∣colae. where before Iulius Agricola did the like, when he subdued the Ile to the Romanes, and not betwixt Man and Brytaine, as Polydor Virgil ignorantlie affirmeth. This bridge accomplished, so that threescore men might well passe ouer in a front, William Latimer with a great number of the best soldiours, and Lucas Thany steward of Gascoyn with his Gascoynes and Spaniards (where∣of a great number were to come to serve the king) passed ouer the bridge, and there saw no stirre of enimies: but assoone as the sea beganne to flow, downe came the Welshmen from the hils, and set vpon them fiercely, and either slew or chased them to the sea to drowne themselues: for the water was to hie, that they could not attaine the bridge, sauing William Latimer alone, whose horsse caried him to the bridge, and so he escaped. Hol. pag. 791.There were slaine and drowned at this time manie wor∣thie soldiours: and amongst other this famous knight Sir Lucas de Thany (here named) Robert Clifford,Tho. Wals. page. 11. Sir Wil∣liam Lindsey, and two Gentlemen of good accompt, that were brethren to Robert Burnell then bishop of Bath. There perished in all thirtéene knights,Chro. Dunst. seuentéene yoong Gentle∣men, and to the number of two hundreth footmen, which hapned vpon S. Leonards daie. Thomas Walsingham wri∣teth, that the king lost in this viage a little before this,Tho. VVals. ibidem. fouretéene ensignes, at which time the lord William de Audeley, and the lord Roger Clifford the yoonger, and manie other were slaine, and the king himselfe was driuen to take the castell of Hope for his safegard. In the meane time was the Earle of Glocester & Sir Edmund Mortimer with an armie in South∣wales,
where were manie that serued the king, and there fought with the princes freends at Lhandei∣lo Vawr, and gave them an overthrow, wherein on the kings side yoong William de Valence his coosen germane, and foure knightes more were slaine. And all this while the Prince destroied the coun∣trie of Caerdigan, and all the lands of Rees ap Mere∣dyth, who serued the king in all these warres. But afterward the prince separated himselfe from his armie with a few, and came to Buelht, thinking to remaine there quietlie for a while, and by chance as he came by the water Wy,Matt. West. page. 370. N. Triuet. Tho. VVals. page. 10. there were Edmund Mortimer, and Iohn Gifford with a great number of soldiours, and either partie were abashed of o∣ther. Edmund Mortimers men were of that coun∣try, for his father was lord therof. Then the prince departed from his men, and went to the vallie with his esquire alone, to talke with certeine lords of the countrie, who had promised to meete him there. Then some of his men seeing their enimies come downe from the hill, kept the bridge called Pont O∣rewyn, & defended the passage manfullie, till one de∣clared to the Englishmen where a foord was a little beneath, through the which they sent a number of their men with Helias Walwyn, who suddenlie fell vpon them that defended the bridge in their backs, and put them to flight. The princes esquire told the Prince (as he stood secretlie abiding the comming of such as promised to meete him in a lit∣tle groue) that he heard a great noise and crie at the bridge: and the prince asked whether his men had taken the bridge, and he said, Yes. Then (said the Prince) I passe not if all the power of Eng∣land
were vpon the other side. But suddenlie be∣hold, the horssemen about the groue, and as he would haue escaped to his men, they pursued him so hard that one Adam Francton ranne him tho∣rough with a staffe being vnarmed,Prince Lhewelyn slaine. and knew him not, and his men being but a few stood and fought boldlie, euer looking for their Prince, till the Eng∣lishmen by force of archers mixt with the horsse∣men wanne the hill and put them to flight. And as they returned, Francton went to spoile him whome he had slaine, and when he saw his face, he knew him verie well, and stroke off his head, and sent it to the king at the Abbie of Conwey, who receiued it with great ioy, and caused it to be set vpon one of the highest turrets of the Towre of London. This was the end of Lhewelyn, beetraied by the men of Buelht, who was the last Prince of Brytaines blood; who bare dominion and rule in Wales. So that the rule and gouernment of the Brytaines euer continued in some place of Brytaine, from the first comming of Brutus, which was in the yeare before Christes incarnation 1136. to the yeare after Christ 1282. by the space of 2418. yeares. Shortlie after that the King had brought all the countrie to his subiection, the countrie men themselues brought to him Dauid the Princes brother,Thom. Wals. pag. 12. whome he kept in Ruthlan castell, and af∣ter put him to death at Shrewesburie. Then the king builded two strong holdes in Northwales, the one at Conwey, and the other at Caernaruan. When Rees Vachan hard how all things went, he yeelded himselfe to the Earle of Hereford, who at
the kings commandement sent him to the Towre of London, to be imprisoned there. And so the king passed through all Wales, and brought all the countrie in subie∣ction to the crowne of Eng∣land to this daie. Thus endeth the Historie of the Brytish Princes.
The Princes of Wales of the blood royall of England: collected for the most part out of the Records in the Towre. Edward of Caernaruon. KIng Edward, albeit hée had brought al Wales vnder his subiec∣tion: and by a statute made at Ruthlan, An. 12. Ed. 1. incorporated and vnited the same vnto England: in the which statute there be many good lawes concerning the diuision of Wales into coun∣ties, and concerning diuerse offices and officers, and con∣cerning triall, and concerning the diuisions of actions, and the forme of manie writs, and the procéeding therein, much like to the lawes of England: yet he could neuer winne the good will of the common people of the countrie to accept him for their Prince, and to be obedient vnto such officers as he should appoint to gouerne them, vnlesse he would remaine himselfe in the countrie among them. Neither could he bring them to yéeld their obedience to anie other Prince, except he were of their owne nation: for the Welshmen hauing experi∣ence of the gouernment of the English officers, and knowing that the king would rule the countrie by his deputies, cold not abide to haue anie Englishman to be their ruler: who often∣times vpon the kings motion answered, that they were con∣tent to take for their Prince anie man, whom his Maiestie
would name, so that he were a Welshman, and none other answer could he euer get of them, by anie meanes. Whervpon the king sent for Quéene Elianor out of England in the déepe of winter being then great with child, to the castell of Caernar∣uon: and when she was nigh to be brought to bed, the king went to Ruthlan, and sent for all the Barons and best men in all Wales, to come to him, to consult concerning the weale publike of their countrie. And when they were come, he differ∣red the consultation, vntill he was certified that the Quéene was deliuered of a sonne: then (sending certeine lords to the christning of his child, and informing them how he would haue him named) he called the Welshmen togither, declaring vnto them, that whereas they were oftentimes futers vnto him to appoint them a Prince, he now hauing occasion to depart out of the countrie, would name them a Prince, if they would al∣low and obey him whom he should name. To the which motion they answered that they would so doo, if he would appoint one of their owne nation to be their Prince: wherevnto the king replied, that he would name one that was borne in Wales, and could speake neuer a word of English, whose life and conuersa∣tion no man was able to staine. And when they all had gran∣ted that such a one they would obey, he named his owne sonne Edward borne in Caernaruon castell a few daies before. Then the king hauing the countrie at his will, gaue whole lordships and townes in the middest of Wales vnto English lords: as the lordship of Denbigh, to Henrie Lacy Earle of Lincolne: the lordship of Ruthyn, to the lord Reginald Gray se∣cond sonne to Iohn lord Gray of Wilton: and other lands to manie of his nobilitie. This Henrie Lacy lord of Denbigh was the sonne of Ed∣mund Lacy,The lord∣ship of Denbigh. the sonne of Iohn Lacy lord of Halton Pomfret, and Constable of Chester, who maried Margaret the eldest daughter and one of the heires of Robert Quincy Erle of Lin∣colne, the said Henrie married Margaret the daughter and sole heire of William Longspee Earle of Sarum, and had issue Ed∣mund and Iohn which both died yoong, of whom the one pe∣rished
by a fall into a verie déepe well within the castell of Denbigh, and a daughter named Alicia maried vnto Thomas Plantagenet Earle of Lancaster, who was in the right of his said wife Earle of Lincolne and Sarum, lord of Denbigh, Hal∣ton, Pomfret, and constable of Chester. After the death of the said Thomas, king Edward the second gaue the lordship of Denbigh to Hugh lord Spencer, Earle of Winchester: after whose death the same lordship was giuen by king Edward the third, Anno Regni sui primo, as appeareth of Record to Roger Mortimer Earle of March, with diuerse other lordships in the Marches, in performance of the kings promise while he remai∣ned in France with his mother, for the prouision of a thousand pound lands of a reasonable extent for the said Roger, assoone as by Gods grace he should come to the possession of the crowne and kingdome of England. Within few yeares after, the Earle of March being attainted, the said lordship of Den∣bigh was giuen by the same king to the lord Montagu Earle of Sarum: but shortlie after An. 29. Ed. 3. it was restored a∣gaine with the Earldome of March to the Mortimers, in the which house the same remained vntill the whole inheritance of the Mortimers came with a daughter to the house of Yorke, and so to the crowne: as appeareth before, pag. 317. And now of late it was giuen by the Quéenes Maiestie that now is, An. Regni sui. 6. to the right honorable Robert Earle of Leyce∣ster, who was then created Baron of Denbigh:H. Lhoyd. it is counted now one of the greatest and best lordships in England. The lordship of Ruthyn continued in the possession of the Grayes, vntill in the time of king Henrie the seuenth, George Gray Earle of Kent and lord of Ruthyn passed the same vpon some bargaine to the king, and now it is of the possession of the right honorable the Earle of Warwicke. There came the same time with king Edward to North∣wales diuerse Gentlemen, who grew afterward to be men of great possessions in the countrie, whose posteritie doo enioy the same to this daie. Rees ap Meredyth serued the king in all these warres, who
did the Prince most hurt of all men: and was in great hope of goodlie preferments at the kings hands: whom after the o∣uerthrowe of the Prince the king made knight, and fed with manie faire and good woords. After that, he and all other his countriemen and neighbours had submitted themselues to the gouernement of the king of England:Hol. pag. 796. it happened that the lord Payne Tiptoft, warden of the kings castels nigh vnto Reeses countrie, and the Lord Alan Plucknet the kings stew∣ard in Wales, called the said Rees, as they did all other of the countrie to the kings court, whither he refused to come, al∣ledging his ancient priuileges and liberties with the kings promises: but the said officers procéeded according to the law against him:1289 wherevpon a great variance arose betwéene the said Payne Tiptoft, and the said Sir Rees ap Meredyth, so that sundrie skirmishes were foughten betwixt them, and men slaine on both sides, to the great disturbance of the countrie. The king hearing of these things (being then beyond the seas) wrote vnto Rees ap Meredyth, requiring him to kéepe the peace till his returne: at what time he promised to reforme all things in due and reasonable order: but Rees would not giue ouer the enterprise which he had begun. Wherevpon the king sent to the Earle of Cornewall,Tho. Wals. page. 15. whom he had leaft his lieutenant in the realme during his absence, to send an armie of men into Wales, to withstand the disordered attempts of the said Rees. Who went into Wales himselfe, and ouerthrew Reeses castell of Drofolan: but by vndermining and reuer∣sing the walles of the said castell, with the fall thereof, the Ba∣ron of Stafford & the lord William de Monchency, with manie other knights and Esquires, were oppressed and brused to death. Afterward Robert Tiptoft lord deputie of Wales ga∣thered an armie, and méeting the said Rees after the slaugh∣ter of 4000. of his people,Tho. Wals. pag. 20. discomfited and tooke him. Who a∣bout Michaelmas folowing, at the kings going into Scot∣land, was had to Yorke, and there condemned and executed. Not long after,1293 the king wanting monie, there was a great subsidie granted towards the maintenance of the warres in
France, about leuieng of the which there was much adoo in di∣uerse places: but especiallie the Welshmen, which were neuer woont to be acquainted with such contribution, stormed a∣gainst it:Matt. West. page. 395. so that they tooke one of their owne captaines na∣med Roger de Puelesdon, who at the kings commandement gathered the said subsidie, and hanged him with diuers other, and afterward headed the said Roger. Wherevpon the king being sore offended for the death of the said Roger, whom he greatlie fauoured, and hearing that the Welshmen began to stirre against him in diuers places: for the Westwales men had chosen Maelgon Vachan for their captaine, and destroied all Caerdigan and Penbrooke, and returned with rich spoiles: they of Glamorgan and the South parts, tooke one named Morgan for their leader, and driuing the Earle of Glocester out of the countrie, they restored to the said Morgan againe those possessions which the ancestors of the said Earle by force and great wrong had taken from the said Morgans predeces∣sors. The Northwales men had set vp one Madoc being of the kindred of the last Lhewelyn slaine at Buelht, who gathe∣ring a great power came to Caernaruon, and slew a great number of Englishmen which were come thither to the Faire, and spoiled the whole towne: then (I saie) the king called backe his brother Edmond Earle of Lancaster, and Henrie Lacy Earle of Lincolne and lord of Denbigh, who had an armie readie to passe into Gascoyn.Hol. pag. 810. These Earles came towards Northwales, and as they approched néere vnto the castell of Denbigh vpon S. Martyns daie, the Welshmen with great force encountred them, and giuing them battell, droue them backe, and discomfited their people. Then the king himselfe came to Wales, and kept his Christ∣mas at Aberconwey, where Robert Wynchelsey archbishop of Canturburie came vnto him and did his homage, and then returned home. The king as he passed further into the coun∣trie, lost much of his carriages, which the Welshmen tooke, be∣ing loden with vittell and prouision for the armie: so that the king and his people indured great penurie, and was constrai∣ned
to drinke water mixt with honie, and eate verie grosse and course meate, where he was verie like to haue béene dis∣tressed, had not the other part of his armie come vnto him in time. While the king remained in Snowdon,N. Triuet. Tho. Wals. page. 27. the Earle of War∣wicke hearing that a great number of Welshmen were as∣sembled togither, and lodged in a vallie betwixt two woods, chose out a companie of horssemen, with certeine crosse∣bowes and archers, and comming vpon the Welshmen in the night, compassed them round about, who pitching the ends of their speares, and turning the points against their enimies, stood at defense so to kéepe off the horssemen. But the Earle hauing placed his battell so, that euer betwixt two horssemen there stood a crossebow, a great part of the Welshmen, who stood at defense in maner aforesaid with their speares, were o∣uerthrowne and broken with the shot of the quarels, and then the Earle charged the residue with a troupe of horssemen, and bare them downe with such slaughter, as they had not sustei∣ned the like losse of people (as was thought) at anie time be∣fore. After this the king builded a strong castell within the Ile of Anglesey, and called the same Buemarish:Beumarish built. and so putting all things in quietnesse, and punishing such as had put to death Roger de Puelesdon, he returned home with his armie. But Madoc within a while after leauieng an armie of men came to Oswestrie, where the people yéelded vnto him: and méeting with the lord Strange with a companie of Marchers not farre from Knookine, ouerthrew him, and spoiled his countrie mi∣serablie, and shortlie after he gaue the Marchers another ouer∣throw. But for all that the lord Marchers nothing dismaied at this mischance, gathered a great power anew, & met Madoc as he was comming towards Shrewesburie vpon the hils of Cefn Digolh not farre from Caurs castell, where after a long fight the said Madoc was taken, and his men discomfited and put to flight. Then he was sent to the Towre of London, there to remaine in perpetuall prison. There be some which affirme,
that Madoc was not taken, but rather after manie aduen∣tures and sundrie conflicts, when the Welshmen were brought into an issue of great extremitie, the said Madoc came in, and submitted himselfe to the kings peace, and was receiued vpon condition, that he should pursue Morgan till he had taken him and brought him to the kings prison: which was done, and so all things in those parties were set in rest and peace, and ma∣nie hostages of the chiefest of the nobilitie of Wales were deli∣uered to the king, who sent them to diuerse castels in England, where they were safelie kept almost to the end of the warres that followed with Scotland. In the 29. yeare of king Edward the first, Edward prince of Wales came to Chester, where he receiued the homage of the fréeholders of Wales, as: Henrie Earle of Lancaster did homage and fealtie for Monmouth. Reginald Gray for Ruthyn. Fulke Fitzwarren for his lands in VVales. The lord William Martin for his lands in Cemaes. Roger Mortimer for his lands in VVales. Henrie Lacy Earle of Lincolne for the land of Ros and Ry∣uoneoc in VVales.The Ho∣mage doon to Edward Prince of Wales, out of the Re∣cords. Robert lord Mount alt for his land in VVales. Gruffyth lord of Poole for the lordship of Powys. Sir Gruffyth Lhoyd knight. Tuder ap Grono of Anglesey. Madoc ap Tuder Archdeacon of Anglesey. Encon ap Howel of Caernaruon. Tuder ap Gruffyth. Lhewelyn ap Ednyuet. Gruffyth Vachan the sonne of Gruffyth ap Iorwerth. Madoc Vachan Denglfield. Lhewelyn bishop of S. Asaph. Flint. Engl.Maister Richard de Puelesdon. This man (as appeareth by the Records in the Towre) was made Sheriffe of Caernaruon shire during his life, with the stipend of fourtie pound star∣ling
yearelie, An. 12. Ed. 1. Gruffyth ap Tuder. Ithel Vachan. Ithel ap Blethyn, &c. The lord Richard de Sutton Baron of Malpas did homage and fealtie to Edward Prince of Wales and Earle of Chester for the said Baronie of Malpas, Apud Ruthlan 27. Die Aprilis, An. supra dicto. Anianus or Eneon bishop of Bangor, and Dauid Abbot of Maynan, did homage and fealtie to the said Edward Prince of Wales, Apud Conwey 28. Aprilis An. supra dicto. Lewys de Felton the sonne of Richard de Felton did homage and fealtie to Edward Prince of Wales, for the lands which the said Richard held of the prince in Maelor Saesneg. Iohn Erle Warren did homage & fealtie to Edward prince of VVales, in the chappell of the lord Iohn de Kirkbie, sometime bishop of Elie, at London 25. die Iulij, An. 30. E. 1. for the lord∣ships of Bromfield and Yal. The same Iohn Earle Warren swore fealtie vnto the said Prince for the lands in Hopdale. The lord Edmund Mortimer the first daie of Nouember, An. 30. Ed. 1. in the house of the bishop of Elie at London, did ho∣mage and fealtie to Edward prince of VVales before his coun∣cell, for his lands of Cery and Cydewen. About the yeare 1322.1322 one Sir Gruffyth Lhoyd knight gathered a great number of Welshmen,Hol. pag. 863. and tooke diuers ca∣stles in Wales, which were kept by the people of the lord Mor∣timer the elder. He tooke also the castels of Mould, Chirk, &c. The kéepers whereof (comming to Prince Ed∣ward at Shrewesburie who then was king of England) submitted themselues to him, and were shortlie after sent to the Towre of London.
Edward of VVindsore. THe same yeare béeing the fiftéenth of the reigne of king Edward the second,Hol. pag. 869. Edward de Windsore the kings eldest sonne was in a par∣liament holden at Yorke crea∣ted prince of VVales and Duke of Aquitane. Edward of VVoodstoke surnamed the blacke Prince. EDward borne at Woodstoke, sonne and heire to king Edward the third, was created Prince of Wales the twelfe daie of Maie, in the xvij. yeare of his fathers reigne, when he was foure∣téene yeares of age, who in time grue to be the flowre of chiualrie of all Europe. He tooke Iohn the French king prisoner, at the battell of Poytiers, and died, his father yet li∣uing, the eight of Iulie, in the xlvj. yeare of his age, and the fif∣tie of his fathers reigne: a prince of such excellent demeanor, so valiant, wife, and politike in his dooings, that the verie and perfect representation of knighthood appeared most liuely in
his person: for such was his towardnesse, or rather perfection in princelie gouernement, that if he had liued and atteined the crowne, euerie man iudged that he would surelie haue ex∣céeded the glorious renowme of all his ancestors. Richard of Burdeuxe. RIchard the sonne of Edward, Prince of Wales, was after the death of his fa∣ther created Prince of Wales, at Hauering at Bowre, the 20. daie of Nouember in the 50. yeare of king Edward the third his Grandfather, he was after the death of his said Grandfa∣ther, king of England, by the name of king Richard the second. Henrie of Monmouth. HENRIE of Mon∣mouth, sonne and heire to Henrie the fourth, king of Eng∣land, was the fiftéenth daie of October in the first yeare of the reigne of his father at West∣minster created Prince of Wales: who was after king of England, by the name of king Henrie the fift. In the time of king Richard the second there was one Owen ap Gruffyth Vachan descended of a yoonger sonne of Gruffyth ap Madoc lord of Bromfield. This Owen was first a student at
the lawes of the Realme, and became an vtter barrester, or an apprentise of the law (as they terme him) and serued king Ri∣chard in great credit and fauour; betwéene whom and the lord Gray of Ruthyn happened some discord about a péece of com∣mons, lieng betwéene the lordship of Ruthyn, and the lordship of Glyndourdwy, wherof Owen was owner, and thereof tooke his surname of Glyndour. During the reigne of king Richard, Owen was too hard for the lord Gray, being then a seruitour in court with king Richard, (with whom he was at the time of his taking by the duke of Lancaster in the castell of Flynt) but after that king Richard was put downe, the lord Gray being now better fréended than Owen, entred vpon the said commons: wherevpon Owen hauing manie fréends and folowers in his countrie (as those that be great with Princes commonlie haue) put himselfe in armour against the lord Gray, whom he méeting in the field ouercame and tooke priso∣ner. This was the verie begining and the cause of Owens ri∣sing and attempts. Upon the taking of the lord Gray, and spoiling of his lordship of Ruthyn, manie resorted to Owen from all partes of VVales, some thinking that he was aswell in fauour now as he was in king Richards daies: some other putting in his head, that now the time was come wherein the Brytaines through his meanes might recouer againe the ho∣nour and liberties of their ancestors. These things being laid before Owen by such as were verie cunning in Merlins pro∣phesies and the interpretations of the same (for there were in those daies, as I feare there be now, some singular men which are déepelie ouerséene in those mysteries, and hope one daie to méete veluet vpon London bridge with their bowes) brought him into such a fooles paradise, that he neuer waieng what title he might pretend nor what right he had, procée∣ded and made warre vpon the Earle of March, who was the right inheritour aswell to the Principalitie of VVales, as ap∣peareth before pag. 315. as to the kingdome of England, after the death of king Richard being descended of the elder brother next to Edward prince of Wales father to king Richard. Of
which stirre and rebellion there insued much mischiefe to the VVelshmen. For the king conceiuing great hatred against them,The vnrea∣sonable lawes of K. Henrie 4. against the inhabitants of Wales. See the books of statutes. shewed himselfe a manifest oppressor of all that nation, making rigorous lawes against them, whereby he tooke in a maner all the liberties of subiects from them, prohibiting all VVelshmen to purchase lands, or to be chosen or receiued to be citizens or burgesses in anie citie, borough, or market towne, or be receiued or accepted to anie office of Maior, Bailiffe, Chamberlaine, constable, or kéeper of the gates, or of the gaole, or to be of the counsell of anie citie, borough or towne, or to beare anie maner armour within anie citie, borough, or market towne. And if anie sute happened betwéene a VVelsh∣man and anie Englishman, it was by law ordeined that the Englishman should not be conuict, vnlesse it were by the iudg∣ment of English Iustices, and by the verdict of whole English burgesses, or by inquests of English boroughs and townes of the Seigniories where the said sute laie: also that all English burgesses that maried VVelshwomen should be disfranchised of their liberties. No congregations or méetings in counsell was permitted to the VVelshmen but by licence of the chiefe officers of the same Seigniorie, and in the presence of the same officers. That no victuals or armour should be brought into VVales without the speciall licence of the king or his counsell. That no VVelshman should haue any castell, fortresse, or house defensiue of his owne or of anie other man to kéepe. No VVelshman to be made Iustice, Chamberlaine, Chancellor, Treasuror, Sheriffe, Steward, Constable of castell, receiuer, eschetor, coroner, nor chiefe forester, nor other officer, nor kée∣per of the records, nor lieutenant in anie of the said offices in no part of VVales, nor of the counsell of anie English lord, notwithstanding anie patent or licence made to the contra∣rie. That no Englishman, which in time to come shall marie anie VVelshwoman, be put in anie office in Wales, or in the Marches of the same. These with other lawes both vnreasonable and vnconcio∣nable (such as no prince among the heathen euer offered to
his subiects) were ordeined and seuerelie executed against them. Neither was it anie reason that for the offense of one man and his complices, all the whole nation should be so per∣secuted, whereby not onelie they that liued in that time, but al∣so their children and posteritie should be brought to perpetuall thraldome and miserie: for these lawes were not ordeined for their reformation, but of méere purpose to worke their vtter ruine and destruction. Which doth euidentlie appeare, in that they were forbidden to kéepe their children at learning, or to put them to be apprentises to anie occupation in anie towne or borough of this realme. Let anie indifferent man therefore iudge and consider whether this extremitie of law, where iu∣stice it selfe is méere iniurie and crueltie, be not a cause and matter sufficient to withdraw anie people from ciuilitie to barbarisme. Edward of VVestminster. EDward the onelie sonne, and heire of king Henrie the sixt borne at Westmin∣ster the thirtith daie of Octo∣ber in the 31. yeare of the reigne of his father, was cre∣ated prince of Wales, and Earle of Chester, by autho∣ritie of parlement at West∣minster the 15. daie of March in the 32. yeare of the said king his father. This prince was afterwards of such towardnesse, that he became skilfull in the knowledge aswell of martiall affaires, as of matters of go∣uernment and lawes of the realme, he was murthered at Teukesburie.
Edward of Westminster. EDward the eldest sonne of K. Edward the 4. borne in the sanctuarie at Westmin∣ster, his father being expelled out of England in the 49. yeare of king Henrie the sixt, was by authoritie of parlement created prince of Wales, and Erle of Chester, the 26. daie of Iune, in the eleuenth yeare of the reigne of his father king Edward the fourth, and was afterward king of England by the name of king Edward the 5. who was made awaie by the wicked practise of his vncle Richard duke of Glo∣cester, who vsurped the crowne after him. Iohn bishop of Worcester (as appeareth by records of the towne Hall of Salop,Ioh. Bishop of Worce∣ster. bearing date the tenth daie of Aprill in the 18. yeare of king Edward the fourth) was president of the L. Princes counsell of the Marches of Wales: who togi∣ther with the lord Anthonie Earle Riuers, vncle and gouernor to the said Prince, sate in the towne hall aforesaid, and made certeine ordinances for the weale and tranquillitie of the said towne. King Edward the fourth vsing much the faithfull seruice of the Welshmen, meant the reformation of the estate of Wales, and the establishing of a court within that Principalitie, and therefore he sent the bishop of Worcester, and the Earle Riuers, with the prince of Wales to the countrie, to the end he might vnderstand how to procéed in his purposed reforma∣tion. But the troubles and disquietnesse of his owne subiects,
and the shortnes of his time suffered him to doo little or no∣thing in that behalfe. Edward. EDward the on∣lie sonne of king Richard the third, being a child of tenne yeares of age, was the foure and twentith daie of August, in the first yeare of the reigne of the same king created prince of Wales. Arthur. ARthur the sonne and heire of King Henrie the seuenth, was vpon the feast daie of S. Andrew, in the fift yéere of king Henrie the seuenth his father, created Prince of Wales. About this time king Henrie the seuenth, who by his grandfather Owen Tuder des∣cended out of Wales,Owen Tu∣der being aided by the Welshmen in Bos∣worth field, which came thither vnder the conduct of Sir Wil∣liam Standley then L. of Bromfield, Yale and Chirckland, knowing and pitieng their thraldome and iniuries, tooke order to reforme the same, and granted vnto them a charter of liber∣ties, whereby they were released of that oppression, wherewith they were afflicted by lawes (as I haue laid downe before)
more heathenish than christian. And here I can not passe, but must something answere the reprochfull and slanderous asser∣tions of Iohannes Bernardus, Pontus, Heuterus and others, who go about to abase the noble parentage of the said Owen this kings grandfather, following more their owne affectio∣nate humors, than anie good proofe or authoritie, for if they would read that noble worke of Matthew Paris, they shall find in pag. 843. of the printed booke, that Ednyuet Vachan one of his ancestors was the chiefest of counsell to Lhewelyn ap Ior∣werth, otherwise called Leolinus Magnus, and to Dauid ap Lhewelyn, Princes of Wales, as appeareth before page 306. They may also find in the records of the towre, in an. 29. Ed. 1. in the generall homage done to Edward Caernaruon, first Prince of Wales of the English blood, that Tuder ap Grono another of the ancestors of the said Owen, did his homage a∣mong the nobles of Wales, as appeareth in the said records. Further the said Owens grandmother, the wife of Tuder ap Grono, was Margaret the daughter of Thomas the sonne of Elianor, which was the daughter of the countie of Barr, by Eli∣anor his wife, daughter to Edward the first, king of England. Besides all this, there was a commission at this time direc∣ted from king Henrie the seauenth, to the Abbot of Lhan Eg∣west, Doctor Owen Poole chanon of Hereford, and Iohn King, harold, to make inquisition concerning the parentage of the said Owen, who comming to Wales, trauelled in that matter, and vsed the helps of Sir Iohn Leyaf, Guttyn Owen Bardh, Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn ap Euan Vachan, and others in the search of the Brytish or Welsh bookes of petigrées, out of the which they drew his perfect genelogie from the ancient kings of Brytaine and the Princes of Wales, and so returned their commission: which returne is extant at this daie to be séene. After that about the seuentéenth yeare of king Henries reigne,William Smith bi∣shop of Lin∣colne. Prince Arthur went againe to Wales, being newlie married, with whom the king sent Doctor William Smith, which was afterward bishop of Lincolne, to be president of his counsell, appointing him other wise & expert counsellors, as
Sir Richard Poole his kinseman,Prince Ar∣thurs coun∣celers. which was his chéefe cham∣berlaine, also Sir Henrie Vernon, Sir Richard Crofts, Sir Dauid Philip, Sir William Vdall, Sir Thomas Englefield, Sir Peter Newton, &c. But before the yeare ended, this no∣ble Prince, after that he had béene married to the ladie Catha∣rine his wife, the space of fiue moneths, departed out of this transitorie life, at Ludlowe castell, the second daie of Aprill in the said yeare of his fathers reigne, and with great funerall solemnitie was buried at Worcester. Henrie duke of Yorke. HEnrie duke of Yorke, brother vnto Prince Arthur, was af∣ter the death of the Prince, the 18. daie of Februarie, in the 19. yeare of the reigne of king Henrie the seuenth his father, created Prince of Wales, and was afterward king of England, by the name of king Henrie the eight. The said William Smith Bishop of Lincolne, was L. President of his coun∣cell, who continued in that office, vntill the fourth yeare of this kings reigne; and was the first L. President that is named in the records of that court: he was founder of Brasenose col∣lege in Oxenford. In the fourth yeare of this noble king Henrie the eight, Geffrey Blyth Bishop of Couentrie and Lychfield was sent into Wales to be L.Geffrey Blyth President of the princes councell, where he continued vntill the 16. yeare of the same king.
Marie. THe ladie Ma∣rie, daughter to the same king Henrie the eight, by the Princesse Catharine Dowager, the wi∣dowe of Prince Arthur, was Princesse of Wales. And in the seuentéenth yeare of king Hen∣ries reigne, Iohn Voiseie,Iohn Voiseie. Bi∣shop of Excester, was sent by the king to be L. President of the councell of the said Princes in the marches of Wales, where he continued vntill the 25. yeare of the same king.I. Hoker in Catalogo Episc. Exon. This Bi∣shop was Doctor of the lawes, and verie well learned and wise, and in great fauour with the king, who sent him sundrie times in embassages to forreine Princes: and now he had the gouernement of the kings onelie daughter ladie Marie Prin∣cesse of Wales. Of all the Bishops in the land he was coun∣ted the courtlikest; and the best Courtier: and although he was well reported of for his learning,A courtlie Bishop. yet was he better liked for his courtlike behauiour, which in the end turned not so much to his credit, as to the vtter ruine and spoile of his church: for of xxij. lordships and manours, which his predeces∣sors had, and least vnto him of a goodlie yearelie reuenue, he leaft but thrée, and them also leased out. And where he found fouretéene houses well furnished, he leaft onlie one house bare and without furniture, and yet charged with sundrie fées and annuities: by meanes whereof that bishopricke, which some∣times was counted one of the best, is now become in tempo∣rall lands one of the meanest: and a place scarse leaft for the Bishop to laie and rest his head in: yet neuerthelesse he was a great fauorer of learned men, and speciallie of diuines, whom
he preferred in his church aboue all others. He was verie bounteous and liberall vnto all men, but speciallie vnto cour∣tiers, vnto his owne kindred and countrimen. Upon many he bestowed, vnto the confusion of some of them: and vpon o∣ther he spent much, by building of a towne named Sutton Colshull where he was borne, which he procured to be incorpo∣rated and made a market towne: and set vp therein making of kersies, but all in the end came to small effect. ELIZABETH. ELIZABETH daughter to King Henry the 8. was in a Parle∣ment begun the 15. daie of Ianuarie, in the 25. yéere of the reigne of hir father, declared Prin∣cesse and inheritrice of the crowne of England, with all the dominions to the same belonging in default of issue male of the bodie of the said king Henrie. Row. Lee, bishop of Couentrie and Lich∣field.Rowland Lee bishop of Couentrie and Lichfield was in the 26. yéere of king Henrie the eight, sent to be Lord President of the kings maiesties Counsell in the marches of Wales: in whose time the principalitie and countrie of Wales was by Parlement incorporated and vnited vnto the kingdome of England, and all the inhabitants thereof made equall in frée∣domes, liberties, rights, priuileges, lawes, and in all other respects, to the naturall subiects of England, and all inheri∣tances were made of English tenure to descend without diui∣sion or partition after the maner of England. Also the lawes,
statutes, and ordinances of the realme of England, were com∣manded to be executed and put in practise within the contrie and principalitie of Wales, and none other. And to the end the said lawes should be dulie put in execution, the whole domi∣nion of Wales togither with the lordships marchers borde∣ring vpon the same, was diuided into xiij. shires or counties, wherefore xij. made foure circuits, to the which circuits there were seuerall Iudges appointed, who should administer iu∣stice to the inhabitants of euerie of the said shires twise in the yéere. The first circuit was the thrée shires of Eastwales,Eastwales. Den∣bygh, Flynt, and Mountgomrie, wherin the Iustice of Chester kéepeth sessions twise in the yéere, hearing and deciding all ti∣tles, trespasses, variance and misdemeanours within the countrie. The Iustice of Northwales doth the like in the thrée shires of Northwales,North∣wales. Anglesey, Caernaruon, and Meryonyth, which doo make the second circuit. The third circuit are the thrée shires of Westwales,Westwales. Caerdi∣gan, Caermardhyn, and Penbrooke, where the Iustice of that countrie kéepeth his sessions euerie yéere twise. The thrée shires of Southwales,Southwales Radnor, Brechnocke, and Glamorgan doo make the fourth circuit, in the which the Iu∣stice of Southwales dooth kéepe sises twise euerie yéere. And bicause all matters as well of lawe as of equitie are heard and determined in these circuits, the same doo continue sixe daies in euerie of the shires aforenamed. Monmouthshire dooth followe the common order of the shires of England,Monmouth shire. suing all originall writs out of the high court of chancerie. In all these shires there were appointed Shirifes, Iustices of peace, Crowners, and all other officers accordinglie, as they are in England. Further for the kéeping of the countrie in continuall obe∣dience,The Court in the mar∣ches of Wales. and the controlling of the outrage of wilfull and vnru∣lie persons; there was ordeined a President and counsell to remaine within the dominion and Principalitie of Wales, with all officers appertaining to the same. Which President
and councell haue power and authoritie to heare and deter∣mine, by their wisdomes and discretions, such causes and matters as are assigned to them by the Kings or Quéens of England for the time being. And certeinlie (let men imagine what they will) this house was it,The neces∣sitie of the court in the Marches. that (after great hatred and persecution, whereof disobedience and rudenes folowed) reduced the countrie of Wales to quietnesse, obedience and ci∣uilitie: by authoritie whereof not onelie great outrages are appeased, the offendors punished, and the wilfull brideled: but also the quiet and obedient subiect is protected and defended from iniurie, so that he may possesse his owne in quietnesse. Wherein this Bishop Rowland Lee and his associats did no∣table good seruice. And surelie there haue béene of the same house verie wise gouernors and men of great credit; name∣lie Nicholas Heath Archbishop of Yorke and Lord Chancelor of England: Thomas Yoong Archbishop also of Yorke: Iohn Whitgift now Archbishop of Canturburie; and diuers other, of whom I am to speake héereafter. Prince Ed∣ward borneIn the 29. yéere of king Henrie the eight, prince Edward his sonne was borne at Hampton court on S. Edwards euen being the 12. of October, who bicause the principalitie of Wales was now by statute (as I said before) incorporated to the crowne and kingdome of England, being vnder the same lawes and iurisdiction, was none otherwise Prince of Wales than vnder the generall title of England: as the king his fa∣ther was king of England, and vnder that name K. of Wales as a member of England; neither doo I read of anie other cre∣ation or inuestiture that he had to that principalitie, therefore I thought it not conuenient to make any speciall title of him after the said statute. He afterward succéeded his father in the crowne of this realme by the name of king Edward the sixt. The said Rowland Lee died L. President in the xxxiiij. yéere of King Henrie the eight and lieth buried at Shrewesburie. Af∣ter him Richard SampsonR. Sampson. bishop of Chichester was remooued to Couentrie and Lichfield and appointed Lord President of
Wales, in the xxxv. yéere of king Henrie the eight, and so conti∣nued L. President vntill the end of the 2. yéere of the reigne of king Edward the sixt. Iohn Sutton alias Dudley Earle of Warwike and knight of the noble order of the garter,Iohn, Earle of Warwike. was in the third yéere of King Edward the sixt appointed Lord President of Wales, in the which office he continued vntill the fourth yéere of the same king. He descended out of Wales by a daughter of the Lord Powys, for he was the sonne of Edmund, the sonne of Iohn a yoonger sonne of Iohn Lord Dudley, the sonne of Iohn Lord Dudley, the sonne of Iohn Lord Dudley, the son of Iohn Lord Dudley, the sonne of Iohn Sutton Baron Dudley, who mari∣ed Isabell the daughter of sir Iohn Charlton Lord Powys who descended of Hawys the daughter and heire of Owen ap Gru∣ffyth Lord Powys, who was linealie descended of Blethyn ap Convyn Prince of Wales, mentioned before pag▪ 103. This noble man was made knight being verie yoong, by Charls Brandon Duke of Suffolke, for his good seruice doon at Montededier in France, Anno 15. Hen. 8. He was sent Em∣bassadour to the Emperour, Anno 26. Hen. 8. After the death of the Uicount Lisle his father in lawe, he was created Ui∣count Lisle & warden of the frontiers & marches of Scotland, Anno 33. Hen. 8. He was chosen to be fellowe and compa∣nion of the order of the Garter the fift of Maie, An. 35. Hen. 8. In the first yéere of K. Edward the sixt, he was created Earle of Warwike, and in the fift yeere of the same king, Duke of Northumberland. He was also Earle Marshall high admi∣rall of England L. great maister and President of the priuie councell, and further intituled lord Basset and Tyesse. The next yéere after,William Herbert, knight of the noble order. that is in the fourth yéere of Edward the sixt, William Herbert knight of the noble order of the gar∣ter, was appointed L. President of Wales, and continued vntill Michaelmas, in the first yéere of Quéene Marie. After whom Nicholas Heath Bishop of Worcester was sent to be L. President of Wales,Nicholas Heath, Bi∣shop of Wor∣cester. & continued there vntill the third yéere of the same Quéene, and then was remooued to be Lord
Chaunceler of England, being then elected Archbishop of Yorke.W. Herbert Earle of Penbrook. At which time the said William Herbert was againe made L. President of Wales, and so continued vntill the sixt yeare of the same Quéene. He descended of William Herbert, created Earle of Penbrooke by king Edward the fourth, who was the sonne of Sir William Herbert, who married Gla∣dys the daughter of Sir Dauid Gam, which Sir William was the sonne of Thomas Herbert, the sonne of Gwilim ap Ienkyn, lineallie descended of a noble man called Herbert Fitzhenrie, chamberlaine to king Henrie the first. This noble man liued in great credit and estimation with king Henrie the eight, king Edward the sixt, Quéene Marie, and Quéene Elizabeth, and was by euerie of the said Princes emploied in matters of great importance, and for his good and faithfull seruice greatlie honoured: as appeareth in an Epitaph fixed vpon his toombe in the Cathedrall church of S. Paule in Lon∣don, which I thought good héere to laie downe. Perpetuae pietati Sacrum. GVliel. Herberto Penbrochiae comiti, e∣quiti aurato praenobilis ordinis Anglici: Henr. viij. R. Acubiculis: Edoard. vi. R. equitum magistro: Walliae praesidi. Tumultu oc∣cidentali cum Russello & Graio Baronibus pari∣bus auspicijs summae rerum praeposito: Mariae Rae. contra perduelles, ac expeditione ad Augustam Veromanduorum bis, totius exercitus duci: bis summo in agro Caletum, Limitum praefecto: Eli∣zab. Rae. officiorum seu Magno Regiae Magistro. Pariter & Dominae Annae ex vetiista Parrorum
gente oriundae, Sorori Catharinae Rae. Henr. viij. R. vi. matrimonio coniunctae, ac Marchionis Northamptonij: Prudentissae. foeminae, pietatis, re∣ligionis, probitatis omnis{que} auitae virtutis reti∣nentissae fidiss. Comitis coniugi: Henr. F. ac co∣mes, Pp. chariss. sibi ac suis moerens. P. Obijt aetatis An 63. Obijt salutis An 1569. Liberis relictis ex prima. Henrico Pemb. Comite. Edoardo Equite Aurato. Domina Anna Baroni Tal∣bot nupta. Secunda coniuge superstite, Geor∣gio Salopiae comi∣te genita, inisigni praeter antiquum probitatis decus, virtute foemina. In the sixt yeare of Quéene Marie,Gilb. Bourne. Gilbert Bourne Bishop of Bath and Wels was sent to be lord President of Wales, and so continued vntill the death of the same Quéene. In the first yeare of Quéene Elizabeth,I. Williams L. Williams of Thame. Sir Iohn Williams L. Williams of Thame, was sent L. President into Wales, and died L. President the same yeare in the castell of Lud∣lowe, and lieth buried at Thame, in the countie of Oxenford: where he of his good and vertuous disposition towards the good and godlie education of the youth of his countrie, and main∣tenance of the poore, founded by his last will and testament a Grammar schoole and an Almeshouse, to haue continuance for euer, and leaft certaine yearelie reuenues in lands and monie, for the maintenance of the same. And for the ordering conueieng and assuring of the premisses to the vses aforesaid,
he constituted and ordeined executors of his said last will and testament, among other Robert Doylie of Merton in the same countie Esquier, and William Place of Lurgyshall in the countie of Buckingham Gentleman, who purchasing other lands for that purpose to the yearelie value of 57. pounds, two shillings fiue pence, sued out the mortmaine and enfe offed the Warden and Scholers of new College in Oxenford, and their successors of the premisses to the vse aboue mentioned. The foundation of the Schoole is of one head Schoolemai∣ster to be appointed by the said Robert Doylie and William Place or the longer liuer of them for their life time: and after∣ward by the said Warden and Scholers of new College and their successors for euer: who hath yéerelie for his stipend the sum of xxvj. pounds xiij. shillings iiij. pence. And one vsher to be likewise appointed as the maister is, who shall haue for his stipend yéerelie the sum of xiij. pounds vj. shillings viij. pence both which stipends are to be paid quarterly by euen portions. The almeshouse is founded to haue fiue almsmen and one almeswoman, who haue yéerelie towards their maintenance the summe of 7. pounds 4. shillings, and a new gowne euerie fourth yeere. There is also allowed for the kéeping of the toombe of the said lord Williams 8. shillings yéerelie, and for kéeping cleane of the water-course 4. shillings. Henrie Sid∣ney, knight of the noble order.Henrie Sidney knight, after the death of the L. Williams of Thame in the second yéere of the Quéenes Maiestie that now is, was sent to be L. President of Wales. This knight is descended by the heires make lineallie of Sir William Sid∣ney, who came out of Aniowe into England with Henrie Fitzempresse, and was afterward chamberlaine to the said Henrie when he was king of England, and descended out of Wales by his mother Anne the daughter of Anne, the daugh∣ter of William Clement, the sonne of Iohn, the sonne of Willi∣am, the sonne of William, the sonne of Ienkyn Clement, who married the daughter of Conan, the sonne of Meredyth, the sonne of Gruffyth, the sonne of the lord Rees Prince of South∣wales,
of whom mention is before pag. 249. which Rees was the sonne of Wenlhian, the daughter of Gruffyth ap Conan Prince of Northwales. The mother likewise of the same Iohn or Ienkyn Clement, was Cicilie the daugh∣ter of Sir Gruffyth Lhoyd knight, the son of Rees, the son of Gruffyth, the sonne of Ednyuet Vachan, chéefe coun∣seller and steward to Lhewelyn ap Iorwerth Prince of Wales, of whom Matthew Paris maketh mention, page 843. who also was the auncestor of Owen Tuder, the Grandfather of king Henrie the seuenth, of whom I haue written before. In the third yeare of king Edward the sixt, he was made knight by the king: and was sent Ambassadour to the French king, when he was but xxij. yeares of age. In the time of Quéene Marie he was treasurer of Ireland, and lord Iustice there, where he so vsed himselfe, that hée gat great commendation of all the inhabitants of that countrie. Anno. 1564. he was chosen Knight of the no∣ble order of the Garter. He hath now continued L. President of Wales about xxiiij. yeares, of the which he serued in Ireland eight yeares and sixe moneths, being there thrée seuerall times lord deputie generall of that countrie. He repaired the castell of Ludlowe, which is the chéefest house within the marches, being in great decaie, as the Chappell, the court house, and a faire fountaine, from the which by seuerall cocks the offices of the house are serued with water. Also he erected diuers new buildings within the same castell, as a faire new porters lodge: large chambers for the kéeping of the records of that court: and other conuenient lodgings for such commissioners to lie in as are called thither for to giue attendance in that seruice. Tervyn.
An admonition for the reading of the Brytish words. IT is to be noted, that the letter [c] in all Bry∣tish words hath alwaies the sound of the Eng∣lish [k] except it be ioined with [h:] for [ch] is counted but one consonant, which hath the sound of the Gréeke [χ] and neuer of the English [ch.] I haue also vsed [dh] for the Brytish [dd] and [lh] for the [ll.] The single [f] hath the sound of [v] consonant. [R] in the beginning of a word is to be pronounced with an aspirati∣on. The rest of the letters agrée with the English pronoun∣tiation. Certaine words passed in this impression are thus to be amended. PAge 26. Line 7. put out, and Cornwal. page 88. line 26. read, Caradoc the sonne of Rytherch ap Iestyn. pag 96. line 21. Peuensey ibidem line 23. Sheppey. page 104. line 31. Portascyth. pag 122. line 10. Aberthaw. pag 131. line 5. and 25. Cydwely. pag 155. line 25. for of, read and. page 166. line 30. for Riryd, read Madoc. pag 168. line 29. for thy, read his. page 188. line 30. Richard of Clare and. pag 197. line 16. Hugh sonne to the Erle. page 211. line 31. for Anarawd read Meruyn. page 254. line 17. for theidw, read cheidw. ibidem line 18. for Rhae, read Rhac. pag 329. line 15. primat of all. pag 357. line 6. ap Gwystyl. pag 395. line 7. whereof.
A Table conteining the princi∣pall matters, places, and persons in this booke. This letter (D) signifieth the description. The figures note the page. A. ABercynfric, 150. Aberstraw (D) 6. de∣stroied by the I∣rishmen, 62. Abergeuenny (D) 20.289. Aberheidol, 220. Aberlhech, 154. Aberlhiennawc, 155. Aberlhychwr Castell, 203. Aberystwyth castell built, 169.336. taken, 337. Adelarde, 8.12. ouercome by the Brytaines, 14. ioineth his power with Ethelbald, 15. Adelstane K. of England, 50. Aedan ap Blegored, 74. he is slaine, 83. Aedan the sonne of Melht, 38. Alan K. of little Brytaine, 1. Alans whence they came, 39. Alclyd destroid by ye Danes, 34. Alfred K. of England, 33. lo∣ueth and getteth about him learned men, ibidem. trans∣lateth the Brytish lawes in∣to the Saxon toong, 42. his Epitaph, 43. Alfwyen disinherited, 49. Algar Earle of Chester, 99. Almarus Earle of Deuon, 76. Anarawd the sonne of Rode∣rike, 37. he dieth, 45. Anarawd ap Gruffyth ap Rées slaine, 196. Armorica, 2. Arnulph the sonne of Roger Mountgomery, 151. Lord of Dyuet, 154. rebelled against K. Henrie the first, 157. he departeth the land, 159. Arthurs bones found, 238. Arthur Prince of Wales, 390. Aruon (D) 8. Asser archbishop of Wales, 44. Avanc (D) 21. Augustine moonke, the Apostle of England, (D) 15.254. B. BAldwin archbishop of Can∣turburie visiteth Wales, 241. Bardh, Beirdh, (D) 15.191 Beda, 15. Belin ap Elphin, 14. Bernard Newmarch, 148.151. Beumarish built, 381. Blethyn ap Conuyn, 103. he is slaine, 111, Brecheinoc Brechnock (D) 20. spoiled by the Danes, 42.148.277.288. Brochwel Scithroc (D) 15. his dwelling place, 22. Bryth destroied Ireland, 13. Brytaine diuided betweén the sonnes of Brutus, (D) 1.
Brytaines are spoiled of their countrie by the Saxons, 5. they abhorred the Romish re∣ligion, 255. threé remnants of them yet remaining (D) 4. Brytish language now spoken in Wales (D) 4. Brytaine Armorike and the kings thereof, 2. Buelht (D) 20.277.280. Burgundians whence they came, 39. C. CAdelh prince of South∣wales, 35. he dieth, 44. Cadelh the sonne of Gruffyth ap Rées. 201.202. sore woun∣ded by the Flemings, 203. Cadiuor ap Colhoyn, 119. Cadogan ap Blethyn, 152.155 157. he maketh a great feast, 163. charged with his sonnes lewdnes, 168. he is slain, 171. his children, 182. Cadwalader goeth to Brytain Armorike, 1. admonished by an angel, 3. goeth to Rome and dieth, 5. Cadwalader ap Gruffyth ap Conan he dieth, 232. Cadwalhon ap Ievaf, 67. Cadwalhon ap Meredyth, 71. Cardyffbuilt, 116. taken, 289. Caereneon (D) 12. and 14. the castell built, 205. Caer Gay (D) 9. Caerlheon ar Dhowrdwy or Chester, 27. a catalog of the Earles, 294. Caermardhyn (D) 18. taken, 178. destroied, 193. the castell builded againe, 198. taken a∣gaine, ibidem. 247. Caernarvon castell built, 374. Cambria, Cambry, Cambera∣ec (D) 2.3.4. the country di∣uided into shires and cir∣cuits, 395. the good seruice of the people to the K, of Engl∣land. 175.235. they are left out of the conclusion of peace, 278. they offer to be tried by the lawe, 324. punished ex∣treamlie, but when they cō∣plaine they haue no redresse, 161.320. abused by ye Kings officers, 350. Camdhwr, 113. Caradocus lancaruan, 206, Caradoc king of Northwales slaine, 20. Caradoc the sonne of Rytherch ap Iestyn, 88. Caradoc ap Gruffyth ap Ry∣therch, 104.113. Caredigion, (D) 17. Carrec Cynnen castell, 319. Carrec Houa castell, 219.241. Castor ¶See Avanc. Celhy Tervawc, 153. Celynnoc vawr destroied, 65. Conan Meriadoc, 2. Conan Tindaethwy, 17. Conan Nant Niuer, 32. Conan ap Howel slaine, 74. Conan ap Sitsilht, 88. Conan the sonne of Iago, 89. Conan Earle of Richmond receiued to be Duke of Bry∣taine, 205. Congen king of Powys, 29. Conwey, 38. the castell built, 374. Costenin Dhu slaine, 65. Crogen castell, 257. Crogens a nickname whence it commeth, 258. Cudred king of wests ouer∣commeth the Brytaines▪ 15. Cnuedha Wledic, (D) 14. his
sonnes giue names to di∣uers countries in Wales which remaine to this daie, (D) 14. Cydwely (D) 18. spoiled, 152 the castell built, 242.272. Cymer, 287. Cynvael castell, 200. Cynwric ap Rywalhon, 112. D. DAniel Archdeacon of Po∣wys, 187. Danes came to England, 20. they bend their force against Wales, 34. whence they came, 39. they destroie saint Dauids, 45. they are mur∣thered, 76. Dauid ap Owen Gwyneth, 221.227. taketh his brother Maelgon, 234. he marrieth Emme the kings sister, 235. put out of the gouern∣ment of Wales, 245. taken prisoner by his nephew, 250. commeth againe, against Lhewelyn, & being vanqui∣shed dieth for sorrowe, 259. Dauid ap Lhewelyn, 298. taketh his brother prisoner, ibidem. taketh the gouern∣ment vpon him, 299. excom∣municated, 300. refuseth to deliuer his brother out of prison, ibidem. he submit∣teth himselfe to the king, 304. he complaineth to the pope vpon king Henrie, 308. maketh the principa∣litie of Wales tributarie to the church of Rome, 309. putteth king Henries ar∣mie to flight, 310. he di∣eth, 313. Dauid ap Gruffyth, 319. forsa∣keth his brother, 326.335.350. his answere to the kings offer, 370. he is taken and put to death, 374. Dauid Fitz Gerald bishop of Meneuia, 201.237. Denbigh (D) 10. the owners of it sithence the Dauid ap Gruffyth, 377. giuen to Hen∣rie Lacy Earle of Lincolne, 377. Dial Rodri, 38. Dinerth, 45. Dinevowr (D) 6. and 17. the castell wonne, 269. Donwalhon Prince of Strat∣clwyd, 64. Dyffryn Clwyd, (D) 10. Dyganwy (D) 10.262.267.326. parcell of the possession of ye Erle of Chester, (D) 10. Dyuet (D) 17. destroied by the Danes, 65.71. giuen to Arnulph, 154. then to Ior∣werth ap Blethyn, 158. thirdlie to Saer, 159. fourth∣lie to Gerald, 161.272. E. EGbert King of England being the firste of the Saxons, 25. he entred in∣to Wales, 24. he chaungeth the name of Brytaine into England, 25. his warres a∣gainst the Danes, 27. he dieth, ibidem. his wife hated the Brytaines, and caused the king to vse them hardly, ibidem. Elife ap Madoc, 257. his lands taken from him sauing Cro∣gen, and 7. towneships, ibi∣dem.
Edelfled, 44.47.48. Edgar king of England spoi∣leth Northwales, 61. dieth, 64. Edmund K. of England, 51. he is slaine, 58. Ednyuet Uachan, 249.306. Edwal Yoorch, 7.9. Edwal Uoel, 46. he is slain, 51. Edwal ap Meyric, 72. slain, 73. Edwal Uachan, the sonne of Edwal Uoel slaine, 65. Edward the elder, 43. he taketh London and Oxford from his sister, 44. he disinheriteth his sisters daughter, 49. di∣eth, 50. Edward the Martyr, 64. Edward the Confessor, 92. Edward Earle of Chester, 319 retireth, 321. commeth to Wales, 326. goeth to the ho∣ly land, 328. crowned king of England, ibidem, he com∣meth to Chester, 333. his of∣fer to the Prince, 364.365. his offer to Dauid, ibidem. he brought al Wales to his sub∣iection, 374. he giueth the lands of the Welshmen to the noble men of England, 377. Edward Caernarvon, 376. ta∣keth homage of the freehol∣ders of Wales, 382. Edward of Woodstoke, 384, Edward of Westminster, 388. Edward of Westminster, 389. Edward sonne to K. Richard the third, 390. Edward the sixt, 396. Elizabeth Princesse, 394. Eneon ap Owen ap Howel Dha, 65, he is slaine, 66. Eneon ap Cadiuor, 119. England and Englishmen, 25. driuen out of the countrie of Senghennyth, 279. they doo oppresse the Welshmen, 337. Easter not kept by ye Brytains at the time appointed by the church of Rome, 17.18. Esylht the daughter and heire of Conan, (D) 16.22.24. Ethelwulphs genelogie, 29. he was bishop of Winchester, 32 Ethelbald maried his mother in law, 32. Evneth ye sonne of Bledred, 41. F. FAmine in Southwales, 71. Fermael the sonne of Ed∣wal, 18. Flemings came to Dyuet, 163. they desire peace, 277.279. G. GAlfrid Arthur bishop of Lhanelwy, 203. Gauelford, 25. Geffrey Blyth bishop of Co∣uentrie and Lichfield, 392. Geffrey Langley, 321. Genelogies estéemed among all nations, 31. Gerald de Windsore steward of Penbrooke, 154. Gilbert Strangbow Earle of Strigule, 169.172. Gladys daughter to Lhewelyn ap Iorwerth, 298. Gwaith y dinas newydh, 47. Gwaynyttyd, 113. Gwent (D) 19. spoiled by the Danes, 42. Gwenwynwyn lord of Powys 250. getteth againe the castell of Poole, 248. laieth siege to the castel of Payne in Eluel
251. discomfited, 252. detai∣ned prisoner by the Counsell 260. released of his oth of o∣bedience to the king by the pope, 267. Gweythen, 32. Gwyneth ¶ See Northwales. Gilbert De Humfreuile, 125. his heires, 134. Glamorgan (D) 19. spoiled, 71. won from the Welshmen, 122 Goths whence they came, 39. Grono ap Owen ap Edwyn, lord of Tegengl, 172. Grono ap Ednyuet vachā, 327. Gruffyth ap Madoc slaine, 49. Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn ap Sitsylht, 90. he is slaine, 101. Gruffyth ap Conan commeth to Anglesey, 112. he warreth against Trahaern ap Cara∣doc, 113. ioineth with Rées ap Theodor, 114. obteineth the principalitie of North∣wales, 115. he maketh peace with king Henrie the first, 174. dieth, 190. his statute to reforme the abuses of min∣strels, 191. Gruffyth ap Rées ap Theodor, 175. putteth himselfe in ar∣mour against the king, 176. he taketh the towne, of Caer∣mardhyn, 178. he dieth, 190. Gruffyth ap Trahaerne ap Caradoc, 162. Gruffyth Maylor L. of Brom∣field, 242. Gruffyth ap Rées taken by his brother Maelgon, and sent to prison, 250. set at libertie, 252. he dieth, 256. Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn ap Iorwerth, 280 goeth with an army against William Mar∣shall, 282.292. disquieteth his father, 297. valiant and cou∣ragious, 298.307. imprisoned by his brother, ibidem. great sute to the K. for his inlarg∣ment, 301. deliuered to the K. and sent to the towre, where séeking to scape he brake his necke, 307. Gruffyth lord of Dinas Bran, 293.300.304.321.327. Gurmond (D) 15.6. Gwgan ap Meyric, 34. H. HAsting the Dane, 39. Henrie the first K. of Eng∣land, 157. he commeth into Wales, 173. againe, 184. he is in danger to be slaine, 185. he dieth, 188. Henry the second king of Eng∣land, 204. he commeth to Wales, 206. put in danger of his life, 207. he maketh peace with the lords of Wales, 208. commeth to Southwales, 209. againe, 219. he commeth to Northwales, 221. lieth in∣camped at Berwyn, 222. in danger to be slaine, ibidem. he goeth the Ireland, 230. retur∣neth from Ireland againe, 232. forsaketh his wife, 239. he dieth, 241. Henrie, the third king of Eng∣land, 276. commeth to wales and buildeth a castell at Mountgomerie, 280. com∣meth againe with an armie to Wales, 283. againe, 289. marieth, 293. commeth a∣gaine to Wales, 299. called to appéere before the Abbots of
Aberconwy & Cymer, 309. he commeth again to Wales, 310. he and the Earle of Chester come to Wales, 322. commeth to Montgomerie and maketh peace with the prince, 326. he dieth, 328. Henrie Lacy lord of Denbigh and Earle of Lincolne, 377. Henrie prince of Wales, 392. Henrie Sidney knight of the order, 400. Howel the brother of Conan Tindaethwy, 22. King of man, 25. Howel Dha prince of South∣wales, 45. prince of al Wales, 52. his lawes, 53. he went to Rome, 54, he dieth, 58. Howel ap Ieuaf, 62. vseth his brother Meyric cruellie, 63. ruleth Northwales, 64. he is slaine, 66. Howel ap Edwyn, 88. he is slaine, 93. Howel ap Grono, lord of Stra∣tywy Cydewen and Gwyr, 159. he is traiterouslie slaine, 161. Howel ap Ithel lord of Ros & Ryuonioc, 183. Howel ap Owen Gwyneth a valiant captaine, 199. Howel ap Ieuaflord of Arust∣ly, 240. Hubert de Burgh kéepeth the castell of Douer, 275. gaue the French nauie an ouer∣throw, 277. some of the Ba∣rons conspire against him, 283. owner of Montgome∣rie, 284. his folie, 285. com∣mitted to prison, 288. escapeth out of prison, 289. reconciled to the King, 292. Huganus lord of Westwales, 47. Hugh Lupus Earle of Che∣ster, 151.155. he dieth, 157. Hugh de Montgomerie Earle of Salope, 155. he is slaine, 156. Hugh Earle of Chester win∣neth Mehenyth, 197. Hugh Lacy, 151. I. IAgo ap Edwal, 59.62. Iago ap Edwal, 87. Iestyn ap Gurgant lord of Glamorgan, 119. Ieuaf ap Edwal, 59.60.70. Igmond commeth to Anglisey, 41. Iohn king of England made Knight, goeth to Ireland & returneth againe, 240. lost Normandie, Aniow, Mayne and Poytiers, 258. goeth to Ireland, 261. goeth to Wales, 264. and againe, 265. maketh his kingdome tributarie to the Pope, 270. he destroieth the Marches of Wales, 275. he dieth, 276. Iohn le Fleming, 125. his heires, 136. Iohn de Cremona a Cardi∣nal, 186. Iohn Scot Earle of Chester, 288.293. Iohn of Monmouth, 290.310. Iohn Peckam Archbishop of Canturburie, 338. Iohn Uoisye bishop of Exce∣ster, 393. Iohn Sutton alias Dudley Earle of Warwike, 397. Iohn Williams L. Williams of
Thame, 399. Ionaual the son of Meyric, 67. Iorwerth Drwyndwn, 227. Iorwerth ap Blethyn, 157.158. condemned and cast into pri∣son, 160. set at libertie, 167. slaine cruellie, 170. Iorwerth ap Owen ap Cara∣doc lord of Caerlheon vpon Usc, 230. wan Caerlheon a∣gain, 234. obtained the kings fauour, 236. Ioseph of Aremathia, 12. Ithel K. of Gwent, 29. Iuor the sonne of Alan, 7. Iuor the sonne of Ednerth ap Cadogoan, 154. K. KEntwine K. of Westsex, 8. Kenulph K. of Wests. 16. he destroieth Wales, 25. L. LHanbadarn destroied by the Danes, 71. Lhanvaes, 293. Loegria Lhoeger, 1. Lhechryd, 117. Lhewelyn ap Sitsylht, 83.84. Lhewelyn ap Iorwerth, 245. taketh his vncle Dauid pri∣soner, 250. calleth a parle∣ment, 257. marieth Ione the daughter of King Iohn, 259. maketh peace with K. Iohn, 265. released by the Pope of his oth of allegeance to the K. of England, & comman∣ded to war against him, 267. he winneth Ruthlan and Dyganwy, 270. excommuni∣cated by the Pope, 271. he winneth Shrewesburie, ibi∣dem. goeth with an armie to Southwales, 273. also to Brechnocke, 277. leadeth an armie to Penbrooke, 279. cō∣meth to the K. at Shrewes∣burie, 281. destroieth all the marches to Southwales, 287. entreth into England, 288. commeth with an armie to Brechnocke, ibid. taketh the towne of Salop againe, 291. concludeth peace with K. Henrie the third, 292. cal∣leth all the Lords and Ba∣rons of Wales togither, 297. he dieth, 298. Lhewelyn ap Gruffyth chosen Prince of Wales, 314. diui∣ded the principalitie betwene him and his brother Owen, ibidem. entred the Earle of Chestersland, 321. causeth the Earle to retire, ibid. de∣stroieth the Erldom of Che∣ster, 326. maketh peace with the K. 326. refuseth to come to K. Edwards coronation, 328. excuseth himselfe to the Archbishops, 329. maketh peace with K. Edward, 334. he is maried, 336. his an∣swer to the Archbishop of Canturburie, 340. his an∣swer to the kings offer, 366. he is slaine, 374. Lhywarch ap Owen, 69. Lhywarch ap Trahaern, 164.169.171. Lhyyn destroied, 65. Locusts destroie Ireland, 42. Lumbards whence they came, 39.
M. MAdoc ap Riryd, 164.166.172. Madoc ap Meredyth ap Ble∣thyn, 210. Madoc ap Owen Gwyneth, 227. Madoc ap Gruffyth Maylor, 255.293. Madoc coosen to Prince Lhe∣welyn, 380. discomfiteth Ed∣mund the kings brother, and H. Lacie Earle of Lincolne, ibid. taken and sent to pri∣son, 381. Maelgon Gwyneth, 2. Maelgon ap Rées, 242. esca∣peth out of prison, 243. win∣neth the castel of Strat mey∣ric, ibid. his vnconstancie, 266. dieth, 286. Maelgon the son of Maelgon, 287.289.290.308.315.380. Magedawc, 16. Manaw, (D) 14.5. Marie princesse of walles, 393. Mathraual (D) 6. & 11.267. Mawd the empresse cōmeth to England, 195. she dieth, 240. Meneuia (D) 18. destroied, 114. spoiled, 154. the see made sub∣iect to the see of Canturbu∣rie, 160. spoiled, 289. Merdhin or Merlin, 4. Meredyth ap Owen, 69.71. he dieth, 73. Meredyth ap Owen ap Ed∣wyn prince of Southwales, 103. he is slaine, 110. Meredyth ap Blethyn, 157.158 taken by his brother Ior∣werth and sent to the kings prison, 159. he escapeth out of prison, 162. Meredyth ap Gruffyth ap Rees lord of Caerdigan and Stratywy, 204. Meriadoc, 2. Merionyth, (D) 9. Meruyn Urych, 22.24. he is slaine, 28. Meyric the son of Arthpoel, 85. Miles Fitzwater Earle of Hereford, 148. Moon (D) 6.7. destroied, 29.65.69.71. Monkes and Freers lately re∣ceiued in Wales, 253. Mooren of cattell in Wales, 69. Morgan of Glamorgan, 380.382. Morganwc, (D) 19. ¶ See Gla∣morgan. Mont Paladour, 5. Montgomerie, 152.280. Murcasteth, 173. N. NIcholas Heath bishop of worcester, 397. Normans whence they came, 39. Tithed and put to death, 92. they destroie Dyuet, 110. Northwales described, (D) 6. descended thrée times to a woman, (D) 13. O. OFfa K. of Mercia, 18. his ditch, 19 (D) 5. he draue the welshmen beyond the ditch, ibid. Oswestrie castell built, 201. the towne burnt, 288. Owen ap Iorwerth traito∣rouslie slaine, 232, Owen ap Meredyth, lord of
Cydewen, 325. Owen Tuver, 390.391. Owen the son of Howel Dha, 58. Owen the sonne of Dyfnwal, 71. Oliuer, De S. Iohn, 125. his heires, 136. Owen ap Edwyn, 155. he di∣eth, 160. Owen ap Cadogan taketh a∣waie Geralds wife, 163. fli∣eth to Ireland, 165. pardoned and called home againe, 170. submitteth himself to K. H. 1.174. he goeth with the King to Normandie and is made knight, 175. he is slaine, 182. Owen Gwyneth, 188.193. he burneth Caermardhyn, 193. taketh the castell of Moulde, 199. builded a castell at yal, 201. wanne the castell of Ba∣singwerke, 223. maketh war vpon Owen Cyuelioc, 224. wanne the castell of Ruth∣lan, and all Tegengl, ibid. he dieth, 225. Owen ap Gruffyth, 314.334. P. PAganus de Turberuile, 125 his issue and heires, 132. Parlement when it first began, 182. Penant Bachwy, 173. Penbrooke, (D) 18. the castell built, 154. the same castell built againe, 163. Peter le Soore, 125. his heires, 135. Polydor Uirgil reprehended. (D) 23. Poole taken by the Archbishop of Canturburie, 248. the ca∣stell ouerthrowen, 288. Powys, (D) 11.35. the parti∣tion of it, 211. Priests forbidden to marrie, 162. Prophesies causes of much hurt, 5. Pwlhgwitie, 113. Q. Quo Warránto, 336. R. RAdnor destroied, 71. Rees ap Owen ap Ed∣wyn, 111. he obtaineth the rule of Southwales, 112. he is slaine, 113. Rees ap Theodor Prince of Southwales, 113. he ioy∣neth with Gruffyth ap Co∣nan, 114. ouerthrew and put to flight the children of Ble∣thyn ap Convyn, 117. ouercō∣meth his enimies at Lhan∣dydoch, 119. he is slaine, ibid. Rees ap Gruffyth called the lord Rees, 204. maketh peace with the King, 208. laieth siege to Caermardhin, 210. did his homage to the King, 220. maketh warre vpon the Earle of Clare, ibid. wanne the castell of Aberteiui and Cilgerran, 223. came with a power to Powys, 230. came to the K. at Penbrooke, 231. commeth to the court, 235. his feast, 237. he wanne the castels of S. Clere, Abercor∣ran and Lhanstephan, 242. likewise the castell of Dine∣uowr & Lhanhayaden, 243.
taken prisoner by his sons, 244. he taketh Caermarthin, Ciun, Radnor, the castell of Payne in Eluel, 247. he di∣eth, 249. Rees ap Meredyth knight, 378 Reginald de Sully, 125. his heires, 135. Reginald Graylord of Ruthyn 377. Richard de Granuile or green∣féeld, 125. his issue, 131. Richard de Syward, 125. his heires, 134. Richard Belmersh bishop of London, sent to be warden of the Marches of wales, 160.164. Richard 1. K. of England, 241. goeth to the holie land, 242. winneth Cyprus, 243. he is taken prisoner, 243. retur∣neth to England, 244. he di∣eth, 253. Richard Marshal Earle of Penbrooke, 286, 288. in leage with Lhewelyn Prince of wales, 290. he goeth to Ire∣land and is slaine, 291. Richard of Burdeux, 385. Richard Sampson bishop of Couen, and Lich. 396. Robert Fitzhamon, 119. his Conquest in wales, 124. his twelue knights, 125. his own portion of Glamorgan, 127. his Petegrée and heires, 128. Robert S. Quintine, 125. his heires, 134. Robert Sitsylt, 141. his issue and descents, 142. Robert de Belesmo Earle of Salop rebelleth against K. H. 1.157. he forsaketh ye land, 159. he is taken and impriso∣ned, 171. his crueltie, ibid. Robert Fitzstephen a chiefe capteine in the conquest of Ireland, 225. Roderike Molwynoc, 14. dri∣uen from the west countrie to Northwales, 16. Roderike the great, 28. he is slaine, 35. Roderike ap Owen Gwyneth, 237.243. Roger Montgomerie Earle of Salop, 151. he fortified Montgomerie castell, 152. he is slaine, 153. Roger de Berkrolles, 125. his heires, 135. Roger Earle of Clare obtai∣neth of the king such lands in wales as he could winne, 208. Roger Mortimer right heire to the principalitie of wales, 314.315.316. Rollo came to France, 37. Rowland Lée Bishop of Co∣uentrie and Lichfield, 394. Run the sonne of Meredyth counterfeited by a Scot, 85. Ruthlan (D) 10. the castell the palace of Gruffyth ap Lhe∣welyn prince of wales, 100. fortified by king Henrie the second, 207. belonging to the Earle of Chester, 267. Ruthyn (D) 10. the lordship, 378. Rydcors castell built, 153. Rytherch ap Iestyn ruleth Southwales, 87. he is slaine, 88. Rythmarch Archbishop of S. Dauids, 156. Rywalhon ap Convyn, 103. he is slaine, 109.
S. SAyson Saysonaec, (D) 4. Saxons whence they came, 25. they spoile the Brytaines of their countrie, 6. their sea∣uen kingdomes, 26. Sibertus K. of Essex, 11. Sigebert K. of Westsex, 16. Simon de Thurnay, 258. Strat Alyn, 356. Strat Clwyd spoiled, 58. Strat Marchelh, 214, 217. Strat Tywy, 152. Stephen Constable of Aber∣teiui, 189. Sulien bishop of S. Dauids, 110. he forsaketh his bishop∣rike, 113. he is compelled to take his bishoprike againe, 114. he forsaketh his bishop∣rike againe, 116. he dieth, 118. Switzers whence they came, 39. T. TAlaeth, 35. Taliefyn, (D) 15, 254. Tegyd, (D) 9. Theodor the sonne of Belin, 16 Theodor Mawr, 66. he is slain, 72. Trahaern ap Caradoc, 112. he is slaine, 114. Thurstan abbot of Glastenbu∣rie, 116. V. VAndals whence they came, 39. Uchdred ap Edwyn ap Gro∣no, 154. Urgeney ap Sitsylht, 114. W. WAllia, wales, (D) 2.3.4. ¶ See Cambria. Walter Steward, 97. Walter bishop of Hereford, 165. Walwern castell, 219. Walweys sepulchre found, 116. Westwales destroied, 65. Woolues destroied in Wales, 61. William Conquerour commeth to England, 107. he ouercō∣meth Haroald, and is crow∣ned K. of England, 108. he entreth Wales with an ar∣mie, 115. he dieth, 116. William Rufus, 117. he cōmeth with an armie into Wales, 153.155. he builded Westmin∣ster hall, 156. he is slaine, 157. William de Londres, 125. his heires, 131. William Stradling, 137. his heires, ibid. William Brusus traitorous fact, 236.260. hanged, 286. William Marshall Earle of Penbrooke, 279. to whom his great liuing in England, Wales and Ireland descen∣ded, 312. William Smith bishop of Lin∣colne, 391. William Herbert Erle of Pen∣brooke, 398. Y. YAl, (D) 11. the castel built. 201. the castell taken and burnt, 208. Yarthyr the son of Mervyn, 60. Ynyr the cosen of Iuor, 7. Ysbys, 152. FINIS.
1584 Imprinted at Lon∣don by Rafe Newbe∣rie and Henrie Denham. Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
