5791 S116690 99851906 17200
¶ A Supplication exhibi∣ted to the moste Mightie Prince Philip king of Spain &c. VVherin is contained the summe of our Chri∣stian Religion, for the profession whereof the Protestants in the lowe Countries of Flaunders, &c. doe suffer persecution, vvyth the meanes to acquiet and appease the troubles in those partes. THERE IS ANNEXED AN Epistle written to the Ministers of Antwerpe, which are called of the Confession of Au∣spurge, concerning the Supper of our Sauiour Iesus Christ. VVRITTEN IN FRENCH AND Latine, by Anthonie Corranus of Siuill, professor of Diuinitie. ¶ Imprinted at London by Francis Coldocke, and Henrie Bynneman. ANNO. 1577.
¶ To the Christian and vnaffectionate Reader. THE Author was determined to pre∣fixe before these treatises an Apology, wher∣in he declareth and defen∣deth certaine places speci∣ally chalenged in thē: which his defence, for certaine re∣spectes he hath reserued to be imprinted with the La∣tine Copie (which by Gods grace, shall shortlye come
forth) and in the mean time referreth this, as it is, to the iudgement of the learned and vnpartiall Reader.
To the most mightie and most victorious Philip King of Spayne. HAuing had cer∣tayne intelli∣gence aswel by cōmon report, as the speciall letters of di∣uers Citizens of Antwerpe (most migtie Prince, and my most dread soueraigne) how miraculously, farre beyond the ex∣spectatiō of man, God had made a way for the frée passage & preaching of his holy Gospell in your Maiesties lowe countreys, I determined with my selfe at the earnest persuasion of my friends (setting all my other businesse aside) to take my iourney thither: both that I might be partaker with many others seruing God there sincerely and truely, of that great ioy and cōsolation which hey receiued and enioyed through the xcéeding mercie and goodnesse of al∣mighty
God, powred vpō your graces subiects: & withall to my simple power further as much as in me lay this spi∣ritual buylding of Gods house, cōside∣ring that God had appointed me to this vocatiō. For since my departure out of Spaine, which is now .xij. yéeres past, I protest vnto your highnesse truely & sincerely, that there was nothing in the whole world that I more earnestly de∣sired & prayed for, than yt which at this present I behold & sée before mine eies, trusting yt this singular grace & benefit of God shal not alwayes be conteyned in this so smal a coūtrie, but frō thence in processe of time shall be deriued into your M. whole realme of Spayne, so yt the true & sincere knowledge of Iesu Christe may there likewise shine & be manifested, & therwith al superstition & all blinde & false worshipping of God banished & exiled, which by the wilfull ignorance of men, & for wante of the knowledge of Gods worde were crept into our religion, and like wéedes had quite ouergrowen it. Finally I haue good hope that this chaunge & alteratiō
of the world shal stir vp your Maiestie to heare the pitiful cōplaynts & lamen∣tatiōs of your faithful & obedient sub∣iects, & to haue compassion of the cala∣mities of so many miserable soules, as (being your most faithful and obedient subiects) are notwithstanding oppres∣sed with diuers kindes of tormēts, per∣secutions, banishment, confiscation of goods & landes, & (that more is to be la∣mēted) are before their cause lawfully heard, against right & reason cōdēned, & executed most horribly by the moste extreme & cruell kindes of death that cā be deuised.The office and duety of Princes and Magi∣strates, touching the cause of religion. Iosue. 1. Deuter. 17. As for the iudges which sitte in this cōmission of life and death & in this wise condemne the poore in∣nocents, they beare your grace in hād that the determinations of these cau∣ses, dothe not appertaine to Kings or Princes, notwithstanding that the ho∣ly Scriptures teach the contrary, and shewe that it is the office and duetie of Kings, Princes, and all other ru∣lers and Magistrates, chiefly and be∣fore all other things, to sette foorth good & true doctrine accordyng to the
lawes conteyned in the first table, and the same so set forth to authorise and cause to be published: and consequent∣ly, to gouerne their subiectes with Iu∣stice, and with equitie to defend them. The whiche thing it is vnpossible for any euer to performe without ye true knowledge of Gods diuine Maiestie, as the very Heathēs thēselues iudge, which were only learned & instructed after the law of nature. Justitia (sayth Tully) nec in regno nec in Repub: retine∣ri,Cicero lib. 1. de natura deorum. aut conseruari potest, nisi iactis ante ve∣rae pietatis fundamentis. Vnneth can iu∣stice be kept or maintayned, either in kingdome or cōmōwealth, but where true religion is first of all planted and rooted. And truly this is the very same true doctrine, & seruice of God, which I sée preached in your Maiesties low countreys, which causeth me assured∣ly to hope that all other thinges will haue like happie successe, & that your Maiestie by this occasion will vnder∣stande and determine this cause, and purge Christian religiō, in banishing and rooting out all the abuses and er∣rours
which haue crepte in by little & litle, and corrupted al Christendome. Wherefore (most noble Prince) vpon my comming to Antwerpe many mē did greatly meruayle, thinking it a thing scarse credible, that one of the Spanish nation, borne & bredde there, shoulde embrace the Gospell so desi∣rously, and so earnestly maintayne it, that he boldly durst professe himselfe a publicke Preacher of the same. And forasmuch as ye bruite of this strange noueltie was so common, that it came to your Maiesties eares (as I conie∣cture) and perhaps many a false slaun∣der and misreporte added therewith all, I thought it not amisse for me to take occasion, of this my comming to Antwerpe, to breake this long silence whiche I haue kepte these whole .xij. yéeres, to the entent to purge my selfe vnto your Maiestie, and to iustifie the doctrine which I professe, and that by writing. Wherefore in most humble maner I beséeche your highnesse (my gracious soueraigne) to take in good parte this writing of mine your most
humble and faithfull subiect, wherin I haue declared the causes aswell that moued me to departe out of Spayne, as to resort hither into your countrey of Flaūders. For I take God to wit∣nesse, my comming to your Maiesties citie of Antwerpe was not for any de∣sire of newfanglenesse, or to disquiet the state, but by the preaching of the Gospell to pacifie them that were of∣fended, to make a quiet end of quarels and controuersies that were risen a∣mong them, & to my power to caulme & appease the hurlyburly whiche was nowe begon, to cause vnitie, & peace, where was discorde and dissention, and to discharge the duetie whiche I ought bothe to God and to your Ma∣iestie: as I doubt not, but your high∣nesse shal in tyme right well perceiue. But chiefly my desire was in very déede, to professe openly and to preach the doctrine of our Lorde and Saui∣our Iesus Christe accordyng to the measure of his grace, & the knowledge that he had giuen me therin. And now concerning the first point, that I haue
purposed to entreate of, I wil eclar vnto your Maiestie the causes that en∣forced me to departe out of your most flourishing realme of Spayne. For I am not ignorant that the time of my departing is very well knowen, and much noted of many men, aswell for the number of vs that fled at the same tyme, as for the colour that was made to our Countrymen, of our necessarie departure, but yet without allegation of any cause certayne. Many had good cause to meruayle most of all at me that I among the reste so voluntarily departed into exile, considering there was not onely no apparaunt cause of feare for mée, of any open accusation for Religion to be had agaynst mée, but not so muche as any suspition at all, yea rather beyng in so good cre∣dite, with diuers personages bothe Worshipfull and Honorable, as fewe menne of my cote and callyng were, so that this my necessarie departure is not to bée termed a constraynt or enforcement, beyng not dryuen there∣vnto by any Officer or Inquisitour,
who liked of my presence and compa∣ny very wel, and gaue me friendly en∣tertaynemēt: but it was my consciēce that vrged me therevnto, which by the beyng lightned by Gods spirite, did séeme to be in continuall torment, and felte as it were a hell in it selfe, to be miserably ouerlayed with so huge a Masse of superstition and idolatrie as long time and much labour would not suffise to declare. Wherefore of many things I will shewe to your Maiestie a few in excuse of my selfe & for mine owne purgation, moste humbly be∣séeching the same to encline your gra∣cious eares, & with patience to heare this my declaration, to the ende, that your grace may of your selfe, the bet∣ter iudge of my cause, and descerne whether this my departure out of your graces Realme of Spayne, de∣serue blame and condemnation, and not rather pardon and cōmendation. Secondarily, that I might shew some proofe of my Faith & doctrine to your highnesse, I will briefly declare vnto you certaine articles of our religion,
and for the residue will at all times at ur Maiesties commaundement be ost ready to do the like. And first to ppe vp vnto your grace all thinges om the very beginning, I will shew you how miraculously, and after how range a maner the Lorde did open he eyes of my soule, and made me to ée the truth. What time the Empe∣our your Maiesties Father of fa∣mous memory, had nominated D. Ae∣idio the chiefe chanon & preacher in the Cathedrall churche in Ciuil,D. Aegidio accused of the Mōkes. to bée Bishop of Tortose, the Monkes of Ci∣vil beganne so greatly to enuy it, or ra∣ther so furiously to rage thereat, that whereas they were not in any wise a∣ble to hinder him of that preferment wherevnto the Emperours maiestie had aduaunced him, they conspired to∣gither in what sorte they might beste accuse him for a sower of heretical do∣ctrine, after he had obtayned the Bi∣shopricke: For vntill that time D. Aegidio for his preaching was thought to be an Apostle, and for his godly cō∣uersation and life, iudged of his very
enimies to bée a paterne for all oth Preachers to folow & direct thēselu by. After this conspiracie was put  practise, whole thrée yéeres were spe in quarrelling, & entring billes of co¦playnts against him, during al which  time (good mā) he lay in pryson, paciē¦ly, and manfully abyding all kinde o affliction and miseries that were layd vpon him. At what time for mine owne parte, whensoeuer I either be∣hold his estate or heard it spoken of, I thought in my conscience that he was well and worthily serued, and I also meruellously abhorred to heare him, yea but once named, as one commōly reported to be a sower of Luthers he∣resies, and a sworne enimie agaynst the Pope. In this opinion, or error rather, I remayned a long time, till one of the Inquisitours to whom his cause was specially recommended by priuate letters sente from the Empe∣rour,An Inquisi∣tour disco∣uereth the secretes of the Inqui∣sition. began to make his complaint to me of the iniurious dealings & wic∣ked demeanour of certē of his felowes, that were ioyned togither with him
in commission, aswel concerning other matters whiche pertayned to their of∣ce, as especially in their procéeding a∣gaynst D. Aegidio, who as (he sayde) was both a good man and a true chri∣stian, & better learned by a great deale than his aduersaries, for all their glo∣rious tithes of Doctorship, declaring moreouer, that he vnderstoode right well out of what forge these quarrels and false accusatiōs were coyned, and that the Mōkes durst neuer haue bene so bolde as to attempt so to set them∣selues against him, but that they were bolstered & vpholden by a certen Bi∣shop. Beside this, he made report vnto me particularly, in how many things the holy Inquisitiō (as they call it) had dealt very cruelly with suche as were accused. The whiche things it were requisite and necessarie for your Ma∣iestie (most rightuous prince) through∣ly to vnderstande, that your Grace might knowe the common Prouerbe in your tong to be true, No es todo or lo que: reluze, It is not al gold that gli∣stereth: and that this highe consistory
and holy house of Inquisition (as the terme it) is most wicked and voyde  all holinesse. For whiche consideratiō he tolde me further, that he had both dispatched himselfe out of the charg of that office, and refused the fée therof to the end that he might haue his frée election to be present onely in special matters at his pleasure, & beyng now farre stroken in age, he might not be compelled to deale in all affayres. And yet to the end that he might be an ayde and succour to some, whom otherwise his companions would with tiranny haue oppressed, he was content to be named in commission, and reteyne the authoritie still. For suche was their madnesse and furor (sayde he) ioyned with frowardnesse of minde, that they would procéede to condemnation of mē innocent & guiltlesse, without hearing and debating their cause. Whereof he sayd there was euidence sufficient in the cause of D. Aegidio, wherein foras∣much as they were ignorant thēselues and vnderstoode not what was right & what was wrong, what was in religiō
true and what false, they did therefore all the Monkes to counsell, that they ight weigh the causes, and by preiu∣ice giue their verdites, whiche they ommonly call the Qualifications, be∣ng knowen to be moste enuious eni∣mies against that good man, & to beare hote malice towardes him stil boyling in their brestes. And as for D. Aegidio truely, (sayd he) if he be an heretike, as his aduersaries do reporte him, I con∣fesse that I am an Heretike also: For I am fully persuaded in my consciēce, that he teacheth no other doctrine than the very woorde of God, in the whiche opinion his good life and conuersation agréeing with his doctrine, doth the ra∣ther cōfirme me: neither thinke I any Preacher of them all within the whole Citie, that doth more euidently, both in woorde and déede, expresse true pietie & godlinesse than he doth. For whiche of all the Canons in the whole Colledge bestoweth his yéerely pention more li∣berally, & to better or more godly vses than doth D. Aegidio, by whose good de∣uotion and almes, poore widowes are
holpen, fatherlesse childrē cherished, a great number of pouertie relieu This speach so grauely procéeding fr so fatherly a personage, besides one o so great credit & authoritie (to declar the truth to your Maiestie) did not¦withstāding greatly moue me & offēd me, when I hearde him vtter al these things against such men whom I did both honor in my hart, & estemed to be ye very pillers & supporters of ye church & the true & sincere iudges of christia∣nitie, howbeit partly the authoritie of him that spake it, & partly ye good will which I know him to beare me, & the credite of his report, hauing experiēce hereof himself, & seing it with his eies, wrought not a little wt me on ye other side, the rather to giue eare vnto it & to enquire further therof: whervpō after more talke had of these matters be∣twixt him and me, I requested him to helpe me to the sight in writing of the accusatiōs & the articles layd against D. Aegidio, with the determinations of the diuines or Qualifications (as they terme thē) ye which he graūted me ve∣ry
willingly & therwithal gaue me the y of ye Apologie made by ye same D. gidio in his own defence & purgatiō.  ye reading wherof I fel in a marue∣s admiration.The Do∣ctrine of D. Aegidio. For Aegidio that cō∣ly was accōpted to be an enimy to hrist, referred al his writings to the ly & euerlasting honor and glory of Christ, cōfessing the singular ioy & cō∣rt of christē men & womē, only to cō∣st in his death & passiō, & in ye cōtinual mebrance & meditation thereof. He was called an infidel, & yet he extolled with highly, & set forth the force & ver∣tue therof which is quite contrarie to al hipocritical & pharisaical workes, & ye sundry sortes of superstitiō which mē had deuised to please God withall. To be short, most mightie prince) the wri∣tings & workes of ye mā did so greatly inflame my minde, ye me thought I did euidently sée ye very true & liuely image of christ crucified expressed therin, since which time I had a gret desire to haue some cōferēce wt ye said D. Aegidio & dili¦gētly to peruse his sermōs & expositiōs vpon certain bokes of ye holy scripture,
whiche when I cōpared with the S¦mons & writings of the popish Pri and Monkes eyther treating of Pu¦gatory, or the Popes Bulles, or rath Burles (as they were well and wo¦thily termed) or written in aduaunc¦ment of mans merites and superstit¦ous workes,i. Scoffes. I noted so great a diuer¦tie betwixt thē, as is betwixt day an night, light and darkenesse, truth an errour: finally, betwixt the doctrine  the holy Ghost and the deuice of man braine. Whē I was in this touched  so earnest a zeale of pure religiō, I ha also other friends whom the Lord vse as meanes & instrumēts to enflame my desire of further knowledge, the which was first kindled in me by ye working of the holy spirite: for by this occasiō I came first acquaynted wc D. Cōstantino, whose learning, grauitie, wisedome & profounde knowledge in Diuinitie, no man knoweth better than your Maie∣stie: surely al Spayne had him in great account, and admiration therefore. I came also acquainted with Gasper Ba∣ptista, a very honest and iust man: with
Garcia ab Arias: with Maestro Scobar: Iuan Goncales: and diuers other, very learned and godly preachers. Besides this I did with great diligēce inquire for Luthers workes and other wryters of the Pro∣testantes, which the Inquisitours them∣selues did lende me at the first very wil∣lingly, as one of whome they had no ma∣ner of suspitiō. Wherein I did acknow∣ledge the singular prouidēce of God, who to cure my blindenesse, made the Inquisi∣tours themselues his instruments, and by their handes gaue me suche bookes for my better instruction, which they had be∣fore taken frō others. By meanes wher∣of it came to passe, that in shorte space I profited greatly in the knowledge of true and perfect religion. Then began God to open the eyes of my vnderstanding, & to giue me (as it were) certain spectacles, by meanes wherof I espied many horri∣ble & abhominable things which before time were vnknowen to me, and no such things in my iudgement. And, to declare to your Maiestie by what wayes God did leade me as it were by the hande to a
further knowledge of his truth. I will in the beginning shew vnto your good grace ye means wher by I first attained to per∣ceyue the tyrannous dealing of the Pope and his Inquisitours. For whē I weyed with my selfe, and pondered in my minde the great darkenesse and ignorance that we were in, I considered how necessary a thing it were for vs to be instructed in the holy and sacred Scripture which God had left for the encrease and confirmatiō of our faith:The Lay people in∣hibited the reading of holy scrip∣ture. On the contrary part, when I perceyued howe the Pope and his In∣quisitours with all the reste of their sect, laboured tooth & nayle to kéepe men from the reading of the worde of God: & when I dayly hearde cruell Edicts and Procla∣mations published against suche as had either Bible or Testament in their mo∣ther tong, I straightway bruste out into these wordes with my selfe, saying: Are these the decrées & Edicts of the true Mi∣nisters of God? God expresly by his word cōmaundeth that all men should read the Scriptures: & these men directly do coun∣termaūd it.Iosu. . God apointing Iosua to be the
ruler and guider of his people, enioyneth him to take his lawe as a rule to direct & order all his enterprises by, & the people would not receyue him, but with condi∣tion that he should guide & gouerne them according to the prescript worde of God: wheras the Inquisitours are growne so bold, that they dare inhibite Princes and Magistrates ye reading of the Scripture. I reade in Iohn that euery man ought to search the scriptures,Iohn. . for asmuch as they do beare witnesse of Christ. The Inqui∣sitours beare vs in hande that it is onely meant of the learned sorte whiche vnder∣stand Latin: & that it is punishable with death for any other man to presume to read thē in their mother tong. Moreouer Paule taught me yt the iust man liueth by his faith,Rom. 4. & 10. & in another place yt faith is got∣tē by hearing the word of God. The In∣quisitours teach the cōtrary, yt the faith & belefe which ye church holdeth generally is sufficiēt for ye behoofe of euery particu∣ler person.The cōm and Popis catholicke fayth. And if a mā had asked thē the questiō what maner of faith yt is, & which is ye true church, they did answer, in effect
the same, which the Pope, the Cardinals, the Bishops and Inquisitours declare by their fruites, and represent in person, of whose fayth and workes they woulde haue all other men wholy to depend. And truly this inhibition of reading the holy Scriptures me thought did sounde much both against all good reason and policie. For what Prince and potentate is there in the whole worlde, that woulde thinke it an indifferent matter to commaunde his subiects to obserue & kéepe his lawes and ordinances, whiche neyther his offi∣cers wil suffer them to reade, nor to haue in theyr custodie? For if that were so, then shoulde eyther the Prince be suspe∣cted to go aboute to intrappe his people within the daunger of lawe, or the Ru∣lers vnder him thought not only not obe∣dient subiects, but rebelles against theyr Princes will, considering that it is a ve∣ry harde and a difficulte matter to kéepe lawes, except a man be skilfull and con∣uersant in them, and by meanes thereof vnderstande them perfectly. What (thought I with my selfe) Mahomet was
neuer so cruell against his secte and fol∣lowers.The Tur¦kes more cunning i theyr Al∣corane that Christians are in the Bible. For he left his Alcorane in wry∣ting as a compēdious and brief Abstract of his sect and heresie, to the end that eue∣ry one, both old and yong, learned and vn∣learned, Lay mā or Clergie man, might learne in theyr owne naturall language to know and to follow the doctrine & reli∣gion of him whome they had chosen for their Captaine and supreme head. How much more requisite were it then that the most rightuous lawe and most sacred worde of our God should be redde, and in perpetuall meditation with them that professe themselues to be schollers of his schoole, and members of his Church? To be shorte, as I was in this cogitation, I became fully persuaded in cōscience that the Pope and his Cardinals, the Inquisi∣toures and their adherents, and all the o∣ther their complices and confederates in the like tiranny, were the professed eni∣mies of Gods kingdome and his glory, sworne traytours against the Maiestie of Christe, and the very meanes and in∣strumēts of Satan, wherby he inueigled
many miserable soules, spoyling them of the foode & sustenaunce of their spirituall life which consisteth in the worde of God, and compelling the poore flocke of Christ to begge the crummes of that heauenly bread at the hands of Monkes & Friers, who tempering the same with their pha∣risaicall leuen, made it bothe foystie and vnsauery foode: and yet not withstāding, made their marchandise thereof, and solde it to the people at a very high pryce: And here began I to conceyue a great griefe in my conscience, and to féele (as it were) a corosiue at my hart, beholding the cōmon people and the foolish superstitious womē runne by flockes here and there vp and downe to get them ghostly Fathers, that might comfort and heale their wounded and guilty consciences. I considered fur∣ther that these tyraunts had forcibly en∣tred and intermedled within other mens iurisdictions and liberties, taking vpon them the interpretatiō of holy scriptures, and yet in such sorte that they neuer ope∣ned their mouthes to preach the worde to the cōmon people, but at their owne plea∣sures
and their beste leasure at certayne times in the yéere, as most commonly in Lent, Aduent Sondayes, and a few other festiuall dayes. But O good Lorde what kinde of Scripture is it they preach? such as they make their markettes of, and sell for money, prophaned with all kinde of Idolatrie and superstitiō, corrupted with the idle deuises and cōstitutions of mans brayne, seruing onely for the aduaunce∣ment and cōmoditie of the Pope and his champions, without bringyng any qui∣etnesse to afflicted consciēces, or any per∣fect knowledge and instruction in the mi∣steries of Christian religion: for all there sermons and actiōs respect no other end. And nowe I leaue it to the conside∣ration of your Maiestie (moste mighty Prince) to weighe and consider what kinde of knowledge of God this people can haue ingrauen in their hartes that haue suche Pastors and Schoolers to teache them?VVhat m¦ner of knovvleg of God is in papaci For myne owne parte I muste néedes confesse, that the same God that by his holy Spirite hath wrought this alteration in me, hath bene defaced
by them, and spoyled of his greatest and moste meruelous workes, Mercie & Iu∣stice. For these lying Doctors and tea∣chers made him a cruell and seuere God against such as coulde not make satisfa∣ction for their sinnes with money. And if their doctrine be true which teach vs that those mē are more acceptable in the sight of God, that make sumptuous & magnifi∣ciall foundations of Abbeys and Mona∣steries, that make large and ample dona∣tions for the maintenaunce of the same, that buylde Chappels and Aultars in Churches, that finde lights and giue sil∣uer lamps, that giue money to the main∣tenaunce of the Quyer, that found perpe∣tuall chaunteries and Diriges, that giue fayre and rich suites of Copes: woe is me therefore, what shall become of poore la∣bourers & handycraftes men, of the poore ploughman and others, that get theyr li∣uing hardely by sweate of their browes, that neither haue any money to bestow to suche vses, nor scarcely sufficient to buy bread for their family? with what face or coūtenaūce dare they presume to apeare
in presence before such a goldē God, and ne so desirous of presentes, hauing no∣hing to present him withall? Surely the mercy that suche a God will shewe shall xtend but to a fewe. Againe me thought hat that God of whome those Doctours did preach vnto vs, was not perfectly iust and rightuous, that woulde pardon the transgressions against his holy will and commaundement, for gold or siluer or o∣ther presents whatsoeuer, cōsidering that it is a great shame for a man of any cre∣dite or honestie to bée brybed with re∣wards, and to pardon a trespasse for mo∣ney. For what can be more vile,The blas∣phemous cōsequēces of the Po∣pishe do∣ctrine in their opi∣nions they holde of the Deitie. or de∣serue greater reproche, than that a man should make the trāsgressing of the law, but a money matter? And yet the God of the Papists according to their doctrine (as though he were not cōtented and sa∣tisfied with the euerlasting sacrifice and obedience of his sonne Christ) selleth his grace and fauour for money, is content to pardon the greatest and moste horrible offences that can be, to him that giueth most money, and in respect of masses, ob∣lations,
pilgrimages and suche like babl content to be recōciled vnto vs, and to b at a perfect vnitie and attonement wi vs. Wherevpon I gathered and conclu¦ded, that the conscience of man shoulde  the sight of such a God be in a perpetual and continual feare and terrour, alwaies restlesse, hopelesse of finding any place o stay in the mercies of God. But if any b the direction of Gods holy spirite had any assuraunce and certen affiaunce in suche goodnesse and mercies of God, hée was straight-way called arrogant and pre¦sumptious heretike that durst presume to put such a confidence in God, who was so wayward and daūgerous to please, that the moste precious presentes that can be wil scarce cōtent him. The which things I perceyued to tende wholy to this ende and purpose, to kéepe them in continuall awe and dispayre, and by this meanes to compell menne to runne with quaking and tremblyng consciences to theyr con∣fession,Incertenty and vveak∣nesse of fayth bree∣eth distrust & dispaire of grace. as to a moste safe and holy san∣ctuarie. And to kéepe them in this per∣plexitie, they did abuse many places of
Scripture framed alwayes to their own yne and profite. For this doctrine the stirre menne to séeke to merite the race of God by all meanes, which these edlers make their markets of & retayle  euery body. Moreouer me thought e coules and hoodes of Friers and Monkes, the Vestimentes and Belles f the Churches and suche lyke, were (as I may terme them) Mercers signes to direct a man by where hée mighte sée hoyce of suche wares, and buy the grace and fauour of God of what sorte or price it pleased them. And what kinde of fayth then dothe your Maiestie thinke that these menne can haue, whiche be∣ing blinde themselues, follow them that be blynde guydes?A definitiō of fayth af∣ter the Ro∣mishe do∣ctrine. For theyr doctrine of fayth in effect is, that it is nothing but a certayne persuasion imprinted and set∣led in the harte of manne, by meanes whereof they holde for a suertie that what soeuer the Popes holinesse, the Cardinales and the reste of the Clergie do and beléeue (for these say they are the Church) that same is ye very wil of God.
And this faith they call Fidem implicit that is to say, the commō & generall fai meaning hereby that wée may not be ¦quisitiue of the Articles and points of r¦ligion, but that we must depende vpon ¦ther mens fayth, and beléeue as they b¦léeue. Moreouer if the mind of man we at any time troubled and out of quiet, o¦ther by the threatnings of the lawe, or b the guilte of our owne cōsciences for o misdéedes hauing not vnderstoode th meruellous force of faith in Christe, an the frée iustification that cōmeth by him I beséeche you what playster did they ap¦ply to our wounded cōsciences?The Popes playsters and reme∣dies for sin. For soot we must make confession of our sinnes t them, and make a generall rehersall of a our misdéedes, and leaue not out one, bu shriue our selues wholy of al. The which thing besides that it is a very harde & a difficulte thing to do, will sooner dryue a man to desperation, than yéelde to our af∣flicted soules any kinde of comforte and consolation: except perhaps some special men of learning and discretion whiche know the true vse of confession, do quali∣fie
the matter some maner of waies. But  concerning the matter of our frée iu∣fication and reconciliation with God rough the bloud of our sauiour Iesus hriste, not a woorde I warrāt you ther∣, for it brought them neyther morsell  theyr mouth nor penny to their purse. ouching repentaunce, how many sub∣le points and nice quiddities haue they uised of their owne brayne quite and eane against the woorde of God? to the nd to flatter the rich and wealthie of the worlde, and to lull them asléepe in their owne sinnes and filthie abhominations,Contrition is the depe sorovv of the hart & dread of conscience springyng from the knovvlege of our sins. The Do∣ctrine of Attrition nourisheth sinne. Attrition is a motion in man, mo∣uing to the disliking of sinne. teaching them that although they haue o perfect Contrition of harte for theyr sinnes, that before God it is sufficient to haue a little Attrition, that is to say, a kind of disliking of thēselues, for that they had a pleasure in wickednesse and sinne, and in continuyng therein. This Attrition oyned with a little shrifte was a meane and an emboldening, as me thought, and a kinde of prouocation of théeues to con∣tinue in their theft, adulterers in their ad∣ulterie, and of other wicked persons to
commit sinne and to continue in the sam For they beare the people in hande no¦withstāding al this, that they might ha a ready & spéedy way to heauen, and r poste if it pleased them so they would pa for it, and if they could not reache thith without a bayte, they shoulde be sure  méete with no worse an hostery by th way than Purgatorie. The whiche pla the Diuel & his Ministers haue erected  robbe Christe of al his gestes, and to de¦fraude thē of that heauenly banquet tha he hath fréely prepared vpon the Aulta of his crosse, by offering vp his body ther for a sacrifice & shéeding his most innocē bloud a propitiation for our sinnes. Bu as cōcerning Iustification & Sanctifica¦tion of man, and the inwarde affection of the harte, whiche God specially requi¦reth of his children, these Preachers speake not one worde. For so ofte as they preached of good workes, they named vn¦to vs, workes meritorious, workes that iustified, and of Supererogation, whiche they sayde were acceptable before theyr God, who (as they fayne him) is better
pleased when we eate fish than flesh,The super∣stitious vvorkes of the Papists. whē  go woolward than when wée weare a nē shyrt: when we sléepe vpon a straw dde than vpon a bedde of downe: when e go a long pilgrimage, as to S. Iames of mpostella, or some other suche Idoll, an if we go a short iourney to any other e. As for true faith, such as worketh  Charitie or sure and stedfast hope, or rfect loue, whiche is more carefull for e cōmodities of other thā for his owne,  mortifying the olde man with whom we must kéepe a continuall conflict & bat∣tayle, God (say they) was not so greatly carefull. By this bayte (moste mightie Prince) is the most part of Christēdome oth trayned into the Church of Rome & etayned therein, for these teachers haue very greate care ouer the body but none at all ouer the soule, yt is to say, are very arefull in outward ceremonies, wherein he more busie the better Christian, the more Hypocrite the deuouter is he accō∣pted and more religious. As for the matter of regeneration and new birth in Christ,No rege∣neration vvithout fayth. they declare euident∣ly,
that they neuer receiued benefite th of, nor so much as cōceyued the misteri For they do onely inquire thereof at t tune of their baptisme, when the infa hath neyther sense nor vnderstandyn nor will, nor faith to receyue Christ, a yet are they as proude and as bragge  may be, and by their doctrine make oth to growe in lyke pride, and bring them  beliefe that they haue put vppon the Christe vndoubtedly, bicause they ha bene outwardly wasshed with the visibl Element, and that the kingdome of he¦uen is theyrs of duetie, after they haue r¦ceyued the Sacrament of Baptisme though they neuer had any sense or per¦ceuerance of the sprinckling of the blou of Christe, nor that testimony of a go conscience that S. Peter requireth of the whiche be baptized in Christe and sprin¦kled with the deawe of this grace. Bu howe many wayes this Sacramente i abused and prophaned, for breuitie sak I wil omitte to speake of at this present. Yet may it please your grace thus much to consider, to what great boldenesse an
impudencye these workers of iniquitie re growen with practise, and professe to oniure diuels oute of the bodyes of in∣ants (whome God reckneth among his wne) and that with the vnsauery breth f theyr corrupte stomacke by laying pittle vpon their faces, casting salte in heir mouths, annointing their forhead nd shoulders with filthy oyle, as thou∣he Christ our sauiour had at any tyme nstituted any such thing. I sawe moreouer, that in stede of con∣rmation vsed in tyme paste in the pri∣itiue Churche, to strengthen the noui∣es in the fayth by some Cathechisme nd exposition of the articles of Chri∣tianitie, suche as was thoughte moste pte and conuenient for that purpose, re∣pecting their capacities, there came in lace a foolishe and an apishe imitation f the like, or to terme it more aptly, a ery ridiculous counterfayting of the ame.The Po∣pish maner of confir∣ming chil∣dren. For the Bishop arayed wyth hys Rontificalibus doth firste binde the childes orheade that is to be confirmed, or doth lindfold hym rather, and then giueth
hym a blowe on the chéeke to putte hym in mynde that hée departed from vn∣der hys handes, and receyued of hym confirmation, the blinde to followe the blynde that waye whyche shoulde leade them to destruction. And this abhomi∣nable ceremonye they are not ashamed to call a Sacrament of the newe Testa∣ment, and sette it in lyke place and de∣grée with those whiche Christe hymselfe had instituted. Of lyke presumption and arrogance I perceiued likewise that they had delte in the case of mariage,The solem∣nization of mariage, a ciuile mat∣ter, and of mere pollicy. the first instituti∣on whereof, albeit, it did procéede from God, yet is it a matter ciuile and poli∣tike. For it maye bée contracted and so∣lemnized before the ciuil Magistrates, aswell as in the face of the congregati∣on: forasmuch as it importeth no other thyng, but that the people maye vnder∣stand that the coupling is iuste and law∣ful, their faith and truth being plight on both partes by eche of them to the other, and the banes openly asked, before that the whole Church be sufficiently aduer∣tised
thereof. Whereas these good school∣maisters of ours doe affirme that matri∣mony is a Sacrament: not of any zeale hey haue of giuing that honour to that oly institution (which call maried folks worldly and carnall and imperfect Chri∣tians) but bicause they would raise some duantage to themselues of euery thing hat they might get any profite by, and herefore they say it is no lawfull mari∣ge, except the Prieste haue hys share in oney. And who séeth not moste mani∣stly these mens arrogāt and shamelesse pudency, whych contemne, & disprayse tat honorable estate of holye wedlocke,  the ende that they might aduaunce, nd bryng in estimation theyr filthy and ncleane single life, and the abhomi∣able vowes of theyr counterfaite cha∣tie, verifying in themselues the same hyche hathe béene long a goe foretolde y the holye Apostle: and on the o∣er syde doe terme it by the name of  Sacrament,1. Tim. 4. that they may make their ynes the greater. Or is there anye yng that they wyll bée afrayde and
ashamed to attempt, that where Christ hath instituted onely two Sacraments,Ceremo∣nies turned into Sacra∣mentes. haue presumed to make fiue moe, and of certain holy ceremonies which the aun∣tient fathers vsed wyth greate deuotion and reuerence, and with good discretion, they haue made their gaine, and set the sacraments to sale, promising grace and saluation by such means; hauing no one word in scripture for their warrant that the promisse of God is ioyned to anye of these their newe inuented Sacraments. Touching the blessed Sacrament of the Lordes supper (mercifull God) howe many abuses did I manifestly sée brou∣ghte into the holy mysterie by the blinde superstition and arrogant presumption of men, in the celebration whereof lyke as they vse in baptism, al things are said and song in a barbarous and an vnkno∣wen language, so that they which had n knowlege in latin could vnderstand no∣thing, but onely sée a fewe gesture lyke iuggling knackes.The Masse a sacrifice propitia∣torye. They perswaded th people that the Masse was a sacrifice propiciatory, that is to say, that ye wrat
and vengeaunce of God was appeased, and himselfe reconciled therewyth, and by this means, solde the graces and bles∣sings of God for mony to men desperate and vnrepentāt. Besids this, they made thys medicine serue to satisfye for the sin of all men both for quicke and deade, a doctrine no where to be founde in all the holy scriptures. And to the ende to perfect their iniquitie, and to accomplish it fully, they taught vs further that these massemongers and sacrificers had suche power and abilitie committed vnto thē, that immediatelye after the wordes of consecration (as they call them) or sacra∣mentall wordes, and by the vertue ther∣of, they were able to fetch Christ from heauen with a trice both fleshe, bloude, and bone, and the same Christe breake in péeces with their handes, offer, sacri∣fice, eate, teare with their téeth, and de∣uoure, whereas he is nowe immortall, impossible, omnipotent and euerlasting,The coun∣cell of Trē in the time of Iul. 2. th 2. &. 3. Ca∣non. and death hath henceforth no power o∣uer hym. Besids this, in the administration of
this Sacrament the people was defrau∣ded of one parte, to wit, of the wine, the Sacrament of his bloud, contrary to the prescript forme and institutiō of Christ: the which albeit the fathers in the late councell of Trent did acknowledge and confesse, yet notwithstanding (say they) for certaine speciall causes, the holy mo∣ther Churche of Rome hath determined the contrary, that it shall not be lawfull for all Christians to receyue the cuppe whyche is the Sacrament of Christes bloude. Moreouer I was fore agréeued to be∣hold the abhominations committed ther in the adoration of a péece of breade, and that with such kinde of worship and ho∣nor, as God by his commandement hath specially reserued to himselfe. This God of theirs made of breade and dowe was caried I say, about in solemne procession through towne and streates, with candle and torch light, with ioly chaunting and iangling of bells, it was caried to ye sicke & diseased, it was a preseruatiue against the plague, it was good againste all thun∣der
& lightning by land, against stormes & tempest by sea, it was caried about the ields to make thē yéelde the more fruite, to driue away caterpillers & other suche venemous worms, which didde destroy, & eate vp the corne in the eare: to be short I didde sée a horrible and a monstrous manye of abuses, Idolatries, super∣stitions, buying and selling that the Monkes and Priestes vsed, and all for vile lucres sake. And thus briefly out of a number of the lyke, I haue sorted a fewe (moste noble Prince) wherewyth I was moued (or to saye more truely) enforced to forsake youre Realme of Spaine, to my great griefe, as being my natiue countrey, the soile yt I was borne & bred in, wher I had ye comfortable pre∣sence of my friends & kinsfolk, being not in very perfect health, but hauing a era∣sed bodye, disposed to diuers infirmities. Notwithstāding I shrōk not for al this, but tooke this trauaile vpō me, and was content voluntarily to goe into exile, to the end that I might bestow the residue of my lyfe in the declaration & exposition
of the causes of thys my departure. Whereof if I shoulde haue chaunced t haue bene preuented by death, yet my dying in a straunge Countrey should be an argumēt and testimony to them that shoulde remaine behinde me, of what af∣fection I was towardes true religion, and so shoulde amounte at the leaste to a secrete profession of my faith, accomp∣ting it better for me to suffer any kinde of aduersitye wyth Gods chosen people, than to continue among the flesh pottes of Egipt,Heb. 11. and there to cherish my body, and to hang vppon theyr sléeues, and to be vnder their countenaunce, which de∣light in nothing so much as in the sauour thereof, séeing suche things (as saith the Apostle) be brittle and laste but a little season, and vanishe awaye lyke smoke. And what shall it auaile any man, I be∣séeche your Maiesty, if he win the whole worlde, and wallow in all kind of world∣ly pleasure at will, and lose eternall life, yea and hys owne soule. For if the de∣lights and pleasurs of this world be mo∣mentane and shorte, then surely our mi∣series
and calamities that we suffer here n this world manfully in the defence of he glorie of God, are lesse than the ex∣éeding ioys that God hath prepared for s, wherof he hathe giuen vs good assu∣aunce. Among the reste of their abuses and eremonies whyche be infinite,VVorship¦ping of Images. if a man houlde goe aboute to peruse them al, I had almoste vnawares ouerpassed the worshipping of Images and Crosses, a matter very necessary to be remembred, considering the horrible Idolatrye that they brought in vnder the cloke and co∣loure of certayne blinde distinctions of Latria, dulia, hyperdulia, in worshippyng stockes and stones with honour and re∣uerence, not alonely the Images of their Saints (as they call them) but the reliks, and the counterfaits of such Images as haue bene heretofore at any time, or in any place had in reputation, as appea∣reth manifestlye by the Images of oure Lady (as they call hir) of Montserat and Guadaloup, whiche are not onely sought vnto with great deuotion and reuerēce,
but also their pictures and portrature drawne to the likenesse and similitud of the same Idols. Besids this, the thin that I maruelled at moste of all, was t sée where dyuers pictures represente all one Idoll, yet one to be had in mor peice of the common people than the o¦ther, wyth more deuotion to bée soughte vnto and worshiped, more richly presen∣ted with iewels & ornaments, as it is ea¦sy to sée throughout your whole Realm of Spaine. The vovvs of Nunnes and FriersAnd here it maye please youre Ma∣iesty also to call to mynde their doctrine of Monkery and cloystering, and theyr vowes of perpetuall chastitye, obe∣dience and pouerty, the whyche of what soete and condicion they bée, and howe much they auaile and helpe a man to the better seruing of God, I referre all men to the consideration of their dissolute and vncleane liues, that take these vowes vppon them, to iudge and to estéeme. But that whyche is moste worthe the rking, and oughte leaste to bée for∣gotten,
is that these false and lying do∣ures, to the ende that their rules and ders of Monkery shoulde be the more dde in price and estimation wyth all en, haue so farre passed the limits and undes of modestye and shamefaste∣sse, that they haue not bene ashamed  affyrme, and to preache openlye, that e profession of Monkerye dothe purge man as perfectly, and maketh him as ghteous before God, as Baptisme,Monkery 2 second bap∣tisme by the Papists reli∣gion. d that other Christians are but once ly regenerate, but Monks and Nunnes gyther wyth theyr coules and vailes e receyue (as it were) a seconde or double regeneration: O moste hor∣ble blasphemy, and intollerable in chri∣ian eares, what a deuillishe arrogance nd presumption is this, to bée so mala∣erte to compare the dreames and fan∣asticall rules of Benet, Frauncis, Domi∣icke and suche lyke, wyth the moste sa∣red institution of Baptisme, yea and o place them in lyke degrée therewyth, heras our Lord & sauiour Iesus Christ
hath instituted and ordeined Baptis for a signification and a seale to vs that true oblation and wshing by  whiche Christe the immaculate lam that was slaine for our sakes,Looke in the bookes of Caiet. did wa and clense his Church, by shéeding h moste precious bloude. But if any m woulde enter straightly into the exam¦nation and tryal of their liues, that ha bene so often washed and regenerate. I feare me he should find it too hote a ¦uour to suffer any time without a spe all good perfume. And therfore to spea my fansie briefly, this their filthy a vncleane lyfe is a greate euidence a proofe, that by this seconde regenerati they are become the ims of the Deuil that before peraduenture hadde som marks and tokens of adoptiō in Chris The whiche thyng was no small grief vnto me to sée the good and godly ord and profession of Monkes that was  tyme paste to be so fondly defiled by the of oure tymes, and so quite altered fro their firste institution. For there is no so ignorant, that hath bin any thing con¦uersaunt
in any antiquities and aunti∣ histories,The fyrste original of Monkerie. Looke in the tripar∣tite historie but he may sée that the per∣uted Christians in the first infancy of e Churche to auoide the crueltie of the thnike Princes, and to the ende they yght serue God wyth more fréedome, nd with lesse feare, did accustomablye ée into desert places: wherevppon they oke their names at the firste, and were alled Monkes, as men solitary and se∣uestred from the companye of men, to ue aparte from other in more perfecte tudy, and meditation of Christes reli∣gion, and in more safety and securitie to nstruct others in the same. Afterwards n processe of time the sages of that tyme ōsidering the great vse that the Church shoulde haue of learned men to teach and instructe the people in the Principles and precepts of Christianity, caused cer∣taine schooles to be erected, and for the better training vp of youth, bothe in the knowledge of holy scripture, and vnder good discipline, they did place suche men as liued solitary before incertaine Col∣ledges or Monasteries, to this ende and
purpose,Chrisostome in his booke that hee vvrote a∣gaynst them that dis∣praise the solitary lyfe of Monkes. that out of those places as frō storehouse they might alwais choose a and able ministers & pastors for the co¦gregation to preache the gospel a bro among the people. But after corruptio and ignorance was crepte in, and th Poperye hadde gotten the vpper hande Gods worde was layde asyde and neg¦lected, and the youth bestowed all theyr time in chaunting and howling both day and night, and in so blinde ceremonies full of superstition and Idolatry, conten∣ting themselues wyth a coule, the badge, and cognisaunce of their second regene∣ration. Is it possible then that ther shuld be any man liuing eyther so farre from God, or so carelesse of his owne saluati∣on, that beholding daily with his eyes so greate and so horrible a corruption, and deprauation of all thyngs, and knowing them to bée contrary to the Maiestye of God, odious in his sighte and abhomi∣nable, wyll notwythstandyng continue therein, and be partaker wyth others of theyr wickednesse. I passe euer, that the Gospell was made a playne marchaun∣dise
an open shop therof kepte in Chur∣s to buy and sell, and to exchaunge  other wares, the most precious bloud Christe. For what other thyng (I beséeche ) are their proclamations, and In∣gences, Remission and forgiuenesse ynnes, dispensations, processions,  rogations, bulles and suche other e, but an open sale of Christes bloud,  it were by the drumme and standerd?  so muche that the deade can not reste ietly by them, but they wyll haue em in by hooke or by crooke one waye  an other. For as thoughe it were a all matter to deuoure, and at a mor∣ll to choppe vppe the quicke to gnawe  theyr bones (and as the Prophet yth) to breake them in péeces, and st them in a potte to make themselues oath wythall, they wyll also resem∣le the Crowes,VVhat it is to deuoure the deade. and praye vppon e deade carkasses. For what is to ée called a deuouryng of men a liue if hys be not? That no mā be he neuer so pore wtout
present pay might either haue his ch christned or bishopped (as they term  nor any be priested nor maried, nor ¦ceiue the Communion, nor be anoyl lastely, (which is a moste euident arg¦ment of the insatiable couetousnesse  these gréedy cormorants) might not b buried and layde in the earthe, which  common to al men, except these fellow had their mony paide afore hande: b specially if a poore man ought any pe¦tithe, firste fruite, or any other Church duety, he shoulde not haue Christian b¦riall before he hadde satisfied therefor And then also I beséech you what chan¦tic did they shewe to the deade? after a this forsoothe they woulde make the exe¦cutours pay for their Masses and D¦ges for their singing and chaunting, fo crosse and crosse cloth, for bell and can∣dle light, for soule knells, for sensing, fo¦beare and beare cloth, wyth infinite o¦ther polling recknings, that these sha∣uen Syres, and these pedling Mercers ha learned in the schoole of Satan their Syre And this is the cause (moste myghtye
Prince) why a number haue willingly parted out of your Maiesties Realme  Spaine, sorowing to sée before theyr es, so manye and so horrible abuses in e Popish Church, and hauing no hope  redresse in so curelesse a case: for suche  durste either priuyly or openly make eyr mone to others, or declare their dgement in religion asted the Inqui∣ours tiranny therfore: some being exe∣ted by fire quicke, some strangled to athe, some perishing vppon the racke, nd other their tormentes inexplicable, me by the filth and corruption of the prison, others moste cruelly intreated at he Gaolers handes, and yet of all the est, this is most slaunderous and grea∣st dishonour to your Maiesty, that all ese tyrannies are countenaunced with our aucthoritie, and by vertue of your ighnesse commission: as the common ying is, that your Maiestye is the au∣hor thereof, and the Inquisitours but oure instrumentes. For they saye that our Maiesty hath straightely charged nd commaunded, that all suche persons
as shall holde opinion that these thinge that be aboue named bée abuses, and de∣sire to liue in that fréedome of conscienc wherein God hathe placed vs by the Go∣spel of hys sonne Christe, shoulde suffer imprisonment, tortures, death in most cruell sorte that can be deuised. And ther∣fore it behooueth your Maiesty greatly (most gracious Prince) to take notice of this cause: (which our aduersaries, for ye respect of their own priuate lucre, séek by al means to kéep from your knowledge fearing yt our cause being knowen they gaines would ceasse) before your grace authoryze by Commission suche vniust Iudges, and not to permitte that they shold sit of life and death ouer them, who can best declare to your grace the subtill practises of thys generation, bycause they knowe them beste.Kings and ciuile Ma∣gistrates oughte to heare and determyne the causes of suche as are accu∣sed for re∣ligion. It is reported in histories that Hadri∣an the Emperor, who knew not Christ, nor his religion, neuerthelesse woulde not reiecte the supplications, and bylles of petition exhibited vnto hym by the Christians. Neyther did Pontius Pilate
that Iewe, enter into iudgemente of ure Sauioure Christ, before he hadde y orderly Processe, and as it were y due fourme demaunded of the par∣ye hym selfe, what hys cause was, utting apart out of the place of iudge∣ente all his accusers. Festus and Felix twoo chiefe Ru∣lers among the Romaynes, and Lieu∣tenauntes of the Prouynces, woulde ot condemne S. Paule till they hadde wyth pacience hearde hym pleade hys owne cause. Neyther woulde youre moste noble progenitoure and late Emperour Char∣les the fyfthe, of moste famous memo∣rye, bée quiete in hys mynde, before ée hadde hearde Luther speake for ymselfe in hys Maiestyes owne pre∣sence. And also (as it is reported of enne of verye good credite,) dyd pri∣ately séeke to vnderstande the whole ate of hys cause at Luthers owne outhe. Whervpon Pope Paulus the thirde of hat name, began to haue him more than
halfe in a ielousy, and to conceiue some displeasure towardes hym frowned vp∣pon him fouly therefore, in so much that he lette not to threaten the Emperour t remember hym for suffering an heretike to speake in hys presence, though in hys owne cause. The whyche is an euident argument of a full weake and an vniuste quarrell, when a man refuseth to haue his cause referred to the debating and de∣terminations of indifferent iudges. For if the Pope and his Clergy maintaine a righteous quarrell, why dare he not re∣ferre it to the iudgement of Kings and Princes? why fléeth he the triall therof: why is he afraide to come to conference, and haue hys cause fréely debated in a generall councell, where the controuer∣sies of religion might be debated and dis∣puted of, and euerye man be hearde to speake his opinion according to the truth of the Gospell, without feare or danger of their tyranny? What impediment was ther thinke you, why the East chur∣ches of Greece, Macedonia, Asia, Africa, Constantinople, and Antioche woulde not
gyue their consent to the primacie of the pedo me, not giue their consent, naye  at moued thē with might and maine withstande that ambitious nation of  Romishe Supremacie, by vertue ereof (say they we may displace kings o Emperours from their Kingdomes  Empires, wée maye spoile them of ir Crownes, we may take the sword t of their handes, and dispose all that me at our owne pleasures, and at our illes giue the spoyle thereof where it easeth vs: And yet Princes and Po∣ntates being drunke with the Babilo∣nicall harlot, doe kisse hys féete, honour im in earth like a God, and so do terme im the God of the earth, their most ho∣ father and supreame Bishop, and be∣g falsely perswaded that hée can not re, doe therefore thinke that the poore rotestants are iustly condemned by his ome, bycause they will not fall downe nd worship the enimy of God, thinking hat all Princes may with very good iu∣tice, and with a iuste conscience execute ll things that are commaunded by him,
and that the inquisitours likewise m doe the same by vertue of theyr commi¦sion. O mercifull God, what a blyndne is this? O how sharp are thy iudgmen (O Lord) that hang ouer our heads, the men being worse blinded inwardly, as in more grosse and palpable mists of i¦noraunce, than the outwarde mistes a darkenesse that the people of Egipt we in, shoulde notwithstanding thinke the did as perfectly sée the truthe as the Su at middaye, and on the other syde iudg them to be blinde that haue the true an perfect light, euen the spirite of Christ▪ giue light to their vnderstādyng. Who senses also and vnderstādyngs they da go about to blind, and to captiuate lea happily they shoulde espie their iugling and treacheries, naye plucke their ey rather out of their heads, molest, vex, di¦quiet, torment, kill and slea those by fin and sworde, and by all kind of torments whome God accompteth to bée of hy flocke, and hathe béene maruellously carefull and tender ouer to bryng them
vppe, to foster and cherishe them, and  encrease their number, and for whose ke Iesus Christe the euerlasting sonne  the almightye father hath shedde hys oste precious bloude to worke their re∣emption and saluation. And then began  thus to thinke secretely wyth my selfe. What meaning haue these fellows with em? If wée bée heretikes (as they ac∣ompt vs to be) why haue they no com∣assion of our soules, forasmuch as they éeke not only not to saue our bodies, but work our vtter destructiō? Why do they putte vs to death, perseuering in oure o∣pinions and iudgementes, whyche they all Hereticall, especiallye beyng per∣waded as they are, that our opinions be damnable?The In∣quisitours labour to destroye both bodie and soule. Why labour they not ra∣her to teache vs the truthe, and to bring vs backe into the ryghte pathe a∣gayne? Why are they not contented to spoyle vs of oure lyues, but imagine howe they maye doe it in moste despite∣full and cruell sorte that can bée deui∣sed, to the ende, that they myght driue men into desperation, whose saluation
they might driue men into desperation whose saluation ought of Christian cha¦ritie to be moste deare vnto them. Now surely so it hath pleased God to order it, that these men shoulde bestirre them i this sorte like furies and helhounds, that they maye declare themselues to bée th séede and generatiō of Sathan their Sire, who hath bene a murtherer from the ve¦ry beginning, the broode of Cain subiecte to the curse, of whome God in the laste daye at his comming to iudgement, will aske a strayghte accompte for the inno∣cent bloud of his Saints shedde here in earth by them, and reuenge al the whole, from innocent Abel, to the very laste of his Prophets and Martyres. As our sa∣uiour Christe doth moste manifestly de∣clare, speakyng to the Pharisies: Verily I saye vnto you, it shal come vpon thys generation from the bloud of iust Abel, to the bloude of Zacharias the sonne of Ba∣rachias, whome you haue slaine betwixte the Temple and the Aultar. Wherefore in most humble manner, I pray and be∣séech your Maiestie (most gracious soue∣raigne)
not to defile nor embrewe your ndes with the bloud of your moste in∣cent subiects, nor to permit and suffer y longer that these limmes and mini∣ers of the Deuill, the deadly enimies  God shoulde abuse your gentlenesse nd good inclination any longer. Let not  great and so horrible cruelties be pra∣ised and countenaunced wyth your au∣horitie. Cast not the shéepe committed nto you by God, into the mouthes of hose moste rauening Wolues, leaue not ehinde you so lamentable a memoriall to your posteritie, that your grace should be registred among them that volunta∣ily, and after their owne luste and plea∣sure, haue by all meanes persecuted the true Christians, the children of God, and put them to death, lette it neuer be saide that good men haue bene vniustly oppres∣sed without cause knowen, but only pre∣tended contrary both to Gods lawe and mans, and that in your Maiesties moste Princely throne and consistory. For be∣sides that this corrupte kinde of dealyng in the seate of iudgement will séeme most
monstrous most detestable and most vn∣reasonable to thē that shall follow: there is a worse thing greately to bée feared, least God the Lord of hostes the moste myghtye and strong defence of Israell, will laye so greate and so horrible Pla∣gues, vpon these moste cruell and vniust Iudges, and vppon their issue, theyr re∣alms and dominions, that it shal remain as an example for al posterity that shall come after, & the memory of them shal not be worne out while the world endureth.The mise∣rable ends of them that perse∣cuted the Churche. No more then is the memory of Pharao that was drouned in the depth of the sea, or of Nabuchodonozor that was transfor∣med into a brute beaste, or at the leaste (whyche is as much in effect) giuen ouer to brutish and beastly delyghts and exer∣cises, or of Holofernes, whose heade was striken from his shoulders by the hands of a séely woman, or of Herode, that was eaten vp with wormes, of Nero, Caligula, Iulianus & other like tyrāts. It is therfore a good lessō in this case to beware, & to be wise by other mens exāples. For it is a great grace of God to learne by the mis∣haps
of other men, as it were at the han∣des of a scolemaster what is best for our owne behoofes. The whiche your grace may easily learne (most mighty prince) if it may plese you to cast your eie aside, & to behold the miserable calamities whi¦che in youre memorie haue hapned vnto them that haue persecuted and vexed the church of god. Nam tua res agitur paries cū proxmus ardet, as the common saying is, When thy neighbours house is on fire, take héed of thine owne. But to returne to my purpose, these are the chiefe occasions that enforced me to leaue Spayne, and to betake my selfe to the wide worlde, and to wander as a Pilgrime and stranger in forrain coun∣treyes. In the whiche trauayle for the space of tenne yeares, besides great sick∣nesse, I haue suffered extreme Pouer∣tie, and haue bene constrayned to be∣com as an infant again, and to learne to speak strāge languages to be able to vn∣derstand others, & to expresse mine owne mynde. The which things notwithstan∣ding, trusting in the mercies of God, I
haue bothe willingly and paciently ac∣cepted and suffered, knowing assuredly that the Disciples & souldiours of Christ cannot be in better estate and condition than their Maister and Captaine hathe bin. And this is the cause why the world that is naturally enclined to malice and spight, refuseth to be at league with me. For if I were a worldling, then surely woulde the worlde embrace me as one of his broode, would commend and extoll me, would sette me alofte in honour and authoritie, would endue me with riches, and would yéeld me at full al other com∣modities and pleasures, as it is accusto∣med to do to his own. But I for my part render vnto almighty God moste hartye thanks, for that it hath pleased him frée∣ly, and of his mere grace without anye desert of mine, to imprinte in my hearte true and perfecte faith, by the which I do not onely stedfastly beléeue in his dearly beloued sonne, and in his Gospel, but al∣so do manifestly abide & suffer al thinges for his name sake, and am made parta∣ker of his Crosse. Howbeit in all thys
my long trauayle there is nothyng that séemeth to me so vnséemely, as that suche as be aboute your Maiestie and of your Counsel shoulde vse suche diligence, spa∣ring neyther for labour and coste to ap∣prehend, and to clappe in prison a num∣ber of vs Spaniards that haue fled your Realme, and one also among the reste. For it is manifeste and verye apparant, that by them there haue bin diuers spies and searchers sent abroade to apprehend vs, and that there haue béene no small summes of money spent about the same. And yet notwithstanding, God hathe so blinded them, that neither they knew, ne being present among them, nor wist not well either what to doe or speake, for the which cause the Lordes name be praised for euer. For neyther haue I hidde my selfe in corners in thys tyme of my ab∣sence, nor lurked in obscure places, but God hath giuen me such spirite, and such boldenesse of courage, that neither in Ita∣ly, Germany, Fraunce, Sauoy nor presently being in your Maiesties lowe Countrey of Flaunders, I haue eyther disguised
selfe or dissembled my religion. Naye I haue openly, fréely and boldely, preach the Gospell in the moste famous Cities where I haue trauailed, and in a greate and wonderfull audience, yea before the moste noble Princes, and moste honou∣rable personages of all Europe, wyth the liking and commendation of many, and with good opinion and credit for my con∣uersation. Albeit I acknowledge right well mine owne weakensse, and confesse my selfe to be subiecte to manye infirmi∣ties, and guiltie thereof in the sighte of God, knowing that I am defēded of that most corrupt and cursed roote of the old Adam, and that al my déedes of thēselues bée vile and naughtye, abhominable be∣fore God, & accursed vnlesse they bée sha∣dowed and couered wyth righteousnesse and innocencie of our Lorde and sauiour Iesus Christe. Notwithstandyng (moste mighty prince) my cōscience pricketh me not for any thing yt I oughte to bée asha∣med to shew my face among men, nor a∣ny cause I thanke God to make me hide myselfe and kéepe in corners. And when I was in Spaine I thanke God I did not
only lyue there blamelesse, but also voide of al suspitiō of crime. Although I must éeds confesse yt fearfulnesse of my fleshe, and natural frailty was some let & hin∣deraunce vnto me that I did not openly preache & professe the truth of Gods gos∣pell at the first, after it was reuealed vn∣to me: In so much that the Inquisitours thēselues, could not bée perswaded of sixe moneths after my departure, that I had changed my Country for religions sake, thinkyng me veryly both to haue a good opinion of their procéedings, and to bée a perfect Catholike after their Romish sect. Notwithstāding these pursiuants & sear∣chers made such ernest pursute after me, and that by expresse commaundement from the Kyngs mouth (as they moste falsely pretended,) as they wold or should haue done agaynste the greatest thiefe and cutte-throate, or counterfayter of the Kyngs coigne or the rankest traitour to youre Maiesty that could be, whereas I (god be thanked) was frée from these and all other suche lyke offences: as I reporte my selfe to the Inquisitours themselues and to their own promoters,
or of anye of these matters, thought I knowe them otherwise, and in other to specte to bée my deadly foes and aduersa¦ries. And why is that I beséeche you Forsoothe I wyll not beléeue the Pop and hys Chapleines. And that is suche  sore matter in my fansie, that I thinke I coulde not aske a greater bowne at Gods handes, than that it might bée m chaunce to testifie and to seale vppe m faith wyth the sheadyng of my bloud. I is causelesse therefore an myne opinion, that these furious & raging mad brayns doe thirst after my bloude so hotly, al¦thoughe they knowe assuredlye that my beliefe and persuasion bée quite contrary to their superstitious deuises and Idola∣tries. Moreouer the power and authori∣tie of Rulers and Magistrates séemeth to haue certain bounds and limits with∣in the whyche it is contayned, so that it reacheth not so far as the minde and con∣science of man beyonde the rule of Gods lawe, as appeareth more plainely by the expresse rule and commaundement of Christe, where hée sayth: Giue vnto
Cesar that which is Cesars, and vnto God that which is his. And therefore kings and princes can require no more at their Subiectes handes, than that of righte is their duty, to wit, obedience of their sub∣iectes towardes them, and their lawes, the due payment of taxe and tribute, and in their behalfe to spare neither body nor goods. Mary the heart and conscience and religion that resteth therein, is an other manner of matter, and is in the hands of God alone, who guideth and gouerneth the mind of man with his holy word and scriptures, teaching them both, what o∣pinion we muste haue of him, and what kinde of worship and honour we oughte to yéelde him. Wherefore in most hum∣ble maner, I pray and beséech your Ma∣iesty (moste mercifull Prince) not to ac∣compte that to be a faulte that is so farre from offence, howsoeuer your false in∣formers will beare you in hand the con∣trary. And this sense and féeling of a pure and vpright conscience, hath comforted and confirmed me from time to time, and hathe brought me in case that neyther I
feared any indifferent Iudges, nor doub∣ted to goe into other of youre Maiesties dominions, to the ende that to my power I might doe good both to your Maiesty, and to my fellowe subiectes. Specially calling to my minde, and considering the greate tumultes and vproares, and the cruell warres that this chaunge and re∣formation of religion had caused both in Germany, Scotlande and Fraunce. The which I thinke hath fallen vpon vs part∣ly for our sinnes, and partely the rashe boldenesse of some that were in hope be∣like to bring their purposes to passe by contention and strife, and being hot and egre soughte to plant religion and buil∣ding vp of the Churche of Christe, with force and strength of armes, imagining that the same were the means of the go∣uernement and administration of a ci∣uile common wealth, and the buildyng and maintaining of Christian religion: which being spirituall and heauenly, née∣deth not these contentions and tumultes for planting & defence therof. And there∣fore after my firste commyng into youre
Maiesties lowe Country, being perhaps not altogither ignorant in these affaires, I did bende the whole force of my witte in my sermons to calme and pacifie the common people, and to bring them to an vnitie and attonement togyther, exhor∣ting them to giue themselues to peace and brotherly charitie, to beare one with another, and to forget all quarrels till it might please God so to worke in your Maiesties hearte, that eyther in youre owne presence, or béefore some discrete and indifferent Iudges deputed by your Maiestye, or in some generall assem∣blye of the states in Parliament youre Maiesty woulde permitte your poore and miserable subiectes, to complaine them∣selues of the tyrannye that is practised againste them, and that heauye yoke of bondage with the whiche they are op∣pressed by the Bishoppe of Rome. And truely so farre as I can gather bothe by the talke and behauiour of youre Maiesties Subiectes of the lowe countreis, they had rather choose to haue frée accesse to make theyr supplications
and complaints to youre Maiestie, and haue libertie to maintaine and retaine a∣mong them the Gospel of Christ, though it coste them a greate parte, yea theyr whole substance to purchase it, than to stoupe and yéelde their necke to the hea∣uy yoke of Idolatry and tiranny of the Papists But at this present, partely for feare of war and persecution, and part∣ly of your highnesse displeasure, they are content to bée quiet and to kéepe silence, waiting a good time when your Maiesty woulde bée so gratious vnto them as to permitte them to serue God duely, and in that sorte that he hymselfe hath in his holy word prescribed and appointed. Wherfore (moste dradde soueraigne) at my firste commyng, my chiefe desyre was to teache and to perswade the peo∣ple to refraine from the dooing of suche like things, as before my commyng had bin rashly & lightly attempted by some, to wit from the breakyng and plucking downe of Images, the ouerturnyng of Altars and Churches, and Monasteries (as they call them.) For one thought it
was very reasonable and conuenient for vs, if we will serue and worshippe God,Iohn. 4. and call vpon him as he hath appoynted vs to doe, that is in spirite and in truth, to permitte and suffer other also to liue somewhat after their owne liking, and forasmuche as they are perswaded, that they can not without offence to God re∣iect these superstitious and Iewish cere∣monies, to let them alone there wyth for a time, and to take their fill thereof, yel∣ding for a season to their infirmities and ignorance, and praying to god for them, that it would please hym to lighten their vnderstandings with the shining beames of his glorious Gospel. And after that by the good exāples of our modesty and our conuersation of life, to moue, to allure, and to enflame them to embrace true re∣ligion, and forsake their olde Idolatrye, and false seruice of God. And bicause your Maiesty may brief∣ly vnderstande the chiefe articles of oure religion wherein wée dissent from the Pope and his popelings, I will kéepe the order well neare in declaring my minde
concerning true religion, that I haue heretofore obserued in the discourse whi∣ch I haue made in detecting their errors and abuses, the whiche declaration shall only containe that doctrine which I haue learned and takē out of the word of God and holy Writ, and endeuoured myselfe accordingly, to preache and sette foorth to your Maiesties subiects. And for bre∣uitie sake, I will not debate nor amplify the proofes and reasons that I haue for the confirmation of our religion, but wil briefly and summarily, and by the waye (as it were) will lightly touch the argu∣ments taken oute of the holy scripture, that make for the proofe of our parte, and the disproofe of our aduersaries. Wher∣by it shall remaine as a testimony to our posteritie, and appeare most manifestly, that the inquisitours of Spaine haue v∣sed great iniustice, and abused their com∣mission in persecuting mée for an here∣tike, and therewith also your Maiestye maye well perceiue what kinde of do∣ctrine it is that I woulde haue preached vnto your subiects.
And bycause perhaps it would be too ong and too tedious to entreate of all the points particularly that are at this daye called into controuersie, I will only han∣dle fiue or sixe of the chiefe articles, and moste necessary of the religion wée pro∣fesse, wherevppon all Christes religion wholy dependeth, and is sustained: and that your Maiesty may also more easyly iudge the oddes betwixt our doctrine and our aduersaries: I will as briefly as is possible, lay before you their proofes and argumēts takē out of their own works, and speciallye oute of that booke whiche one Ruardus TaperusRuardus Taperus. a diuine of Louane chiefe inquisitour for the lowe Country, hathe in the name and behalfe of all the Diuines, and Romishe Clergy dedica∣ted vnto your highnesse, the whyche sée∣ing it is authorized by youre Maiesties priuiledge, I truste all men of that part wil bée contented to take the proofes and confirmatiōs of the Romishe reilgi∣on out of ye booke, as out of the storehouse of their diuinity. For at this daye, it is a very hard & a difficulte matter to gather
any certaine doctrine oute of the reste of popishe diuines, consideryng they doe in so many poyntes dissent and disagrée a∣mong themselues, one condemnyng an other, in so muche that certaine famous Vniuersities haue especiallye noted and coted the errors of these men that were accompted the sure stakes and pillers of the Churche of Rome, as for example, Thomas Aquinas, the Maister of the Sen∣tences, Durandus Scotus, and suche other whom the Romish Clergy hath in grea∣test price and estimation. Of the word of God, the holy scripture, and the authoritie therof, & the rea∣ding therof in the mother tong. SEing that the Church (as saith the holy Apostle) is builded vppon the foundation of the apostles and prophets whyche is Iesus Christ, that heauenly and euerlasting worde, it is reasonable and conuenient, that we also shoulde be∣ginne the grounde of our confession and faithe of that worde of euerlasting lyfe, wherevnto the Churche leaneth, and
wherein shée reposeth hir whole trust and fiaunce. Firste and formoste, therfore e confesse that the word of God which e Grecians call  was before all ings, and from the beginning,VVhy Christ vvas called the vvorde. Iohn. 1. 1. Iohn. 1. Heb. 1. Math 2. Heb. 7. Luke. 2. the whi∣e both was with God, and was and is od it selfe. The same worde we con∣sse was incarnate, and conuersaunt, nd continuing heere among vs a long me, to the ende to reconcile mankinde  his father, and to preache vnto them, hose name was called Iesus, that ther∣y might bée signified vnto vs, that re∣mption and euerlasting saluation was rchased for vs by the benefit of hym, he same surnamed Christe, to signifie nto vs the anointing of the euerlasting riesthood of his kingdom that endureth r euer,Hebr. 9. & of his most certaine and true eaching. And forasmuche as the same ernall and almightie God can neyther  séene nor comprehended in the com∣sse of mās vnderstanding, he determi∣ed and perordayned to distribute, and stowe vppon men the treasures of hys isedome and grace by thys hys Legate
and Ambassador sent from aboue. Wher vppon he is worthely termed the word o God, begotten of God from euerlasting and before the creation of Heauen an earth. This is the same Iesus, that from the beginning spake vnto the Patria¦ches and Prophetes, imparting to them the will of his father, being the very so of God, the shining brightnesse of his fa¦thers glorye, the expresse Image of hy substaunce, who vpholdeth and may¦tayneth all thinges by this his most myghtye woorde, and by the whych all thynges were erected, bothe visibl and inuisible. And by thys worde beyn the eternall and liuely worde, we mean not any such thing as can be eyther set down in paper, or written with inke. Fo our meaning is that that word only m be written with inke, whiche either pr¦céeded foorth of hys owne mouth, beyn here in Earthe, or out of the mouths  some of hys ministers at hys wyll an appointment. And thys worde to wit that was spoken by his mouth or by hy Prophets, and set downe in writing, w
alo terme, and that rightly and worthi∣ by the name of the holye scripture: yche is the onely way and meanes directe vs to true holinesse, and ther∣e of right we call it holy, to make a ference betwixte it and the worde t procéedeth from man, whiche of the turall frailty and infirmitye of man, commonly ioyned wyth corruption d error. Wée doe moreouer acknowledge d confesse, that the same worde or de∣ration of the wyll of God is contay∣d in the bookes of the olde and newe estament or couenaunt, whyche are yuered vs by hande, to the ende wée ye knowe and discerne the true God m the false and fayned Goddes and olles,Psalm 19. Rom. 1. Hebr. 11. whiche man hath deuised of hys one brain. And though the contempla∣n & view of things created bring some ht to ye vnderstanding of man, to make m to acknowledge and confesse the yght and power of hys creator, yet is not of anye suche force, as of it selfe one to bée able to imprinte in oure
harts the perfect and absolute knowled of hym, it was therefore verye requi and necessary for vs, both to be lightn with his holy spirite, and instructed  his moste holy word: for out of this fo¦taine issueth all the knowledge that  haue of God, and is conueyed into ou mind, which otherwise coulde in o ca be comprehended of men, and that is  true and the onely meanes wherby  may imprint and engraue in our heart the true and perfect presence of our G and creatour. And that is the order that God hi selfe hath appointed and obserued fro the very creation of the worlde, and vi in teaching Adam and Abell to repro the sinne and offence of Cain, to open a declare his will to Noe, and afterwar to his peculiar & chosen people, to who he would in more familiar wise and mo sencibly reueale and manifest hymsel Hovv di∣uersly God hath reuea∣led hym∣selfe.For God by diuers and sūdry mean hath made his will manifest vnto me somtime by worde of mouth and speac procéeding from his diuine substance,
when he spake to our forfathers in suche te, as they conceiued it with their out∣rde senses: sometime by the secreate orking of the holy spirite: sometime dreames and visions, and yet all these dry means wrought one effect, to wit, oste sure and certayne perswasion to  schollers, that eche of these were it rde, inspiration, or reuelation, did al∣aies cary with it an infallible veritie, océeding from the secret hart and will god, who can not deceiue men no more an he can lay aside his Godheade from m. Whereby it came to passe, that the atriarches and Prophets by force of ys perswasion, were so confirmed and engthned, that such times as it pleased od, they shrinke not to seale vppe the ne heauenly word with the sheding of eir bloude: Wyth the lyke fayth and rtaine perswasion, they didde likewise ue some of theyr writyngs and monu∣entes to the posteritie to the ende that yng moued by the studie thereof, wée ght be more conuersaunt in the schoole
by the study thereof we might bée  conuersaunt in the schoole of God, in  which he wil no lesse instruct vs by  holy spirite, than he did in time past  elders and forefathers, that thereby  may vnderstande and beléeue, that th hathe bene, is, and alwaies will bée,  only Church, and one only truth, tho it appeare sometyme more euident th at another: suche is the maruellous p¦uidence of God, to apply himselfe to  capacities. And that he giueth vnto his discipl and hearers, by this meanes we confe that by the ministerie of that heauen worde, whyche God commaunded to  committed to writing, and to remaine  the posteritie for euer, bothe in the ty of the law, and of the Prophets, we c¦fesse I say, that we do wythout all scr¦ple sincerely, and from the bottom of o heartes, acknowledge hym to be the tr God the maker & gouernor of al thing as our forefathers in like sort haue do before vs. We say moreouer and affirm that this same word is the most certain
rule wherby to direct al our dooings, and herto we ought to refer all ye thoughts nd imaginations of our harts, least we eing deceiued & led awaye wyth the in∣abilitie of our own wits do wāder and  astray, through our own fond fātasies imaginations. If thē the word of God,The au∣thority and credite of scripture vvhere it proceedeth nd holy scripture be none other than the octrine procéeding out of the mouth of God, and from his holy spirite, I beséech ou what can bée more absurde than to ake it of no greater aucthoritie, than he Popes and general Counsells wil e∣éeme it? wheras we ought on the con∣rarye rather to estéeme the Counsells hemselues, if they represēt the church of Christ to haue al their force, credite, and uthority of the worde of God. Further∣ore we do affirme (albeit the spirite of God be tied & bound to no outward thin∣es) that notwithstanding that same spi∣ite hathe both promised and determined o teache the Churche no newe doctrine ther than it hathe taught oure forefa∣hers, the whyche it hathe lefte re∣maynyng wyth vs as a touche stone
to examine and try the true motions an inspirations of the holy spirite, from th false and heathnish, and suche as the lu and curiositie of our owne fleshly fanta¦sies doth cause and worke in vs. And forasmuche as thys was th mind and will of our God, that by mean of this word, we shuld al come to know¦ledge hereof, we do accompt it sacriledg and highe treason, to withdraw men, ey¦ther by perswasion or otherwise by au∣thoritie to inhibite thē the reading ther∣of: where as it oughte rather to bée wi∣shed, that aswel women as mē, the igno∣rant as the learned (at the least suche as professe themselues to bée Christians) shoulde be occupied bothe day and night in the meditation thereof, eche in theyr owne vulgare tongue, and not these a∣lonely, but also Turkes, Iewes and all other of any Countrey or nation what∣soeuer, throughout the whole world. The holye Scriptures are ob∣scure to that vvilful and vnre∣generate.But if any be so impudently bolde as to accuse and blame the wisedome of God, saying, yt he hath deliuered vnto vs his woorde in great darkenesse and diffi∣cultie,
so that many therby fall into ma∣ny great errors, we detest him as a blas∣phemer, and a most false flaūderer of the Maiesty of God, and one cleane voide of Gods spirite, and wanting that moste comfortable and shining light whereby hée might be able to beholde and sée the misteries of God. Of the knowledge of God gotten and attained by the word of God. FRom the very beginning and crea∣tion of all thynges when God firste made mankinde, to the end that he might be partaker of the knowledge of hym,The firste degree in knovvlege of God. he ordained and appointed, as it were thrée formes or degrées in hys schoole: in the firste wherof he set before his eyes to be∣hold and take ye full view of his wonder∣full worke, the huge masse of the whole world, that the varietie and abundaunce, of all things shoulde be as it were an al∣phabet to induce him to the knowledge & contemplation of his might, power,Psalm. 1. eter∣nitie, & diuinitie, that as the prophet doth witnesse, the Heauens, the Earthe, the
Sunne, Moone Starres, Sea, and all o∣ther things contained therin, doe nighte and daye, and wythout ceassing, declare the glorye and excellencye of our Lorde and God, neyther is there any country or nation so brutishe or so barbarous that is not able to conceiue this bothe wyth outwarde eyes, and by secrete imagina∣tion, the whiche thing also maketh them vnexcusable in the sight of God, that he may wyth iustice condemne them, for that they hauing by this means ye know∣ledge of God, yet did not worshippe him accordingly, nor shew themselues thank∣full for hys benefites bestowed vppon them, as he hath deserued at their hands. The se∣conde de∣gree.To the second forme or degrée in thys schoole do properlie apertain those whom god hath specially & peculiarly chosē to be his people, to whom it hath pleased hym to exhibite himselfe to bée knowen in moste familiar wise, in the whiche I do also place all dissemblers and hipocrites, whiche haue not onely from time to time bene mixed with good, but sometime also haue had the chiefest place of prehemi∣nence
in the same congregation, and abu∣sing their authoritie haue oftentimes op∣pressed the better sorte, as for example, suche were the Scribes, Pharisies, high Priestes of Ierusalem in Christes time. And in our daies the Popes Cardinals, Popish Prelats, Monkes and Priestes, and the rest of the Popish Clergy repre∣senting the same, their predecessors whi∣che altogither ascribed themselues into thys number, and moste commonly fre∣quent the congregation to reade or heare the worde of God. Which wheras they ought to vse and exercise or apply to their owne saluation, and the peoples, yet not∣withstanding (the more is the pity) they do so abuse, that they séeke after nothing so muche as their owne aduauntage, that they maye the more easely satisfye their owne lustes, desires, and pleasures. And if anye good and godlye man haue the zeale and courage to discouer thys their trecherye, and tell them theyr faultes, whyche are cloked vnder the pretence of vertue, they laboure by all meanes possyble, and practise agaynste hym
all extremitie they can, whose purposes and imaginations,Sapien 2. The hate∣full spea∣ches of the vngodly a∣gainst the vngodly. the spirite of God hath described in these wordes: Lette vs treade the iuste men vnder our féete, and let vs priuily lay snares for hym, foras∣muche as he is againste vs and our pro∣fitte, and casteth vs in the téeth with our misdéeds, and bringeth our conuersation to light, to our greate reproch & infamy. He vaunteth & boasteth himselfe to haue the knowledge and vnderstāding of God, and maketh as though he were the sonne of God, and séemeth to bée ordayned for this purpose, to obiect our faults against vs: And how greate a corroziue is he to vs I beséech you, hauing chosen a lyfe quite contrary and diuers from vs. Hée estéemeth vs no better than he doth cop∣per coigne of a counterfaite stampe, and abhorreth to doe or say as we say, and do as much as a man would abhorre a most filthy sincke, or the very pitte of hell. As for the iust & righteous men, he reckneth them moste happy euen in their end, and braggeth of God to be his father: let vs therefore examine the matter, and trye
whether the doctrine hée preacheth bée true or no, and lette vs sée what issue it will growe vnto. For if the iuste man be the childe of God, he will defend him and take hym from amids hys aduersaries. Lette vs séeke to persecute him, and to practise all kinde of punishments and in∣iuries vpon him to trye his pacience: let vs execute him by some infamous kinde of death, if it be true that he teacheth, God will aide and assist him. These thin∣ges, and suche like, haue the wicked ima∣gined in their mindes, and haue erred bi∣cause their owne frowardnesse hath blin∣ded them. These are the wordes & sayings of hi∣pocrits (moste mighty Prince) who ter∣ming themselues ye examiners & inquisi∣tors of other mēs belief & faith, haue pra∣ctised no lesse indéede than they haue pro∣mised before in wordes. And to these (no doubte) the reading of holye scripture is tourned into bitternesse and poyson, and their eyes dazeled with the bright beams thereof doe waxe daily more blinde than other. For whereas by meanes of holye
scripture the sacred worde of God, they ought to acknowledge the true God to be bothe iuste and full of compassion: they fansie I wotte not what, but a kinde of Godhead they doe imagine, that is with∣out both these two chiefe vertues. And in stéed of oure Lorde and sauiour Iesus Christe, doe substitute another Christe, whome they lure from Heauen to flée to their fiste at a becke to earne themselues pence. Moreouer, forgetting that onely and euerlasting sacrifice of Christe, they bring in place thereof very arrogantlye their owne merits and workes of super∣erogation, and where they ought to ex∣toll the excellencie and maiesty of Christ as it becommeth them, beyng the verye true sonne of God, the heauenlye Pro∣phet, the chiefe and euerlasting Prieste, the Prince and gouernour of all things, the spirituall king of godlye minded con∣sciēces: yet notwithstanding they spoyle him of all the ornaments of hys Prince∣dome, his sacrifice, and his office of pro∣phesie, in conclusion, these miserable dis∣semblers, though they enter into thys se∣conde
degrée and order of God with o∣thers of Christes disciples, to heare and receiue the doctrine of our Lord and Sa∣uiour, yet doe they not acknowledge tru∣ly, and as they ought to do their own ig∣noraunce and infirmitie, nor that greate benefitte of Christ bestowed vpon man∣kinde, as for faith they knowe no whitto therof, nor can not giue and exact accompt by what means we are recōciled to God. But suche as our Lorde and Sauiour Christ hathe chosen,The thirde degree pro¦per only to the electe. & by adoption made his own, they perceiue and know al truth after God hath remoued them out of the first and second order and degrée, where they had some small entrance and instru∣ction, & giuen them more perfect learning and vnderstanding in the thirde, for it is not the knowlege it selfe of things crea∣ted that are obiecte to our senses (whyche bée naturallye blinde, and dazeled before they bée opened & lightned with the spi∣rite of god) that is able to bring a per∣fecte, and absolute knowledge of the truth, no nor the Scriptures themselues wythout the Spirite of God, can not o∣pen to vs the gates of Heauen, and the
waye to euerlasting saluation: bycause the weakenesse and imbecillitie of mans witte, staying it selfe and resting in the view and contemplation of the bare and naked Elements or letters, is not able to reache to the force, efficacie, and sense of the same: for the worde of God is like a sharpe two edged sworde, whyche if a man drawe out againste the olde Adam, it dispatcheth him altogither, and cutteth all his lustes and concupiscences: but if a man strike with the scabbarde, it hurts not, onely the stroke maketh a sounde, and woūdeth not. And truly if the course of our life wer in this wise, and thus ap∣pointed it were nothing but a shadowe, a counterfaite, a vizarde of hipocrisie, whiche happeneth not to the children of God, who being indued with Gods holy spirite, are able to iudge and estéeme all things, and are themselues notwithstan∣ding iudged of none. For they haue the perfecte knowledge of Gods holye wyll depely imprinted in their minds, the whi∣che the spirite of God hathe ingrauen in their heartes by the reading of his holy
and sacred worde. And hereof doe arise (moste mightie Prince) so sundry sectes of religion,The origi∣nall cause of the con∣trouersies aboute re∣ligion. here∣of growe daily innumerable questions and controuersies, and herevpon do the nquisitours bende their force agaynste os, as against heretikes and seducers of others, wheras we on the contrary side, are certainly perswaded that they walke in moste horrible darkenesse, being eni∣mies to the glorye of God, and earnest promoters of their owne vayne glorye, corrupters and deprauers of the word of God, the which bicause they vnderstand not aright by the direction of his holy spi∣rite, they referre to their owne commo∣ditie and aduauntage, and make it serue their owne ambition, and moste filthye abhominations. What can be then more shamefull than to appoint suche iudges for the deciding and determination of the causes of Gods children, whome so good a father hathe so well instructed in his precepts and commaundements, that they haue not learned it according to the dead letter, but in spirite and truth, that
and haue after a sorte put on Christe, by whose Gospell they are assured that they are reconciled both to him and to his fa∣ther? It resteth nowe to compare the do∣ctrine of the true children of God, that are guided by his spirite with theirs, who as they are very hipocrites indéede, so do moste falsely affirme, that they wholy de∣pende vpon the aucthoritie of the holye scriptures, such is their blindnesse and ig∣norance, that hauing learned of the wise∣dome of the flesh, as it were at the hands of a schoolemaister, nothing but that whi∣che is worldly and carnall, yet notwith∣standing they brag of themselues moste arrogantlye and impudentlye that they haue the true knowledge and vnderstan∣ding of scriptures, the whyche they doe daily more and more corrupte & depraue with their sophisticall gloses and philo∣sophie, or to speake more truly with their own dreames and fantasies. Of the creation of man, and of his estate in innocencie, and fall into synne. THe children of God, and such as are taught by his spirite out of his word
doe confesse, that God in the beginning reated man of nothyng to hys owne I∣mage and likenesse, that hée shoulde bée ufre and vpright, and zelous of his glo∣rye. In the whiche estate of originall iu∣stice (as they call it) he continued vntill he of his owne accorde abusing that frée will whiche God had giuen him, that hée mighte be perfecte in his kinde and na∣ture, did swarue and decline from God, and being deceiued by the flattery of the Serpēt, made himselfe thrall to that wic∣ked and tempting spirite. And this voluntarye transgressing of Gods holye lawe and wyll, bothe brou∣ghte man into a moste miserable condi∣cion, and remoued him from the estate he was in, in honour, and defaced the image of God in him, that is to saye, made him vniust vnfaithfull, an enimy and a rebel against God, and spoiled him of the other graces and ornaments he had bestowed vpon him in his former estate.
Of originall synne, and howe it is conueied throughout the whole posteritie of man. BVt this calamitie and misery rest not alonely in the firste man & wo¦man, and there stayed, but by reason tha they were the séede and stocke whence issued all mankinde, the blemishes an corruptions of oure firste parents doe s sticke in vs, and from them are conuey¦ed to al their posteritie, that al ye of spring and issue of Adam is no lesse defiled with his corruption and filthines, than if they had bene both parties, and guiltie to the offences committed by theyr fyrste pa∣rents. And for this cause also, is that called originall synne that is deriued and des∣cended from our firste parents to all the posteritie, both bycause it is oure owne, and caste vppon vs as by discent and in∣heritaunce from oure auncestours, and is the roote and originall of all other vi∣ces, whether they be generall infirmities common to all men, or proper and pecu∣liar to singular persons.Rom. 5. The force and
strength whereof is such, and so greate, at it maketh a man rude and ignorant  the holye misteries of God, voide of e heauenlye light, resty and stiffe nec∣d against the will of God, vnkind and nthankefull towardes a moste merci∣ll and louing father: and finally in the erformaunce and fulfillyng of hys will nd commaundement, not onely weake nd féeble, but as it were vnapt and vn∣ble. And to the ende we maye beholde the uely image and patern of that mā that eing borne of Adam is not regenerate n Christe:A descrip∣tion of mans cor∣ruption be∣fore his re∣generation. sée howe Paule describeth uche a manner of man vnto vs: Al saith hée, bothe Iewes and Grecians are en∣tangled in the snares and bonds of sinne, there is not one iust man to be founde a∣mong them, there is none that vnder∣standeth any thing, none séeketh after God, all are gone astraye, and giuen to iniquitye,Rom. 3. Psalm. 14. Psalm. 53. Psal. 5. &. 9 Psalm. 140. Psalm. 12. there is not one that embra∣ceth righteousnesse: Their throate is like an open sepulcher that deuoureth men aliue, with their mouth they speake lea∣sing,
and flatter with their tongue,Psalm. 39. Psalm. 36. Esay. 19 Prouer. 1. Psal. 13. &. 35. Collos. 2. the lippes are annointed wyth the poyson  Adders: Their talke is ful of cursing a bitternesse: their féete moste swifte  shead innocent bloud: finally their wh life is moste miserable, that care neyth for godlynesse nor good religion. Lo th is the beste description that can be ma of man, and therefore no man may be  bolde, vnlesse he be altogither shameles as once to whisper a worde of mans fr will to good, of workes preparatiue ( they terme them) merits deserued ex con∣gruo & condigno, and suche other sophisti¦cal and Dunsical deuises, except he wy altogither flatter and deceiue hymselfe and séeke to draw other into like destru¦ction. But to speake the same in more plain termes without any curiositie, wée say that in man is the whole bodye of synn (as the very wordes of the Apostle are) whyche like vnto a leafe of paper, wher∣vppon if neuer so little filthye and stin¦king oyle be dropped by little and little
preadeth so into al parts that ye whol d euery parte thereof is ouerspreade th the filthinesse of the same: euen so e say that originall sinne is not a hurte, ime, or griefe in any speciall parte in an, but an vniuersall blindenesse or rkenesse in the witte and vnderstan∣ng of man, as touching the knowledge  God, and suche as bréedeth in man a aywardnee against the will of God, nd an imbecilitie and weaknesse to per∣urme those thyngs whyche God hathe mmaunded vs to doe. And to define this corruption in few ordes, wée muste thus thynke, that here is no parte in man from heade to ote voide of thys execrable wickednesse nd detestable waywardenesse and per∣ersenesse, as the Apostle in the place I ited before, hath noted wyth greate vn∣erstanding, quoting togither diuers and undrye places of holye scripture verye ptlye and wiselye to the same intent. Oute of thys fountayne also infynite ices issue and spring vppe in the
mindes of the elect. The infection and contagion wher the verie best and moste godly men,The firste sort of sin∣ners. y the greatest sainctes them selues, ha sensibly had experience of in themselu boyling in the myndes of men, yea eu the moste perfecte that euer haue bée like a burnyng fyre, or a flaming fo¦neys. And the infection is wroughte them thrée maner of wayes especially First and formoste it stirreth vp certa inwarde motions,The firste imaginatiō o vvic∣kednesse is very sinne in it selfe. affections, desires a cogitations contrarie to the law of G though the will in all pointes be not f¦ly consenting therevnto, then followe immediatly a great tumulte in the mi¦des of the elect, so great and so veheme as cannot be vttered in wordes, hauyn a moste feruente desire to be released  the length, and set at libertie from thi corruption. The whyche motions a affections of the mynde, the holy script¦res doe testifie bothe to be sinnes, & su as prouoke the wrath of god, whom w ought to worship and reuerence, with al our minde, wyth al our soule, & with al
our strength: notwythstanding oure do∣ing Doctours to pacifie mens mindes nd qualifie their faultes, haue coyned ertaine distinctions, of thrée kindes of otions and affectiōs of the mind, in the rst, second, and third degrée, as thoughe hey myght by this meanes escape the udgement of God, & the horrible threat∣ings denounced againste the transgres∣ors of the lawe of God. Secondarily af∣er the same motions doth ensue the con∣ent of mans will, the mother of concu∣iscence and luste, equall in nature to the ynne itselfe, as our Lorde himselfe hath aught vs. And yet these false Doctors valewing ll thing by their owne weight and mea∣ure,The Po∣pish distin∣ctions of sinnes by degrees. haue in this behalfe likewise inuen∣ed certaine differences of delectations, n quantitie and measure, some to be sin∣le, some double, some long time, some horte, heaping to themselues damnation n tyme to come, for their wilfull error nd ignorance. Of Actuall synne as they call it.
CAste of all after the other two, vp starteth a thirde kinde of sinne, nam¦ly that beside the motion of the mind a the willing inclination of the same is ¦ctually committed in déede, of which so be worshipping of Idolls, blasphemy a cursing othes to the dishonor of God, a prophaning of his moste holye name, so persticious adoration, and pilgrimages as also the other trespasses committed ¦gainste the commaundementes of the s¦conde table, the whyche bée so grosse a palpable, that the very heathen philos¦phers were moued againste them, and a¦waies detested them bothe in worde a déed, yet haue our diuines in this part all founde out a verye fine and a subtill d¦stinction betwixte mortall sinnes, and v¦nial, pretending venial syns to be such  a drop or twoo of holye water, the sign of the Crosse, and such other trifling an ridiculous ceremonies might purge an clense vs of, and by that meanes lulli vs a sléepe, flatter vs in oure moste grée¦uous and horrible synnes, wherevppo
haue growen greate and more gréeuous ynnes among the Christians. than euer id in any common wealth, that was on∣ye gouerned and guided by philosophers eing méere pagans, and such as had no anner of vnderstanding in Gods holy isteries. In summe, the learned sorte and well isposed will confesse, that the Popish do∣toures haue erred moste shamefully in his doctrine touching originall synne of motions of the minde, and differences of ynnes, and haue béene ignoraunt not on∣ye of the nature and qualitye thereof, ut also how miserable effect it wrought n vs, wherin being both deceyued them¦selues, and leading other into lyke error, being the cause of al the infirmities that bée in man, whyle they goe aboute to applye remedyes, they haue heaped er∣roure vppon errour, as shall bée héere∣after declared in his due and conueni∣ent place.
Of the miraculous meanes that God v∣sed to repayre the fall of man. OVr Lorde and God, like a moste lo∣uing and merciful father perceiuing that hys creature and workemanshippe, beautified with so manye notable giftes and graces, prouoked by the crafte and subtilty of Sathan, was voluntarily fal∣len from him and his commaundement, vouchedsafe to open his iustice and mer∣cye towardes vs, that as by the one hée might punishe the synne and transgres∣sion of mā, so by the other, heale and close vppe oure woundes againe. Wherevpon he putte in execution his eternall coun∣sel, to punish the rebelling and disobedi∣ent nature of man, and his fall from him according to his desert, not in the person of him that became so disobedient, and shranke from God, but in the newe and celestiall Adam whiche might bée a fitte intercessor and mediatour béetwixte all mankinde and God, being both God and man. For it was requisite and necessary for the reconciling of these twoo togither God and man, that the other seconde A∣dam
shuld be true and very perfect man, subiect to all infirmities of man, yea vn∣to death it selfe, to the ende that he might suffer the paines appointed by the iuste iudgement of God, for oure worldly and sinfull fleshe, as also that he should be the very true son of God, to ouercome death, sinne, and the worlde, treade downe the gates of hell, ouerthrow al the kingdome of Sathan, and as Paule saith, to be gi∣uen vppe for our transgressions, and rise againe for our iustification, Roman. 4.Rom. 4. The whiche mercye and abundaunte goodnesse of God, was in expresse wordes declared to the firste man, when it was tolde hym, that the séede of the woman shoulde in time to come breake the heade of the serpente,Genes. 3. and the same was renued by often promisse made to diuers after∣wardes, but especiallye to Abraham. This celestiall Adam I saye, hath bene y diuers signes and misteries signified vnto vs of olde, that by this means al mē might comfort them selues with a most ure and certaine hope, and an vndoub∣able perswasion of Gods promisses.
The description of Christe after the Popishe Churche belife. ANd thys is oure opinion and beliefe concernyng Christe, whereof it is a worlde to consider howe manye infinite questions the Diuines of oure dayes or Sophisters, rather to terme them more aptly, haue curiously and vainely hand∣led, whyche are not onely not profyta∣ble for the staying and stablishing of our faith, but foolishe and ridiculous, and do withholde manye Iewes, and other of forren nations from the Christian faith, in so muche that a man woulde rather thinke they described some fantasie, o dreame, or vision: than Christ oure Mes¦sias and Sauioure, by the wonderfu power of God, sente from aboue. W spend many yeares arguing in schooles in what termes wée muste speake o Christe. Whether thys propositio bée true, Christe was from the bée¦ginnyng, whether it bée more aptely sayde, that hée is compounded o bothe natures, or consysteth, or is com∣mixte, or knitte togyther and com∣bined:
or as it were gellied, or moul∣ed, or coupled and conioyned. Howe muche better were it to omit these moti∣ns and vaine questions,Rom. 2. and to content ur selues with that which the Apostles aue taught vs, whiche affirme vnto vs  plaine termes, that Christe accordyng o the fleshe was made or begotten of the éed of Dauid, and is the true son of God lmighty according to the spirite: and so y thys meanes contenting our selues with this simplicitie of speach should en∣euour our selues to expresse Christ him elfe, that is to say, practise moste perfect olynesse and innocency in our liues and onuersation. Besides this in how darke nd doubtfull termes do these blind Sco∣istes dispute and reason of the foure in∣tants of nature, as also where they goe boute to proue that this worde person oth not signifie relatione Origenis, neyther he common relation &c. Many more ex∣amples of like impious and wicked dis∣utations procéeding from the idle curio∣itie of this Scotist, might here be alled∣ged, but bycause the matter it selfe is
blasphemous and too vnreuerent in r¦spect of the person of Christe, but also  vttered with suche termes, as the com¦mon people can in no wise vnderstande for our mother tongue will not ministe words to vtter so fond and nice conce withall. I haue thought good to retourn to matters more euident, leauing the and other such like toys as the religio is full fraught. For to what purpose is  vainely to spende the tyme aboute dispu¦ting of Gods greatenesse, and howe infi∣nite he is, of soch motions and mere ima¦ginations as these be, or of the relation and foundacions of the Trinitie, and th vnspeakeable beginning of the worde whether it tooke being at an instant, o by processe of tyme, by waye of procée¦ding or generation. These and such other like, what vse I beséeche you, can the haue either to the building or beautify∣ing of the Church of God? notwithstan∣ding sée the mischiefe how this their phi∣losophie preuaileth, and those ioyly di∣uines thinke vs altogither vnlearned, bi∣cause we hold our selues contented onl
with the pure and perfect word, reiecting homas Aquinas with his curious questi∣ns, Scotus with his subtil and sophistical rgumentes, Durandus with his follies, nd diuers others of that sorte with their oste impudent vanities. Of the lawe of God, and the force therof. AFterwards when god perceiued that mankinde was become almost sense∣esse, in so much that he neither was tou∣hed with his own misery and calamity, or of himselfe vnderstoode what should become of him, except their mindes were cherished and comforted with the hope of his promisses, besides to the ende that hée might chose vnto himselfe a people, as it were specially and peculiarly apart from the rest. After he had deliuered the Is∣raelits out of the captiuitie and bondage of Pharao, he made a lawe which he esta∣blished and published in mount Sinay. The force wherof, was to awake such as slept securely in synne,The ver∣tue and ef∣ficacie of the lavve. to accuse and reproue them, to proue whole mankinde guiltye before the throne and Maiestye
of God, that thereby they mighte learne to séeke righteousnesse and innocencye (whereof they were altogither destitute) at the onely mercies of God, when eue∣ry one should acknowlege in his own cō∣science, & know by his own experiēce, the naturall corruption & deprauation of his minde by the iudgement and manifesta∣tion of the lawe. Secondarily, to the end that the faithfull and chosen of God shold be taught by the law, as by a most excel∣lent and learned schoolemaister, what ex∣ercises and dueties God requireth at the handes of hys children, bycause no man shoulde deuise of his owne fantasie and i∣magination any newe seruice of God o∣ther than was by the law of God prescri∣bed and appointed. The summe and effecte of whiche do∣ctrine, albeit the holy Apostle hath plain∣ly and sufficientlye declared in hys E∣pistles, yet haue these vnlerned doctours broughte in méere Iudaisme and Pa∣ganisme into Christian religion. For they teache vs, that the lawe was giuen
vs onely to this intent, that we shoulde alke in good workes, by the which men night not only be acceptable in the sight f God, but iustified also before him. And herevpon they take occasion to aunder vs, as though we should affirme ood workes to be néedelesse, and shoulde withdrawe men from the studye and ex∣rcise of vertue, and lette them loose to all icenciousnesse. Whereas we studye all we can, and vse all our endeuour to shew he people, that suche as bée regenerate, oughte duely to beée conuersaunte in good workes, and in godly exercises, bothe to tame the lustes and concupiscences of their myndes, and to engender a mutuall loue and charitie among men: as also confirme and establish euery particular mans conscience in the perswasion of his election, and to retaine Gods spirite the better in their mindes by whose good mo∣tion and direction, their willes mighte the rather bée alwayes pliable and con∣formable to doe all good and godlye exer∣cises of true godlynesse and vertue. And yet wée flattely denye, that these
works be the cause of our iustification but rather the effectes, the fignes and to¦kens of true faith settled in our heartes euen as by good fruites it appeareth tha the trées bée good where they doe pro∣céede. Of the Ceremonies and Sacrifices of the olde Testament. MOreouer, whereas the corrupte and peruerse nature of man was suche, that of hymselfe hée coulde not putte hys whole affiaunce and truste in God, thin∣king it a matter of very great difficultie, almoste of impossibilitie to bée delyuered from the bondage and slauerye of Sa∣than, the tiranny of sinne, and the yoke of the lawe, whiche required a paye aboue his power,The figu∣res of the olde testa∣ment, sha∣dovves of Christe. to wit, puritie, sinceritie and holinesse bothe of mynde and bodye: the Lorde did institute Ceremonies, and sa∣crifices, and burnt offerings, by the whi∣che men shoulde be admonished and putte in mind, that he standeth in néed of some mediatour and redemer, by whose means he might bée loosed out of all the bondes
and snares wherein he was entangled, & taine true and perfect libertie. And to e intent that he might be led as it were y the hand, to the knowlege of his Mes∣as and Sauiour,Heb. 6.7.8. he set before his eyes sible ceremonies, wherein as in a Ta∣le, wée mighte beholde the person, the ffice, and the moste singuler and super∣cellent effects of the said Sauiour and edemer Christ Iesus, to wit, the sacri∣ice and order of sacrifying, the Sanctu∣ry, the propiciation, the vaile, the table, he shewe breade, with other suche lyke. Of the Popishe Ceremonies. ANd now I beséech you, compare the Popishe Ceremonies and these togi∣her, and no doubte ye shall well perceiue t to be true, that Augustine complayned of in his time, that they are growen to so great a multitude and swarme, that they are not onely equall in number with the Iewish ceremonies, but also doe excéede them far: neither haue our churchmē bin contented to fetche a great part of theyr
Ceremonies from the Iewes, but ro¦bed the Pagans, and the idolatrous Et¦nicks, also of theirs to patch vppe the heape, as appeareth moste euidentlye  their sacrifice of the Masse, as ther ter it, for it is botched and clowted, parte with the superstitious ceremonies of t Iewes and the Gentiles, but chiefly an principallye of the rites instituted  Numa Pompilius. Arnobius a verye auntient Doctour wrote an Apollogie in defence of Christi¦an religion,Arnobius in his third booke con∣tra Gent. wherein hée sayth that th Ethnickes founde verye greate fault with the Christians, bicause they neithe dedicated their churches to god, nor buil¦ded altars, nor set no incense vpon them nor had no vessell of siluer and golde t serue for holy vses, wherwith they migh do seruice vnto God, and beautifie their Temples. But if those that blamed this want of these things among the Christi∣ans in those times wer now aliue in our dayes, and should behold the popish cere∣monies in their Sinagogs, they coulde scarcely beleue them to be Christians, or
at the leaste they coulde finde no suche aulte with the Romishe religion nowe, s they founde with the Christian religi∣n then. But forasmuche as the wordes of Arnobius containe in them a most no∣able and excellent doctrine againste the horrible idolatry and superstition of our times, I wil here annexe a fewe leaues out of Arnobius, to the intent that youre Maiestye myght more euidentlye sée in what sorte they of the most auntient and perfectest Churches, and that were nighe vnto the Primitiue church and to the A∣postles times, did serue god, & how much their seruice differed from the pomp and multitude of ceremonies vsed of ye Pope in his church: Now (saith he) that I haue generallye declared what wycked and blasphemous opinions you houlde of youre Gods, it followeth consequentlye that I speake somewhat of youre Tem∣ples and youre Sacrifices, and other the consequences that depende héere vp∣pon, for thys is a matter whyche you are wonte speciallye to challenge vs for, and to laye to oure chardge as a
horrible impietie: That wée buylde  churches for diuine seruice, we set vp  grauen nor paynted Images of anye  the Gods, we reare no altars, nor sprin¦kle no bloud of fatlings therevppon, n burne no incense, nor bring in no cor nor wine to bee poured into cuppes, th which things we omit and leaue vndon, not of any wicked and godlesse intent, o for any contempt againste God, but by∣cause we thincke and are certaynely per∣swaded, that if they be Gods indede (and worthy that name) they do either laugh at these kinds of worshipping and seruice as follies and fantasies, or else are gre∣uously offended with them, if there be in them either of these affections, the one or the other, either disposition to reioycing, or motion to indignatiō and displeasure: for bycause you shall vnderstande what opinion wée haue of the verye name of God, and howe we iudge thereof, we are perswaded, that if they be Gods in déede, (to repeate the same ioyntly togither a∣gayne) they bée indued wyth all kinde of vertues moste perfectly, and most abun∣dauntly,
as wisedome, iustice, grauitie, (if wée maye wythout blame gyue them suche termes of praise and commendati∣on, as we vse towards men) excelling in al inward gifts, without néeding the help of any external things, forasmuche as the fulnesse and perfection of all happiness and felicitie is absolute in them that they are frée from all affections, voide of an∣ger, not moued wyth luste or sensualitie, harmefull to none, not delighted wyth the miseries and calamities of others, not fearing men with straunge and rare vi∣sions, not chargyng them wyth theyr vowes, nor sending signes of threate and anger, to the intent that men shuld make sacrifices of expiation, nor plagues or pe∣stilences or other diseases by the infecti∣on of the ayre, nor making dearthe by droughtes, nor presenet at the sheading of bloude by warres, or vnpeopling of Cities, not partial, as fauourable and inclining to some, & contrariwise frow∣ning vppon others: but rather yelding e∣qually and indifferently to either parte, and affectionated alike in good will to∣wardes
all, for it is an argument of a weake and féeble nature, to be subiect to contrarieties: and the determinations of Sages concerning this point hath béene, that they whiche are touched with affe∣ctions, haue sense and féeling of grief, and sorrowe, either more or lesse: and that it is not possible, but that they whiche are any wayes subiect to affections, are sub∣iect also vnto mortalitie. The case then being thus, howe can we iustly be thou∣ghte to contemne God, séeing wée denye that any can bée déemed woorthye that name, excepte he be iuste and vprighte, and such as is praise worthye and hono∣rable in the iudgement and estimation of them that be best affected? But yée will obiect against vs perhaps, that we build no temples for seruice of them, nor wor∣ship their images, nor offer them no sa∣crifices, nor burne thē no incense, & what I pray you can you require more at our hands? or what greater worshippe or ho∣nour can wée yéelde them, than to place them in the same degrée, in the which we put the chiefe Lorde and supreame head of all, by whome the very celestiall bo∣dies
haue their being as well as we? For doe wée honour hym wyth buil∣ding of Churches and Temples, or doe we slay any sacrifices for him, or present him with any other things, wherof ther is no sounde reason to be yéelded, but on∣lye a foolishe continuance of a blinde cu∣stome. For what follye and madnesse is it to measure the Maiestye of God by our necessities: and for bicause suche thin∣ges séeme for the vse of man, to yéelde them therefore vnto God, who gaue the same vnto man, and to be perswaded that by thus dooing thou doste hym honour, and not rather greatly dishonour hym. To what what vse then I pray you, doe we séeke so much for Temples and chur∣ches for Gods vse? or what néede was there say you, why they shoulde either be built at the firste, or nowe be repaired? do they fréese wyth the colde in Winter, or broile in the heat of Sommer, or can the cloudes drowne them with raine, or are they tossed with whirlewindes, or afraid to be inuaded, or ouercome with enimies, or rente in péeces wyth wilde beastes, that therfore there shuld be cause to kepe
them in close house and defende them by stone walles: for what are these Tem∣ples I praye you, in respect of men, and in oure féeble iudgement very huge and vaste: But in comparison of the might and Maiestie of God, a little small cor∣ner, or rather a straighte and a very nar∣rowe hole. The firste builder wherof, if yée liste to knowe them,The firste builders of temples. was either Ph∣roneus the Egiptian, or Merops, or as Var∣ro wryteth in hys treatie of wounders, Aeacus Iupiters sonne: be they therfore builte wyth marble, or beautified wyth golde, or adorned with Iewells and pre∣cious stones, or shine lyke the Sunne beames? they be all but earth and duste, and made of verye filthe, and the vilest matter that can be, neither is God ther∣fore delighted wyth them, bycause you estéeme them of greate price, nor for the vilenesse and basenesse thereof, woulde therefore refuse to dwell within them. This is the temple of Mars saith some, that of Iuno, that of Ladye Venus, héere dwelleth Apollo, here Hercules, there Sum∣manus. Is not this a great and princi∣pall
dishonour, to tye God to a house and dwelling place? to make hym a roofe to shroude himselfe vnder? to deuide it into parlors and chambers, thinkyng them necessary things for hym, that serue for mans vse, and for the séely vermin of the earth, as Cats, Antes, Wezels, and the fearefull mouse: but wée builde them no Temples ye will say for that purpose, to kéepe them from rayne and stormes, or from the heate of the Sunne, but that wée may haue nigher accesse vnto them, and behold them, and make our petitions and praiers vnto them euen face to face. For if we shoulde call vppon them in the open ayre, and out of couert, saue onely the cope of Heauen, they are deafe, they heare vs not, and excepte a man come nigh vnto them whē he maketh his prai∣ers, they stande still as thoughe no man gaue them a worde: but wée are of a far contrary opinion, that if they were gods worthy that name, they could and wold, yea they oughte to heare vs from anye place of the whole worlde, whatsoeuer a man shoulde speake vnto them, were it
neuer so secretly, as well if he were pre∣sent by them? yea to anticipate by theyr foreknowledge, whatsoeuer anye man shoulde secretly imagin in his mind. And as the Stars, the Sun, and Moone, when they mounte alofte, or appeare vpon the face of the earth, are immediatly present, and shine to all alike, euen so is it requi∣site, that the eares of God should be open to all, nighe to heare the petitions of all, though they come frō diuers countries, yea and those farre distant asunder. For this is the nature and propertie of God, to fill all places with his power, and to be wholy euery where, not péece meale in any place, not to be absent and present at diuers times, not to go suppe in Ethio∣piae, and after a wéeke or two, to returne home again to his owne habitation. The which if it were otherwise, then farewel al hope of helpe and relief, when we shal be left in a doubt and vncertaintie, whe∣ther that God heareth our prayers yea or no, when soeuer wée doe make sacri∣fice of Prayers, or Thankesgiuing vn∣to
hym. As for example, lette vs put the case, that there is a Temple of some one god, in the Isles of Canare, another dedicated to the same God in the furthest parte of Thyle, likewise another among the Ethio∣pians, and an other in that parte of the worlde that is furthest distante from them. If so bée that all these at one selfe same instaunte, dooyng their sacrifi∣ces and Ceremonyes, and makyng theyr petitions, aske euery one of them some thyng at Gods handes, accor∣dyng to theyr owne necessitie, what hope can they haue to the obtayning of theyr petitions, If God doe not heare the prayer that is made vnto hym by eche of them alike, or if distaunce of place coulde hinder the praiers of them that call vppon hym, that the sounde thereof shoulde not perce hys eares? for either muste he be present no where, if it bée possible for hym to bée secluded from all places or else muste he be in one
onely place, bicause he cannot giue ear indifferently to all in generall, and giue them the hearing alike, and so muste it consequentlye followe, that eyther God aideth none at all, if by reason that he is occupied some other way, he haue no lei∣sure to heare them, or heare the sutes of some, and sende the rest empty away, and heare not them. Moreouer these goodly Temples that are garnished with golde, and beautified with high stéeples and pi∣nacles, be sepulchers for deade carcasses and places to laye ashes and bones in, is it not then very plaine and euident, that either you doe worship them that be dead in stéede of the liuing God, or doe moste horrible and shamefull villanye to the Maiesty of him, whose Temples you file with the ashes and bones of the dead? These are his wordes moste mightye Prince, worthy no doubt to bée written in golden letters, or rather to be imprin∣ted in the tables of our heartes. Of the comming of Christ & of his gospel. BVt to retourne to our purpose, and to speake of the wonderfull misterye of
our redemption: After the fulnesse of ne was come,Iohn. 1. Hebr. 1. Luke. 1. Math. 1. Gene. 3.15.17. in the whiche the proui∣nce of God hadde determined to helpe ankinde, the whiche was bothe heauy aden and oppressed wyth the burthen  sinne, and pressed downe into the bot∣mlesse pit of hell, assailed on euery side ith the tiranny of the Deuill, and con∣icted by the sharpe and seuere sentence f the lawe. Oure heauenly father sente is onely begotten sonne, the euerlasting orde, the power and wisedome of the ather into the earthe, the whych worde hroughe the vertue of his holye spirite, y a wonderfull and miraculous means ée willed to become man in the wombe f the moste holy virgin Mary, that the ame Christe whiche had bin tofore eft∣soones promised to the Patriarches and prophets of the olde Testament, the whi∣che also by the faith and hope they had in him, attained euerlasting life, shoulde at the length come into this worlde the ve∣ry true and naturall son of God, and of the virgin, conceiued first in hir wombe, and afterwards brought foorth by hir in∣to
this worlde to be the very son of G and verye man, that by this meanes  might take away the sinnes of manki and that by the sacrifice of hys death,  by his obedience, he might make atto¦ment betwixt God and man, to the int that he shoulde no longer bée accompt gods enimie, but be estéemed as his ch and become inheritour of hys heauenl kingdome, and partaker of his diuine ¦ture euerlastingly. And the whole summe and effecte  this doctrine concerning the great ben¦fite of our redemption consisteth speci¦ly in two points. For fyrste wée doe a¦knowlege the wōderful purpose of God heuenly prouidence, in yt he vouchedsa to redéeme vs from the horrible domin of the deuil, that by the obedience & by t death of the latter, and the heauenly A¦dam, the rebellion, and disobedience  the former earthly Adam might be qui and discharged, and that the most filthi spots and staines, not onely of his misbe¦liefe and incredulitie, but also of all hy¦posteritie, might be spūged with the mos
precious bloud of that immaculate lābe. Secondarily we are taught by ye prea∣ing of the Gospell, howe and by what anes we may bée partakers of this so eat mercy & reconciliation offered vn∣ vs by Christ, as also howe thankefull e ought to be towardes hym that hath uaunced vs to so great an honour. In umme, what soeuer our Lord and Saui∣r Iesus Christ hath either done or spo∣en, it tendeth all to the same ende and ope.The origi∣nall of sects & heresies. From the which many following eir owne waies, are caried awaye into iuers & sundry cōtrary opinions of reli∣ion. For the Iewes & Turkes, & others heir likes, doe not acknowledge Christ o be their mediatour. Another sort there s, that can not vnderstande by what meanes they might apply the benefite of he mediatour to themselues, that is to say, howe to putte on Christ, and arme themselues wyth his righteousnesse and innocencie, without ye which none can be accepted with God: and herevpon riseth the grounde of the great controuersie be∣twixte vs and the Papists.
What is cheifely in controuersie betwix vs and the Ppistes. ANd thus standeth the case (most ¦ble Prince) betwixt vs and them, n¦ther is the quarel aboute a tale of Rob Hoode, as the common prouerbe is, or  Purgatorie onely, or the eating of fles or fish, or about lighting of wax tapers  noone tide, or Bishops rochets, or Mon coules, for we coulde well be content  permit them these things, so they wou not enuy vs the enioying of Christe, n shadowe and extinguishe his most clean and shining light, and most pure doctrin with their darke and obscure diuinitie, and yet I thinke wel, they wold be con∣tent we shoulde wholly enioy Christe, s they might lose nothing therby from thei paunches, nor from their purses, whiche thing they stande in feare of excéedingly, if the people shuld once espie their false∣hoode, their hipocrisie and dissimulation detected and brought to light. For wher∣to else serueth the great honor and pomp of the most reuerende fathers my Lords the Cardinalles? their greate traine and
guarde aboute them? howe shall the Bi∣ops kitchen be beated, if you quenche  fire of Purgatory? nay how shal there  in it either flame or smoke, if the fewel  Purgatory faile them? O what a cold d frosty Ice will there be among them, this their yearely reuenue goe to de∣ye? This is it that maketh the Monks d priests tremble and quake for feare, a to fall to vtter desperation. For as r the glory and honour of Christ, they t not a strawe by it. Seing therefore ere is no controuersie betwixt vs, con∣rning the former parte of our religion, at is to say, concerning the person of e mediatour, it remayneth that wée eate of the latter part, to wit, how and y what meanes wée maye attaine vnto hat vnestimable benefite of almightye God bestowed vpon mankinde by hym, hroughe our Lorde and Sauiour Iesus Christe. For our aduersaries neither can nor will not (I dare say) affirme the con∣rary, but confesse vs to agrée in the first point with the primitiue Churche, and the most auntient and catholike fathers,
forasmuch as we detest al the erroni opiniōs, and heresies wickedly and m blasphemously inuented againste the ¦uinitie and humanitie of Christe, w¦ther they sauor of Iudaisme, Turcis or Paganisme. Of the Popishe Baptisme. BVt if we shulde demaunde of ou aduersaries this question: Wh ways a man should take to become p¦taker of this singular benefite of Chr that he might be clothed and armed w his righteousnesse and innocencie, to b able to stande before the throne of t Maiestye of God, the moste righteou iudge: they will answere hervnto I sup¦pose, that men must be washed with t Sacrament of Baptisme, and haue a f¦lishe sir Iohn to breath vppon them, an crosse them in their foreheade wyth h moste filthie spittell, that the Deuils b these means might be cast out of the bo¦dies of the babes: they muste haue sal cast into their mouths, that so they migh he made partakers of the heauenly wise¦dome:
they must haue a waxe taper putte  their hands, that the lighte of fayth ght shine vpō thē, the which is increa∣ in them, & made more forcible, as the dell excéedeth in greatnes & quantitie. r in this the Popes paradise, faith, and  grace of God is solde by weight and easure as wax is. Their head is also, I ot nere why, knit rounde about with a ece of a white linnen rag, as who saye, ey did by that meanes put on the since∣tie and innocencie of Christe, and are oreouer greased with oile, & become as uldiors, & captains, & standerdbearers, at shuld giue vp their names, and take ages, & fight for Christ: for the cōsecra∣ion wherof, a sort of bishops must méete nce a yeare, and assemble togyther to make that holy oyle, and close it in a box, nd commit Idolatrie vnto it, by doing it uche reuerence, as if God himselfe were within it. Laste of all, their eyes are an∣ointed with ye filthy and stincking spit∣ell of the priest, belike to blind ye séely in∣āts, or so to dim their sights, yt they shal not be able to behold the heauenly light.
O what prety toying and iugling  is? what coniurations, what wiche  and inchauntmentes? and yet notw¦standing, when they haue done all th their fond ceremonies, they say plainl those infants which be baptised on th sorte, do foorthwith receiue faith, and  come Christe Iesus brethren, Gods ch¦dren, newe creatures, Christes stand bearers, shine with the light of heau be indued with heauenly wisedome. ¦nally what are they not become, so th paye liberally: for this is the proclama¦on they make, giue and it shall bée giu vnto you. Of the true vse of Baptisme. ANd nowe I beséeche youre Maiesty of your gratious clemency and go¦nesse, not to thincke mée to speake the things of anye delighte I haue in raili or in slaundering of them. For God i my witnesse, that I am ful sorie and he¦uy at my hearte, to sée them so blinde, an so obstinat, in defending so many abuse and foolish superstitiōs: notwithstandin
the people must néedes be informed here∣f, that they may vnderstand how shame∣ully, howe ridiculously, & in how sundry ints the Sacrament of Baptisme hath ene prophaned and defiled, whyche oure auiour Christe did institute to be so ho∣ye and sacred euen in the highest degrée. That thereby he might notifie vnto vs, nd giue vs assurance, that his Churche nd congregation is purged and clensed rom all spots and staines, by meanes of is moste precious and innocent bloude:  that by this wonderfull expiation, hée ight take hir to himselfe, to be his wel∣eloued spouse, being voide of blemish, or ny deformitie. And therefore whereas Christe commaundeth hys Apostles to aptise in the name of the father, the son, nd the holy ghost: It hath no such con∣truction or meaning, to ascribe the bene∣ite of our regeneration to the Element: hat is to say, the water, but rather that he greate and infinite mercy and loue of ur heauenly father, might be made ma∣nifest and knowen, who for the clensing of vs from oure sinnes, hathe not spared
the bloude, no not of hys onely begott sonne: moreouer, that we shuld perswa our selues by thys seale and token, th we are most certaynly chosen and recei¦ued into the societie and felowship of th heauenly couenaunt, and so by this me¦nes should reape all the fruite and for of this sacrament in our soules. For w are not of opinion, nor may not be so per¦swaded, that this is brought to passe,  opere operato: that is to saye, for the w¦thinesse of the worke wrought, (as th schoolemen terme it) but put our whi truste and confidence in the onely me and goodnesse of almightie God, we ha our faith more and more confirmed a strengthned by baptisme, by the which faith we beléeue assuredly, that our he¦uenly father hathe adopted vs into t number of his children hathe pardon vs all oure offences, hathe endewed  wyth his heauenly grace, hathe clens all the filth and corruption of our soule that wée from thencefoorth being whol dedicate and consecrated to serue hy and deliuered from the feare of all o
ghostly enimies, shoulde leade a iuste, an neste, and an holy life before hym that th bestowed these so many, & so greate nefits vpon vs. And thus much brief-concerning Baptism, wherof by gods ace I maye entreate more largely at ne other tyme hereafter. Of Popishe Penaunce. IF any after baptisme do verely per∣ceiue & féele in his consciēce, yt thes eir vaine deuises and fonde ceremonies herof we haue spoken by occasion, and  oportunitie serued, haue ben little or thyng auaileable vnto them, and that ese, and such like distinctions of theirs oad culpam as to the fault, quoad reatum s to the guilte, quoad veniam as to the ardon, bée méere friuolous and foolishe, nd as the prophet saith, nothing but soft illows for the people to leane vnto and ée lulled a sléepe on: if any I saye being hus affected, fynd a trouble in his con∣cience concerning his saluation, & begin o muse vpon some means how he maye scape the iudgement of God wherwith
his conscience is striken and astonied,  and by they bid him leane to a rotten p that is to say, to penance: but good Lor what can be more contrarye to true p¦nance, than this which they appoint hy vnto, whiche is nothing but a méerē d¦ceipt and iuggling, and deuises imagi by them to picke mennes purses, no  this is but a weake plancke to saue a  from shipwracke, and helpe hym to la but to sincke rather to the bottome of t Sea. Of the partes of popish penance, namely of the fyrste parte, called contrition. PEnaunce they teache vs, hath th partes,Vide com∣pend. theo∣log. lib. 6. cap. 4. Ruar∣di Tapart. Pet. Lombar. Sent. 4. Scotus in 4. sentent. Tho. Aquin. in sent. laus. contrition of hearte, confess of mouth, and satisfaction of workes,  who so desireth to vnderstand the reas of this diuision, let him resorte to Thom Aquinas, Durandus, and Scotus: in th bookes, whiche they wrote of the ques¦ons of diuinitie, but to discende to t particularities, Contrition (say they) is griefe voluntarily conceiued, for syn committed wyth a purpose to confe
them, and make satisfaction for the same. his definition is moste like Autentical . They say moreouer, such may be the eatnesse and force of contrition, suche at it is able not only to purge the fault d quiet it selfe, but to remoue the pu∣shement due for the same, and that twoo ayes. First for the charitie sake, which  the very true cause that bréedeth sor∣w and griefe, which charitie spreading ir braunches far in compasse, bringeth orthe contrition, and meriteth partly re∣ission of the payne. Secondarilye, for he sense of that griefe, prouoked and stir∣ed vp by the wil in the very Contrition. And forasmuch as this sorrow and griefe s very greate and gréeuous, it is effectu∣ll also and auaileable to take away both he offence and the punishment: likewise they mince the sorrowe of contrition in∣to thrée partes, one to be deficient, another sufficient, the thirde preeminent, wherof the firste driueth downe to the pitte of hell, the second raiseth him vp to purgatorie: the thirde hoiseth hym vppe to Paradise.  Moreouer, contrition differeth from at∣trition,
as faith framed from that whic is vnframed, and they are al doubtfull  this point, whether contrition maye ri of attrition, or whether there may bée a∣ny place in Hell, Purgatorie, & Paradise for contrition, whiche question is as y vndecided. And this is welnéere the sum of this doctrine, oute of the whiche I bée séech your Maiesty to consider (most gra∣tious Prince) what commoditie, comfort or reliefe can come to a troubled consci∣ence? how shal a mā be able to escape ou of so many difficulte and intricate questi∣ons? or how shall a man haue any reme∣dies of his sorrowes at his owne hands, or staye hymselfe vppon the strength o man? For the will of man (whence they saye contrition doeth spring) is more in¦clining and yéelding to luste and concu∣piscence, than to any sorrowe or pensiue∣nesse. Howe can it then possibly come to passe, that a man shoulde vse the same to the beating down and mortifying of most horrible and detestable vices? Finally in all this péece of doctrine, not one worde of Christe Iesus, and his holy spirite, no∣thyng
ruleth, but onely the will of man, e sorrow and griefe of man, the heaui∣sse of the hearte, pensiuenesse, charitie nd laste of all attrition, which is trans∣urmed into contrition, as it were by in∣bantment and witchcrafte. Of true contrition according to the word of God. HOwe be it Gods worde teacheth vs, that Contrition is the wonderfull worke of God,Ezechiel.  and that the conuerteth the hearte of the synner accordyng to hys nfinite goodnesse and mercye, breaketh t, mollifyeth it, which otherwise of it owne nature woulde become harder than flint, stubborne, rebelling, obstinate,Psalme. 51. and prone to all mischiefe: It is he that of a stony heart maketh it softe as fleshe, apt to bend, tractable, and pliable to his moste holy will. And therfore Dauid ac∣knowledging hys offence praieth vnto God that he would create a newe hearte in him, the whiche God neuer despiseth nor contemneth, if it bée humble and lowlye.
Wherfore almightie God, to the ¦tent that hée myghte abate and pluck downe the pride and hautinesse of man mynde, he doth firste vse the threats and terrours of his lawe, and looketh with the burning and fierie eies of his indignati∣on and displeasure, as those can tell by ex∣perience, whiche do truly and hartyly re∣pent, that they haue so long continued in the seruice of Sathan, and the palpable darkenesse of popish errour, for they vn∣derstande right wel by what steppes and degrées their heauenlye father hathe ad∣uaunced them to the excellency of rege∣neration, and newe birth in Christe, that is to say, to bée partakers of the righte∣ousnesse and innocencie of Christe, which is the onely path to passe to by the King∣dome of heauen. Of popishe confession. THe seconde parte of Penaunce they say is, to bée shriuen of a Prieste by auriculer confession:de com∣nd. theo∣g. lib. 6. ep 25. Ru∣d. Tapart.  confess. and this they affirm to be a Sacrament of Christes instituti∣on in the: 16. and 18. of his Gospell, after
Mathew. Albeit it appeareth by Iames t there was a farre other vse thereof. hey say moreouer, that it is necessarye to saluation, and that we must not on∣confesse the sinnes themselues, but all  particular circumstāces of the same, d speciallye those whiche be said to ag∣auate the synne, whiche bée in number téene, and is to be séene in the writings  these archdoctors and maisters of this eir superstitious facultie. And this auricular cōfession say they th very greate and manifolde effectes,The fruites of Popishe confession. deliuereth vs from eternall death and mnation, it healeth and salueth the oundes of our soule, it causeth the pre∣nce and assistance of Gods holy spirite ithin vs, it openeth vs the gates of pa∣dise, it couereth and shadoweth oure nes, it obtaineth the mercy and fauor  God, it maketh the hearte merry and yfull, it procureth vs many friends and tercessors to God Almightie, it purifi∣th our consciēce, it dissolueth the league nd amitie we were entred into with the euill: forasmuch as the sinne conspired
betwixt the deuill and man, is discouered and reueled, it reconcileth god vnto mā, it is the way yt leadeth vnto saluation,  taketh away sin, & satisfieth for the same, in that a man abideth the shame in re∣uealing the same vnto a prieste: last of all it preserueth a man from falling into sinne againe, euen (as to vse their owne similitude and comparison) when the r∣ten tooth is drawen, the reste that remai∣neth continueth more faste and sure. O foolish fantasies, O deuillish inuētions, O most detestable doctrine, deuised to entā∣gle and to destroye séely ignorant soules. For if it were true that they professe, what néede haue wée I beséech you of th fauour and grace of God? what néede w to flye so fast to Christe, as to oure chi anker and staye? whereto shall the hol ghost seru? what force shall he haue,  what shall be his office, if one shrift wi serue vs in stéede of all, and bring th moste wicked and desperate person tha is into the state of grace, and the inher¦ting of the kingdome of heauen? Wha is to blaspheme God? what is to abu
e worlde? what is to confound heauen nd hell togither, if this be not? And yet e blynde worlde more blinde than a ock, doth condemne those that reueale ese abuses and deceiuable leasings, & rseth them to the very death, to endure l punishments and the moste horrible orments that can be deuised. They tell  we muste confesse at the least once by ere,Cap. omnia vtriusque sexus &c. de sum. Trinttate & fide Cath. Extr. de poe∣nitent. & remiss. vpon paine of excommunication to Priest that hath two kays in his hand, he one the kay of knowledge to discerne etwixte good and euill, the other the po∣er and aucthoritie to bind and to loose. The misterie of this confession is, that he Prieste representeth the presence of God, whych inwardly doeth couer those nnes whyche the penitent reuealeth to he Prieste by mouth, the whiche neither he priest dare presume by any means to eclare, nor cānot onlesse he haue learned hē of some other. They make a differēce ikewise betwixt sins & the absolution of ins. For some only ye pope cā remit, some her be yt the archbishops may, some yt the ishops & their suffragās as they call thē,
some the Curates & Parish priests: m¦ther are the foure orders of the Frier Mendicantes behind with their part.Sem potius mnducan∣tes. For they haue likewise a certain bull and dis∣pensation, which some call the great se or mother of all Indulgences and Par∣dons, by the whiche they haue a large Charter and commission to remitte al sinnes both past and to come, if a ma woulde giue credite to that they profess and vndertake. And nowe youre grace maye sée (moste mightye Prince) howe manye wayes mens eyes bée blinded t make them continue in theyr supersti∣tion still. Albeit the true and sincere vse of confession, if it were among vs, w (no doubt) tourne vs to muche good: but Sathan hath bereft vs therof, and left ¦stéede of it, a moste dangerous and p∣stiferous abuse of the same. Of the christian Confession. THe greate abuse of Confession being declared, it foloweth now consequent∣ly to treat of the true vse of the same: fo asmuch as repentaunce is the first step degrée to the atteyning of Christes righ∣teousnesse.
Let vs therfore now consider me sorts of christen confession, that the orld may sée how causelesse we are ac∣used of our aduersaries, for misdemea∣our in the point of confession. And to procéede herein orderly, fyrste e declare & teache vnto the people, that he law of verie right exacteth of vs per∣ect righteousnesse & holines of life:Rom. 7. which erfection the weakenesse & infirmitie of mans frailtie, without ye grace & helpe of god, is in no wise able to perfourme. The which being opened & made manifest vn∣to vs by the spirite of God, driueth vs in∣to a doubt whiche way we might beste turne vs, for neither can we deceiue God by our false glosing and lyes, neither hide our offences & sinnes from him, being the searcher of the heart & reins: from whose eies no darknes, nor couert can hide vs, more than the leaues & branches of trées could shadow our first parent Adam frō his sight in time past, of the which sorte most properly, your superstitious fastes and praiers, watching & other like exerci∣ses of the bodie, wherewith many a man
dothe foolishly perswade himselfe, that h is sufficiently armed and defenced: not¦withstanding our God lyke a moste lo¦uing and mercifull father, will not suffer his children to be swallowed vp of despe¦ration,Genes. 3. as was Cain and Iudas, but cri¦eth vnto vs with a loude voyce, Adam where art thou? the whych sound of hys breath perceth into the very secret of our hearts, that he might continue his boun¦tye and goodnesse towardes those whome he hath once vouchsafed the benefite of adoption through Christe, at the whiche voice and sounde, the godly minded and well affected people of God, startling as it were at the noise and crack of the thū∣derbolte, like men sore dismayed and dis∣quieted bothe in body and minde, forget∣ting bothe meate and other the necessa∣ries of this life, and ouerthrown gru¦ling as it were with the terrible sounde of the brasen trumpe in the mount Sinay, or else by extremitie of most exquisite tor∣ments driuen perforce to make their con∣fessiō,Exod. 20. do fréely acknowlege and confesse before the father of mercies, both them∣selues
to bée the children of Adam, and one to all kind of wickednesse and mis∣iefe like vnto their forfathers, who re∣cting the commaundement of God, and oste presumptuously affecting thinges oper to the maiesty and glory of God, ent aboute moste impudently and im∣ously to spoile God of his diuine know∣dge, to witte, the knoweledge of good nd euyll, & to take it vnto himselfe, that  to saye, to bée able to discerne by he corrupte and peruerse iudgement of s owne foolish braine betwixte good and ul, and to determin what thing is plea∣ng God, and what vnpleasant vnto him. To be shorte,The true order of confession. man set in the sight of God oth plainly confesse yt he hath followed ye teps of his auncestour Adam, one yt hath éemed rather to loue vertue & godlinesse, han followed them effectuously, and in abouring to couer hys nakednesse, and hide his abhominations, hathe vsed no o∣ther couerture, than ye leaues of fig trées, yt is to say, hath shadowed his moste mō∣strous & horrible offences against god wt no other thing, but only with a pretēce of
wisedome, discretion, diligence, hone merites, and mortifications. And this is (moste gratious Princ the confession which we learne out of t worde of God, namely that whiche G hymselfe doth force out of mans my by the vertue and efficacie of the law as it were with certaine pricks and st¦ges, when man is compelled by the m¦tion of Gods holy spirit, to acknowledg and confesse hymselfe to bée inwarde corrupted, and defiled with sinne: A out of this confession, lyke as oute of  spring or head do issue diuers other sort of confession. Priuate cō∣fession.Firste when a man calleth to mynd with howe greate and howe manifold sinnes he is defiled, and howe sore an ad¦uersary the decrée and sentence pronou¦ced in the lawe is vnto him, wherevppo he bewaileth his sinnes vnto God daily,Psalme 52. and brusteth out into these wordes of the holye Prophet: O Lorde, I was concei∣ued in iniquitie, and in sin hathe my mo∣ther cōceiued me. Creat in me (O Lord) a newe hearte, and a right spirite within
me, tified in thy sight. And wyth the publi∣ane humbleth hymselfe, saying on thys ise, Lord be mercifull vnto me a sinner, nd with the prodigall childe: O Lorde  am not worthy to bée called thy sonne c. And these be the confessions whyche he elect of God ought to make daily vn∣o God, both with hart and tongue, who auing tasted the singuler mercy of God owarde them, call vppon hym wythout eassing, that they might euerye daye bée more and more purged frō the filth and tayne of sinne. The seconde kinde of confession is ve∣ry Christianlike, when a man is so sore touched and stong in his conscience wyth the sense of sinne, that hée perceiueth hys fayth to fainte and waxe weake by the terroure of the lawe, as it were wyth a continuall assaulte and batterie wherby he is compelled for wante of sufficiencie in himselfe to praye aide of another, into whose bosome he might poure all the se∣crete griefes of his hearte, as to his most faithfull and assured friende, to the ende, that he might receiue some present reme∣die
for his woūded conscience. The w¦che kinde of confessing, God hathe com¦maunded to bée obserued and kepte in hi Churche, to beate downe the prou and arrogant opinion of learning an wisedome in man, that euery man might thinke humbly of himselfe, forasmuch as they stande very many times in néede of the aide, comforte, and aduice of other. And this confession or conference in hy whose conscience is wounded or trou¦bled, may be very well had and vsed with the pastours, doctours, and preachers  the Churche, hauing assuraunce of they faithfulnesse in their vocation, and like¦lihoode,Esay 50. that they are called to that functi∣on and ministerie by the holy spirite, tha they might cōfort and cherish the weak¦lings, by their discrete language, as th prophet saith. The thirde sorte of confes∣sion is when the faithfull disciple of the holy ghoste doth plainely confesse his of∣fences before men of a certaine earneste and vehemēt zeale, of humbling himselfe, considering therewithall, that God the sercher of mans secrets, dothe know an
sée the same already: and in this imagi∣ation perswadeth himselfe, that all the reatures of the worlde woulde conspire gainste him,Open con∣fession and voluntary. if he himselfe shoulde not penly confesse & declare to al the world n such sorte as the posteritie that com∣meth after him, might know them like∣wise. And that Dauid vsed this kinde of onfession is manifest by the .32. and .51. psalme, which séeme to be committed to writing, to the ende that it bothe mighte be a president of publike confession vnto ll men, & that men might likewise ther∣by vnderstand, into how greate and hei∣nous sinnes, that beloued of the Lorde, and specially elect to gouerne his people did fall and yéeld himselfe.Daniel. 9. In like maner is that notable confession of Daniell, and yt of Paule wherby he is not ashamed to confesse of himself yt he was a blasphemer of god, & a persecutor of hys church. Au∣stine likewise in a certaine little treatise,1. Timoth. . reckneth vp al his offēces euē frō his ve∣ry first cōming to mans estate: And this kinde of cōfessing opēly of thēselues doth greatly declare ye great modesty and low∣linesse
of minde in the confessor, worthye greate praise and commendations, and partly it is a great comforte vnto others that are greuously loden with the heauy burthen of sinne, to driue them from dis∣paire by hope in the mercies of god, whi∣che they sée other in like case haue attey∣ned before them. There is also a fourth kinde, when e∣uery one in the face of the congregation folowing the minister,Confession in the face of the con∣gregation. doth secretly con∣fesse himselfe before God, to be compas∣sed rounde aboute wyth manifold sinnes and offences, and wrapped in moste pal∣pable mists of ignorance and blindnesse, beséeching God from the bottome of hys heart to lighten his mind and vnderstan∣ding, by the preaching of his Gospel. For so he perswadeth himselfe, and firmelye beleueth, that remission of sinnes is pub∣lished and wrought by the preaching of the Gospell, and that onely throughe the sheading of the moste precious bloud of the immaculate lambe. Priuate re∣conciliatiō.There is yet also one other manner of confessing, whiche we may call reconci∣ling
our selues vnto our neighbour, whē e both confesse our selues to haue offen∣ed him by word and déede, and pray par∣n and forgiuenesse of our trespas com∣itted according to the prescripte com∣aundement and direction of our Lorde nd sauiour Iesus Christe. Math. and ames. 5. but it wée committe any open ime, so that ye shame and slaūder therof oth redounde to the Churche,Publike penaunce for publicke offences. and is of∣ence vnto others, the godlye doe not re∣use in suche a case to make open confes∣on: the whiche custome, both the olde athers in time past didde obserue them∣elues, and deliuered ouer to their posteri∣ie, as appeareth by the Cannons that reate of penaunce. The obseruation nd execution whereof, the Churche of Rome omitting and neglecting, brought n a corrupt custome in place therof, that some one Prieste or Chaplayne shoulde secretely shrine suche as had offended o∣penly, and heare their confession in cor∣ners, for sauing of their honesty, and their good name, whereby did growe two most notorious and shamefull abuses: for by
means that priuate and auriculer confe¦sion came in place of the open declarati¦on of faultes, bothe all good order, a discipline went to wracke, and most m¦serable tiranny beganne to vsurpe in th poore afflicted consciences. Secondari in that there were certaine penitent¦ries appoynted at Rome, or rather p¦lers of pardōs that retailed their Indul∣gences for mony to euery man that lif to buy them, whereby oure aduersaries muste néedes be driuen to confesse, th causelesse they call vs heretiks, and mo falsely, séeing wée are so farre from abro∣gating cōfession, that in place of one fa and superstitious kinde of confession, b teach sixe kinds, all allowed by the tru worde of God. O Popishe satisfaction. AMong all the residue of the articles of Christian religion, thys one con¦cerning satisfaction, as it hathe béene wonderfullye depraued and prophaned aboue the reste, so hath it caused great controuersies to arise now adayes in the Church through the blindnesse and igno∣raunce
of men, and therefore the matter  selfe requireth a longer treatise, than e proportion of this volume will well eare. Notwithstanding, forasmuch as  is a matter of no small importaunce,  beséech your grace (moste renowmed Prince) to heare wyth patience before ou giue credite to the false and vntrue ccusations of oure aduersaries. There be auncient reports, that in the ime of the primitiue church, which was most ful of holinesse & puritie: ther were moste seuere decrées and constitutions made, and a very sharpe and bitter kinde of penaunce, appointed for suche as com∣mitted any heynous or gréeuous crime, whereby offences did growe to the con∣gregation, besides the open confession of their faultes, and a certaine satisfaction to bée made for the same, whiche was a long time in perfourming to their greate shame & reproch. The which kind of dis∣cipline being a long time exercised & cōfir∣med wt great diligēce against notorious offēders, came to ruine at ye lēgth throu∣ghe couetous bishops, ye brought in place
thereof these solemne sortes of satisfacti¦on with gold and siluer. Howbeit the tur∣ning of it into a money matter, was n receiued into the Churche,Good in∣tentes the cause of er∣rours. but vnder a pretence of deuotion and charitie: for the reuenues were bestowed vppon the buil∣ding of Churches, the redéeming of Cap∣tiues, the foundation of schooles, for trai∣ning vp of ye youth in Christianitie, an certaine other good and charitable vses, as séemed to them. In like manner, after their example doe the Spanishe inquisi∣tors gather togyther summes of money vnder the counterfaite cloke of religion, which they leuie of those whom they call the reconciled penitents, to release them the Sambenite, a kinde of garment with twoo red crosses, whych they had before (as parcell of their penaunce) enioyned them to weare. And this custome hathe preuayled e∣uer since the Bishoppes firste spoyled the Churche of this aucthoritie, and chalen∣ging it vnto themselues, beganne to kepe a consistorie, whether they summoned al open and notorious offendors to appeare
before them, enforcing them to sue for ardon, or to speake more according to e very truth of the matter, to purchase eir charters of pardon by money: the hich thing if either they omitted, or re∣sed to doe, they were forthwith exclu∣ed from the companie and fellowshippe f the congregation, and pronounced ex∣ommunicate persons. But Gods people and his flocke, de∣esting this so slaunderous and shameful aines, began by little and little to con∣emne this pelting pedlarie of penaunce,  so muche that no man woulde confesse ny thing of himselfe, but by constraint, ea and that not til such time as he were well nighe conuicted manifestlye of the acte. Wherevppon the Bishoppes and Clergie perceyuing that a greate péece of their gaines beganne daily to decaye, made a solemne Canō, that once by yere, euery one shoulde confesse himselfe to the bishop. This decrée is ascribed to Inno∣centius the first, for the more credite and estimation whereof, they bare the people in hande in their sermons (but falsely)
that it was taken oute of the holye scrip¦ture, and so at the lēgth by the preaching of gréedye Priestes this goodly auricular confession by little and little gathered hart,Cap. omnis vtriusque sexus &c. and was commonly receiued of al, vnder the dāger of incurring deadly sin, and vppon paine of excommunication (as they call it) to all such as should contēn the same. Then within a while after the Bi∣shoppes obtaining thus muche, and vsur∣ping thus tirannicallye vppon Christian consciences, they brought in a doctrin for their owne aduauntage, wherevnto they gaue a false name of satisfactiō, the firste branche therof had a faire shewe, and in apparaunce liked euery bodye, to witte, that they shoulde abstayne thencefoorthe from suche sinnes as eftsoones they hadde committed before. The second was, that restitution shoulde be made of goods e∣uill gotten, whereby a large gappe was opened for the couetous Clergie: for if either the parties died, or they absent, to whome these goodes wrongfullye gotten did of right appertaine, the matter was
lefte sothe ordering and will of the Bi∣hop, euen as the Pope doth nowadays with his charters of pardons and indul∣ences, or rather wyth the verye bulles hēselues of composition, or reconciliation, s be termeth them: for whatsoeuer hath ene filched, robbed, or gotten by extor∣ion or vsurie, or by anye other vniuste meanes taken or wythholden from anye persons that bée either dead, or if they be aliue and vnknowen, so that the parties sing suche vniuste and extreme dealing, will paye sixe rialls of plate to the Pope, they shall not onely bée frée from all dan∣ger of lawe, but also from all faulte and blame. The thirde branch is so much the worse, as it is more perillous & daunge∣rous for the soule, wherein consisteth not alone the losse of a little siluer, but of our soule, when as mē are taught yt they may make satisfactiō for their sins, by fasting, watching, almes, pilgrimage, building of Chappells, & singing of masses, all which notwithstanding they must be at a price wt their cōfessor, for euery of these, wher∣vnto they do annexe ye works of superer∣gation, as the chiefe groundsells & foūda∣tions
of the building, as for example: I any enter into religion & become a N or a Frier, and vowe perpetuall chast¦tie, pouertie, and obedience. Compend. Theolog. lib. 6. cap. 29 Ruard. Ta∣part. art. 6. de satisfa∣ctione.But to knitte vppe the knotte of thi their doctrine of satisfaction, it consisteth speciallye vppon thrée pointes: The cru∣cifying of our bodies, almes, and praiers whether wée perfourme them in proper person, or redeme them with present pa for it is a mart and a portsale of al thi¦ges, yea of the very grace and fauour o God. And hereof forsooth come these greate commodities, if it be worth credite that they say, firste almes doth easyly obtaine the fauour of God: fasting and mortifi∣cation of the flesh, the release of the paine and laste of al, prayer doeth quite extin∣guishe the reliques of the crime, whych Christe had lefte remaining in our con∣science, béeyng vnperfectly purged. But wheras some of the richer sort, and more tender and delicate than the rest, neither coulde nor woulde awaye with fasting, scourging, and other meanes of taming
the flesh, and besides, had verye little ley∣e to spare from their other affaires,The appl¦cation of Monkes merits. to stowe in prayer, one part of these thrée rued in stéede of all the reste, that is to ye, almes or rather a superstitious kind  liberalitie, by the whiche, they mighte alenge and applye vnto themselues, the erits and good workes of Monkes, the hich in their great store and abūdance,  nedelesse and superfluous for thēselues nd supererogatorie (as they terme them) ut for other men wonderous necessarie or they saluation. But some wil men say, what shal be∣de these of daintie and delicate persons,The occa∣sion of e∣stablishing Purgatory. hat are soddainly swapte vp with death, re they can haue these merits of Monks applied vnto them, and enioye them in heir full perfection: for it séemeth theyr soules shoulde be in present peril of eter∣nall damnation, as who say, they may in good time take vp their Inne in Purga∣torie, whence they maye easyly escape, when it shall please the Popes holinesse to open the treasures of Christes bloude, and applye vnto them the merrites of
Saints, and the monkes to commun  vnto them largely and liberally parte  their good workes, and playe with th giffe gaffe lyke good fellowes. And th is welnéere the summe of the Popish doctrine concerning satisfaction, to pa ouer a thousande dreames and blasph¦mous lies, whyche these men haue de∣sed againste the redemption of Christ perfected moste absolutely by the shedi of his moste precious bloude. Of the satisfaction for sinnes, according to the word of God. IF your maiesty (most mighty prince) haue with any diligēce considered  obserued, that which hath bin said lately before: your highnes vnderstandeth right well, that there was no mencion made at all of the benefit bestowed by Christ our sauiour, wheras the scriptures do mini∣ster vs no other comforte to our afflicted consciences, than the redemption of oure lord and sauiour Iesus Christ,Hebr. 7. Psalm 110. that euer∣lasting prieste after the order of Melchi∣zedeck, whiche offered vp himselfe to the
iustice of god a propitiatiō for al the sins  mankinde, the burthen wherof,Esay. 53. he layd d caried vpon his own shoulders, as ye ophet Isay saith, & therfore gaue vp his dy to bée broken, to bée sacrifized, and fered to God his father. And to the intent the matter might be ade more plaine and euident, bycause  is of so great and singuler commoditie, e muste repeate a little of that is sayde efore concerning the estate of mā in sin, oued with repentaunce and sorrow for he same. For when hée is sommoned to ppere before the iudgemēt seat of god, & ath put in baile to answer vnto the law and iustice of god, for his forth comming and apperance, & hath no cloke to couer his sins, not so much as a poore fig leafe, he is enforced at the lēgth,Confession of our ovvne mis¦deedes. as it were one yt were tormēted gréeuously on ye rack to cōfesse his manifold and great offēces, & to acknowledge his nakednesse & misery, being astonied with the iudgemēt of god, not that a man should fall into despayre, (considering God willeth not the deathe of a synner, but hys life and saluation)
but to the ende only that hée might as the knowledge of his sinne and transgr¦sion, bring him vnto repentaunce. Then after a mans mynde i th prepared, the spirite of God beginneth  to possesse him, that he accompteth him  be wholy his, pardoneth all his offences maketh him one of Gods housholde,The be∣ginning of the feare of God. a electeth him into the number of hys ch¦dren. And yet notwithstanding he remo¦ueth not from the eyes of his soule, th liuely Image of God in anger and di¦pleasure, whose voice and countenaun was wonte to amaze him, and make hi whole body tremble thereat, bycause  ofte as the minde shal be ouercome with the prouocations and allurementes  sin, the terrible sounde of his thundering voice and the sighte of hys sterne coun¦tenaunce shoulde so appall hym, that he shoulde shunne and auoyde synne by al meanes. The giftes and graces of the holy ghost.Agayne the same holy spirite of God, to the intent that man should remoue, from him and quite abandone all feare, doth set as it were before the eies of mā,
Iesus Christe and him crucified, that hée might bée fullye perswaded that all hys sinnes be purged by his death and passi∣on. But forasmuche as man being mise∣rable both by his owne nature, and by the sense of his sinne and conscience ther∣of, doth iudge himselfe to be verye farre from God, and can hardly be perswaded that the benefit of Christ doth appertain vnto him, therefore the holye ghoste la∣boureth to perswade him, that almightie God is reconciled vnto man, and doeth tender hym wyth singular loue and affe∣ction, and afterwards openeth the eies of man, béeyng in thys blindenesse, that hée may beholde, and sée by faith Christ Ie∣sus the earnest of his saluation, last of al breaketh the peruerse frowardnesse and obstinacie of the minde, that the same be∣ing somewhat instructed and comforted with the hope of Gods promisses, maye wholly submitte hys will vnto Christe, and imbrace him moste willingly, as the onely phisition of al his diseases and ma∣ladies. And this worke of the holye Ghoste,Degres of regenera on.
wherby the reason, vnderstanding, mind, and will of man is instructed in true pie∣tie and godlinesse, we may well terme by the name of Faith, not any weake opini∣on or vaine imagination of the worde of God, but a firme and constant perswasi∣on, by the whiche we are assured, that we are beloued of god, and adopted to be his sonnes, and inheritours of his heauenlye kingdome, that by the benefite of this lat∣ter Adam, we may be as it were remitted into oure former estate of oure auncient inheritaunce, namely innocenie, righte∣ousnes, and euerlasting felicitie, the whi∣che was loste by the mischeuous acte of the firste Adam,Christian aith. the same faith doth teach vs, that after we be reconciled and at one with God, there is nothing more grée∣uous or offensiue vnto God than iniqui∣tie and sinne, and that wée bée deliuered from the yoke and bondage of the Deuil,Luke. 1. itus. 2. onelye vppon condition that wée should thencefoorth leade a godly, righteous and sober life. The whiche faith being thus planted in mens mindes by the holy spirite, is like
an instrument or hand, wherby wée ap∣prehēd Iesus Christ, or as our mouth to receiue and eate Christ, that moste swete foode of our soules: and whosoeue is en∣dued with this repentance, is not now to be ascribed and thought one of olde Adās ofspring, but by meanes of this faith, is so linked and coupled with Christe,Hovv v be couple vvith Christe. that he is reputed and taken as a brother vn∣to him, so that Christe and a Christian man doe make as it were one spirituall body. For we may not call it in question, but verily beléeue that what Christ prai∣ed for vnto his heauenly father in the .17.Iohn. 17. of Iohn, he obtained the same at his hāds. But after this greate and nighe affi∣nitie is brought to passe and fast knitte with the bonde of faith,Regener¦tion and invvarde baptisme and of the holye ghost, then doth the heauenly father looke vpon man, being otherwise a sinner, with ye eies of mercie and grace, & perceyuing man to be clothed and garnished with the moste beutifull and precious garment of Christ, that is to saye, the innocencie and holines of Christes flesh, and taking de∣light in the moste fragrant smell thereof,
dothe bothe perfecte his felicitie, and re∣wardeth him with the inheritance of his heauenly kingdome, euen as in time past the Patriarche Isaac delt with his yon∣ger son Iacob,es. 27. when he felte hym arayed in the garments of his brother Esau. Therefore when man hathe obtained this honour, nowe standeth hée no more in feare of Gods terrible examples a∣gainste synners, & his seuere and straight iudgements, but perceiueth Christ to be appointed by God a iudge of all mē, who is ioyned vnto man by a strong faith: for what sentence may wée thinke in reason, that the redemer of the whole bodye will giue against his owne members, when as this aucthoritie of life and death is not committed vnto him of our mercifull fa∣ther, not to destroy and condempne those that put their truste in him, but to saue and preserue them rather, and to enriche them wyth the benefite of euerlastyng life. hryste Iudge to itte the ythfull.Hée therefore takyng vppon hym the partes both of an aduocate and a iudge vnto man, doth easyly absolue vs of all
our offences, and pronounceth them iust, for whose sake hee offered hymselfe vnto death,Iohn. 5. that hée might satisfye the iustice of man: notwithstandyng this pardon procéedeth not of anye mans merits or good workes, (for all that be borne of the olde Adam are guiltie of disobedience & rebelling agaynste God) nor of anye fa∣stings, or watchings, or pilgrimages, or satisfactions, or offrings, or masses, or merites of holye men or holye women, muche lesse of Monkes or Nunnes,Free Iusti∣fication throughe faith. (for what are anye of all these able to per∣fourme, that is not of hys owne nature damnable, and simply to be abhorred) but it is that alonly swéete and comfortable voice, Thy faith hath saued thée,Luke. 7. departe in peace and securitie,Christes chardge vvhich he gyueth to the sinner that is co¦uerted an beleeueth. and beware hence∣forthe and sinne no more, leaste a worse thing fall to thée: whiche is as muche to saye, that after thou hast receiued grace from heauen, and doste beléeue that thou arte partaker of my redemption, be thou farre from al guilte and crime, and from the paine due for the same, and that of frée grace and mercy wythout all respecte of
deserte, & yet in suche sort that thou haue earnest consideration howe dearely thou oughtest to estéeme that bonde whereby thou arte fast ioyned vnto me, in whych respect thou arte adopted vnto the num∣ber of the children of my father, to be an inheritour of the kingdome of heauen, a member of my bodye, and a partaker of my righteousnesse, and therefore sée thou bring forth the fruites of innocencie, and of repentaunce, such as shal bée agreable vnto the roote of liuely faith, and returne not to thy olde naughtinesse, least some worse thyng happen vnto thée. Loe, thys is the sentence of Christe (moste gratious soueraigne) whiche the faithfull here pronounced, and doe re∣ceiue by faith, wherevppon they receiue such solace and comforte in their minds, that if they happen to be troubled in con∣science with remorse of theyr sinnes, they séeke none other remedy than out of the worde of God, whence perfect healthe is onely to bée soughte and founde. The whyche doctrine so necessary and comfor∣table (moste mightie Prince) hath so in∣flamed
the hearts of your Maiesties sub∣iectes in the lowe countreis, with such a feruent zeale of pietie and godlinesse, that vnderstāding howe shamefully they haue bene abused in a matter of so greate im∣portance, they make this humble petiti∣on vnto youre Maiestie, that it woulde please the same to permit vnto them one∣ly the libertie of theyr consciences, and the preachyng of the Gospell, whereby they might without pillage or tiranny, be conducted the safe and ready way to e∣ternall saluation. And surely it séemeth a very vnreasonable matter, that so honest and godly a zeale shoulde bée persecuted with so greuous exactions and penalties, and not rather be both fauoured and fur∣thered with his due praise & cōmendatiō. And therfore your maiestie hath earnest∣ly to consider, howe almightie God wll deale with those persōs, which do so cru∣elly tormēt and murder mē that are both created after his owne likenes, and rede∣med with the most precious bloud of his only son, for none other cause, but onely for yt they professe this heauenly doctrine.
Of the doctrine of Iustification, as the Popishe Church doth teach it. ompend. heolo. ve∣itatis. lib. 6. ap. 32. igh. cōtr. 2. hom. 2.2..12. Rur. ap. act. 8. onc. Tridēt. ap. 7.FOr the better vnderstanding of thys whole matter, and the cause of the greate diuersitye of opinions hereabout, I will with as muche breuitie as I can, declare the determinations of the Pa∣pistes concerning Iustification. Fyrste they define it in this wise: that Iustifica∣tion is the passage of a synner from vn∣righteousnesse vnto righteousnesse, wher∣of they say there be foure partes, that is to saye, motion of fréewill, contrition, in∣fusion of grace, remission of sinne. The two firste to procéede from him that is to bée Iustified: The latter two from the Iustifier: and those two first, to be as it were the causes preparing the harte of man to receiue the grace of God. More∣ouer, they say that there bée thrée princi∣pall causes, which concurre in the Iusti∣fication of sinners, namely God, the sin∣ner, and the Church, God which poureth out his mercies, wherby the sinne is for∣giuen, and sheweth his iustice exacting a satisfaction, eyther in this life or after,
that is to saye, in Purgatorie,Luke. 10 the which oo vertues (as they glose) are signified  those two disciples, which Christ sent efore hym into euerye Citie and place, hether he himselfe shuld come, Luk. 10. or that (say they) which then was done rporally, is now perfourmed spiritual∣. Also on the behalfe of the sinner, there e twoo thinges required, loue and sor∣we, the which (say they) are lyke the ones of the Mille wherewith sinne i ound, as was figured in Deutero. 24.Deut. 24. ikewise there be two things that come om the Church. The merits of Christe nd of the Saintes, holy men, and holye omen, who forasmuche as they hadde ore store of good works, than they stoode  néed of themselues, left the surplusage  the custodye of the Churche, that they ight be destributed among such as wā∣ed. Secōdarily, the church by the hands f the Pope, and of Byshops, graunteth ardons and indulgences vnto sinners, uaileable so farre as the wordes of the ame doe purporte. And yet among these octours, there haue béene some whiche
haue affirmed faith to be the foundation of oure Iustification, and yet seruing vs in steade of a preparatiue, to apprehende and receiue the fauour and loue of God, wherof righteousnesse doth procéede, the which he gyueth vs in cōsideratiō of our loue towardes him. Here I omit an in∣finite number of curious questiōs,Vide summā Theolog. A∣lexand. de Ates. art. de Iustifie. which rather make the doctrine of our iustifica∣tiō obscure, than bring any light to ye vn∣derstāding therof, specially to such as be∣ing indued with the spirit of god séeke af∣ter true righteousnes, with ye whole affe∣ction of their heart as may appeare most euidently, aswel by the councel of Trent as also by the Interim, offered vnto the Protestantes. It shall bée sufficient to touche onely by name the palpable mists wherewithall the schoolemen blinde the eies of the simple people. As when they dispute whether a man bée iustified in a moment, or it require a long processe of time? whether Christe after his resurre∣ction coulde doe any merite to make vs righteous béefore God yea or no? whe¦ther this word Iustification is to be con¦strued
largely or strictely in the fifth to he Romaines, where the Apostle saith,Rom. 5. hus béeing iustified by fayth, wée haue eace towardes God throughe our Lord esus Christe? whether Iustification be  motion to the atteynment of perfecte ighteousnesse, or of vnperfect? with such ther like foolish stuffe, wherin they spēd heir time idelly & vnprofitablye. For in l this, there is not one worde I warrāt ou of Christe the sonne of God, the true nd onely Iustifier of mankinde, whose Gospel ought to be spred euery where, & ound in all places, but specially in their ares, whiche are almoste pressed down o the grounde, with the weight of theyr ins, and by the law cited and sommoned to appeare before ye maiesty of god in his cōsistory & seat of iudgemēt. For wherto serue al these subtil points & quiddities, if we be not instructed by what means we may be deliuered frō ye tiranny of sin, the threatnings of ye law, ye dominion of Sa∣thā, ye feare of death, nor the pit of hell: for this I say is the true and sounde doctrine whiche wée oughte bothe to learne oure selues, and to teache others.
Of Iustification according as wee are taught out of the word of God. WHerefore that the matter grow  more obscure,VVhat Iusti∣fiction is and bée amplified  arguments, lette vs content oure selu with the simple word of God, and them learne the true fruite and profite of th doctrine, rather than vaine ostentation▪ For Iustification is nothing else but certaine diuine worke, whereby God r¦ceiueth vs to grace and fauour, (thoug we be the ofspring of olde Adam and pa¦takers of his corruption) and doth frée make vs his childrē, brethrē vnto Chri by adoption: And wée are not ignorau that a man cannot be iustified, vnlesse h bée present in person: so that none ma execute the matter by an atturney or a¦signe to receaue righteousnesse in his be¦halfe. Neither doe wée estéeme a man t be a blocke or a stone, senselesse and with out witte or vnderstanding, but to bée  creature endued with with, will, and rea¦son, whereby hée may bée able by know¦ledge to discerne and haue will to receiu what soeuer good thing God of hys good∣nesse
and fatherly kindnesse doth bestow on him. And therefore they that in this matter nto the question of frée will,The reno∣uation of our vvill and vnder∣standing. doe be∣ye their owne vnskilfulnesse, séeing  euerye man knoweth right well in  own conscience, how blinde he is bée∣ hée bée engrafted into Christe, and e wilfull and obstinate in withstan∣g the will of God, till he be reclaimed  the mercifull goodnesse of oure God.  in this respect we say wée haue great de of the motion of Gods holye spirite open the eies of oure heartes, bothe to knowledge oure maladie, and to craue  helpe of the heauenly phisition to mol∣ye oure heartes, mindes and willes, at wée myghte imbrace the playster ouided for vs by that heauenly phisiti∣ to be a perfecte salue for all men. The hiche worke of the holy ghost, we call  the name of Faith, by onely meanes d helpe whereof man is engrafted in∣ Christe and made partaker of hys ghteousnesse, and by the benefite there∣ is prouoked, with a frée & ready harte
wholy to be inflamed wyth the loue  zeale of god, vnderstanding that throu his grace, he hathe obtained that hoe w¦vnnethable to doe by his owne nature And then doth almightie god besto twoo especiall benefits vpon man, the  in assuring him that all his sins are cle¦sed with the bloude of his son, the other beautifying him wt his owne righte¦nesse & innocēcie. The which the Apos dothe in moste manifest wordes decla vnto vs, and citing the tstimony of D¦uid,Psalm. 32. where he saith: Blessed is the  whose iniquities are remitted, and h sins couered. Blessed is the man to who the Lorde imputeth not his sinne, and forth, as followeth consequently in t same psalme. 3. The firste sentence may bée resemb to the common forme vsed of course places of iudgement, when as Princ and Magistrates of their singuler gra and fauour do pardon persons attaynt of fellonye. The seconde séemeth to bée borow of the clothyng of a naked bodye, in th
cure heauenlye father doth in like sorte uer oure filthinesse and abhominati∣s with his heauenly innocencie. The thirde hathe a kinde of similitude  likenesse vnto the dealing of credi∣s, whyche hauyng bookes of their ac∣mptes, and the names of their det∣rs, doe crosse the summe, and make it scharged. In lyke manner doeth the nly Apostle teach vs, that the note booke foure sins is to be blotted forth, & ye obli∣ation yt was to be shewed against vs, is aced and cācelled by the bloud of Christ nto all those that with a liuely faith ac∣nowlege so great a benefit, & with true bedience apply our selues to perfourme is will. But forasmuche as man throu∣he this wonderfull worke of God,The do∣ctrine of freevvill as the Papists teache it. doth onfesse the acknowledging of his synne, nd his hartie repentaunce and sorowe n béeing so bolde and carelesse to of∣ende agaynste the Maiestye of God, othe in worde and déede, therefore the ate wryters in Diuinitie doe fayne hat these workes, and thys zeale hathe hys originall of mans industrye,
wisedome, and freewill only, by the w¦che he receiueth faith, as it were by h owne preparation, and so by means th of maketh himselfe a member of Chri And bycause wée preache and teache t people, that this agnisyng, confessi sorowing, and repenting of sinne, are  to be estéemed & called the works of ma that they be notwithstanding reputed  procéede frō the force and power of go holy spirite, who prepareth the hart an will of man to conceiue them firste, an after to put ye same in practise: Therfor doe they lay heresie to our chardge mos vniustly and impudently, as they doe  vntruly, slaundering vs most falsely, tha wee reiecte good workes, and moue me to slouth and contempt of their dutie t¦wards God. Howbeit, your Maiesty,  it please you to enter into your own co¦science with the earneste consideratio hereof may easily be iudge herein, wh¦ther it be a matter that consisteth in th fréewill of man to offer hymselfe in th Courte of almightie God, and before hi Maiestie to confesse hys sinne, a thing
odious and abhominable in the sight of God, or to sorrowe hartily for his sinnes, and to fal to amendment with due repen∣taunce, or to be vexed and tormented in conscience for the horriblenesse of sinne, or to embrace Iesus Christe wyth suche fayth, humilitie, and reuerence as wée oughte to doe, that is to saye, as our only sacrifice & propitiation of our sins once offred for vs: for who so is able to per∣forme ye things of what value or estima∣tion so euer they bée, him doe I accompt rather lyke vnto God, than vnto man. Surely I am of opinion, that they which be enimies and impugne this do∣ctrine, and (for that wée mayntayne the same) do persecute vs with fire and fagot, haue either had small sense of Iustifica∣tion, or else are some newe founde people descended into the Earthe, I wotte nere whence. For if they haue not had some sensible perseueraunce and féeling of the principles of Christian religion in them∣selues by experience, I councell them for a time to be quiet and refraine to speake, and aduise them rather to praye vnto al∣mightie
God that hée woulde instruct them by his holy spirite in suche thinges as they are ignorant of, and yet will bée prating rashely and babling either after their owne conceite and imagination, or as they haue heard other men talke, will moste impudently affirme the same: but if they will deriue their pedigrée from God, lette them permitte vs to be (as we are) men contenting our selues with such knowledge as is conuenient for vs. For we do willingly confesse, that we are the children of Adam by nature, disobedient vnto the will of God, senselesse in oure owne corrupte nature, so peruerse and obstinate, that vnneth we wil be brought to repentaunce, so hardned in harte, that wée can not be broken with the sense of sinne, finally of suche pride and arrogan∣cie, that wée can scarcely bée drawen to confesse our sinnes: to be shorte, enimies to our own saluation, vnlesse God of hys fatherly fauour and grace vouchsafe to correcte and amende the malice of oure froward nature, and to enable and make vs apte to doe suche workes. Why doe they then enuie vs thys humilitie and
lowlinesse of harte, in that we thinke we oe greatly honoure our God, when wée referre all thinges to hys gratious good∣nesse and mercie? But if they thinke thys ure humilitie be excéeding, and more han néedefull, is this so horrible an of∣fence, that we shoulde therefore be thou∣ghte worthie of all punishments and tor∣mentes that can be deuised be ac ompted infamous, banished, imprisoned, hanged and burned? Surely this their fierce and barbarous crueltie, may be a sufficiēt de∣claration vnto your maiestie, that this is no godly zeale in the Papists (as they call it) but rather an excéeding choler & heate of stomak, boiling in their enuious & ma∣licious breasts. The other benefit of our iustificatiō is our cōiunctiō with Christ:Our com∣munion & fellovvship vvith Christe. for it is not inough for a man to be onely absolued of his sinne, but it is also requi∣site and necessarye that hée bée maruei∣lously renuee, & shew a new obediēce, the which nothing can worke in thē, saue on∣ly ye power of god through our L. & saui∣our Iesus Christe: & this is ye secōd effect of faith, which the holy ghost hath poured into our harts by the which a man being
made frée from the feare of all enimies & danger of damnation, doth wholy possesse Iesus Christ,Luke. 1. Roma. 8. the very sonne of God and man, to the intent hée might liue in hym, not in walking after the fleshe, but in ho∣linesse of spirit, and that he should thence∣forth work righteousnesse in the sight of God, & of his son Christe, through whose bloude shedde, and sacrifice offred hée is purged and clensed from all hys offences and filthinesse. Last of all, that to declare himselfe bothe mindefull and also thank∣full, for so greate mercifulnesse, and lo∣uing kindnesse shewed towardes him, he shoulde on the other side retourne loue backe againe towardes God, and be zea∣lous in seruing and honouring him. The whiche doctrine the Apostle doth plainely sette forthe in hys epistle to the Romaines, in these words: Ther remai∣neth now no condemnation (saith he) vn∣to suche as be engrafted into Christe Ie∣su, that is to say, those that walke not af∣ter the fleshe, but after the spirite: for the liuely lawe of the spirite, whyche is in Christe hath loosed me from the bondage
of sinne and death. For that whiche was impossible to the lawe through the infir∣mitie of the fleshe,Rom. 8. God by sending hys owne sonne into fleshe, of likenesse and si∣militude vnto our sinful fleshe, hath after a sort destroied sinne by sinne in the same fleshe, that the iustice of the lawe might be accomplished in vs whiche walke not after the fleshe, but after the spirite, for those that be addicted vnto the flesh, haue their mindes bent vppon fleshly desires, but they that be renued in spirite doe fol∣lowe the motion and direction of the spi∣rite, and the desire of the fleshe, is death and destruction: contrariwise the desyre of the spirite is peace, ioye, and life euer∣lasting: For the desire or affection of the fleshe is againste God, neyther is it nor can not bée obedient vnto the lawe of God. Therefore suche as are giuen to the flesh can not please God, howbeit you walke not in the fleshe, but in the spirite, if so be the spirite of God be within you. And who so hath not the spirit of Christ, is none of his, but if Christe be within you, then is the body dead as concerning
sinne, but the spirite aliue or rather life it self for righteousnesse sake. Wherfore if the spirite of hym that raysed Christs from deathe abide in you, the same also will restore you and your mortall bodies vnto life, bicause of the spirite that dwel∣leth in you: wherefore brethren wée are nowe no more subiecte vnto the fleshe, to liue after the luste thereof: For if ye liue after the desires and concupiscentes of the fleshe, yée shall dye the deathe, but if contrariwise by the power of the spirite, you conquer and subdue the lusts therof, you shall liue in most perfect felicitie: for al whosoeuer is directed by ye spirit of god are numbred among the sonnes of God. Here dothe Paule moste notably and largely declare the seconde parte of oure Iustification, and the end also of our con∣iunction with Christ Iesus, namely that we shoulde leade our life, not after the motion of the fleshe, and the voluptuous∣nesse thereof, but according to the dire∣ction of the holy spirite, the which moste profitable and comfortable coniunction & felowship with him, if we had and did en∣ioye,
we would not fall to such vayn and néedelesse questions as we do.2. Timoth. 9. For what profite is in the subtil questions and dif∣putations, whether the righteousnes of a Christian man be a substance or an acci∣dent, a qualitie inherent, or only in vs by imputation?Thom. Aqui. 1.2. q. 113. whether the iustification of the wicked and vngodly, be only the for∣giuenesse of the sin or no? whether infusi∣on of grace be requisit in the remission of the fault? or whether the motion of frée∣will be not also requisite thervnto? whe∣ther the wicked be iustified in an instant, or in processe of time? whether iustificati∣on of grace do go before in order of na∣ture & such like quiddities and subtil nice∣ties? except wée haue ye vertue & efficacie of Christ Iesus imprinted in our harts,Ephes. 3. which we trust is in ye harts of ye faithful beleuers as Paule prayed for ye cōgrega∣tiō of Ephesus, & who loueth his churche dearly, as ye same apostle saith in another place, and yt we be ye mēbers of his misti∣call body. The same Paule doth likewise testify in the epistle to the Corinths, that Christe dothe speake in him, whose po∣wer and vertue the Corinthians also did2. Cor. 13.
perceiue in his speache, and warneth thē that they shoulde giue eare vnto Christe dwelling within thē, for otherwise (saith hée) Christe will reiecte and refuse you Moreouer,Iohn. 17. our Lorde and sauiour Iesus Christe did likewise make his earnest re∣queste vnto his father, and no doubt but he obtained it, that those which were his might bée so coupled togyther in so sure and faste a bande, that as hée and his fa∣ther were one, so they might also be one. The manner and order of whiche socie∣tie, Cyrill a very auntient doctour, dothe very largely entreate of, in hys treatise vppon the .17. Chapter of the Gospel af∣ter Iohn, whether I referre the reader concerning the same. And now I cannot otherwise thinke but that these phrases of speache vsuall in Paule and diuers auntient writers in the Churche, shall in these our dayes be thought somewhat absurde and vnapte, forasmuche as all labour now adays not to profite religion with the true and per∣fecte exercises of the mind, but with cere∣monies and suche like trashe, deuised ra∣ther
for vaine shewe and ostentation, thā vppon any godly purpose. Wherevppon it groweth, ye oure aduersaries acknow∣ledge no other communion of the body of Christe, saue onely that whiche they say is exhibited in the holy supper vnto vs al. As they likewise know no other regene∣ration, than that whyche they thinke is giuen in baptisme, nor any other righte∣ousnesse or iustification, than that which is hid in Christe, who is so farre distant from vs, as heauen from earth: wheras notwithstanding he that hathe not putte on Christe, is voide of all iustice and in∣nocencie, the only pathes that leade vs vnto God, neyther is it meruayle, that these sayings of the Apostles and other the faithfull haue béene vnknowne vnto diuers. For it is as easye a matter to teache the blinde to conceiue the bright∣nesse of the shining Sun beames,Ma blind vvithout the right o the spirite. by the comparison of other creatures, which he hathe neuer séene, as to teache men these things, and perswade them therein whi∣che are onely addicte to the naturall dis∣eases of the fleshe, and therefore I doe
moste hartily pray and beséech those that moue and prouoke youre Maiestie to persecute vs by all kind of torments and cruelties, that they woulde firste learne the reason and cause of oure Iustificati∣on in the schoole of oure sauiour Christ, before they procéed to condemne vs to be heretikes, vnworthy this life, or the so∣cietie and fellowship of men. Of good workes after the doctrine of the Papistes. AFter they haue thus fowly & shame∣fully erred in thys chiefe foundation of our faith, touching satisfaction and iu∣stification, they cannot possibly deliuer vnto vs anye true and certayne doctrine of good workes: and yet notwithstan∣dyng, wée haue better cause to bewaile their blindnesse and vnmercifulnesse, thā to ieste thereat, who falsely slaundering vs with the reiecting of good works, haue taughte a doctrine of theyr owne deuise cōcerning the same most pernicious and hurtefull vnto man. Therfore this they lay for the ground
worke of this their doctrine, that a man ustified, maye safely and lawfullye per∣ourme that which is riquired in the law f God after their owne fantasie, and ccording to the power and strengthe of heir owne will, that they by the aide and assistaunce of Gods grace are able to do workes meritorious de condigno (as they call it). In the mean while not one word of Christe Iesus,The rc degrees of merites. Merita d¦gna. and the presence of hys holye Spirite in the heartes of the faith∣full, wherevppon procéedeth all oure po∣wer and strength whatsoeuer, the fruites of which fréewill they cal merites digna,De Congro and therof do make thrée sortes. The first sort they terme to be of congruence,De Con∣digo. wher∣by we prepare our selues to receyue the grace of God: The second of cndigniti, (as they call it) or of deserte, for bicause that the doer and worker thereof is wor∣thye the grace of God, and the increase therein. The thirde kinde comprehen∣deth both the other two sorts of merits, the whiche being compared with the re∣wards propounded for the same, do easy∣ly match thē in worthinesse & excellency.
Cōcerning the first sort they teach v that a man of his ownefrée motion & wil may without the grace of God prepar and able himselfe to receiue the grace o God, so that a man onely doe hys ende¦uour and good wil. Again, this prepara¦tion contayneth thrée partes: The first that a man shoulde ceasse to committ sinne. Secondly to abate his lust and w to sinne. Thirdely to endeuour hymself to imbrace righteousnesse: likewise (the saye) that thrée things are requisite in a man to the doing of a meritorious acte: the minde that worketh it, the frée will that moueth the minde: the intention and purpose respecting a good end: but of God and of hys holy spirite, not one worde I warrant you. And the workes that issue out of thys roote deserue thrée things, remissiō of sin, encrease of grace, and possession of life e∣uerlasting, the which we merit by meane of charitie, & the excellencie of the work: likewise of good works ther be two sorts either of commaundementes, or but on∣ly of counsell or supererogation (as they
terme them) bicause a man is not bound  doe them, but that Gods will is that  shoulde merite so much the more. And ese be the workes (saye they) whyche hriste taught hys disciples in the .5.Math. 5. VVorks of superero∣gation. of athew in this wise: Blessed be the poore  spirite, for theirs is the Kingdome of eauen: Blessed are they that mourne, or they shall receiue comforte: Blessed re the méeke in harte, for they shall in∣erite the earthe: Blessed are they that unger and thirst for righteousnesse sake, or they shall be satisfied. Blessed are the leane in hearte, for they shall sée God: Blessed are the peacemakers, for they hall be called the children of God: Bles∣ed are they that suffer persecution, for heirs is the kingdome of heauen: Bles∣sed are ye when men persecute and reuile you, and speake all euil vppon you, slaun∣dering you moste falsely for my sake: re∣ioice & be glad, for great is your rewarde in heaue: for so hauen they persecuted the Prophets in olde time. But by these and other like places of holy scripture vncō∣strued, they gather the order and lyfe of
Monkerie, the vowes of chastitie, ob¦dience, pouertie full of all superstition,  this kind of life (say they) is perfecte an most acceptable vnto God, insomuche  they cōtemne al other things in respect, and call al other Christians, worldlings and secular and lay people. VVorkes of mans de∣uice and inuention.The residue of their good workes ar to fast in the holy time of Lente, to ab∣stein frō the eating of flesh at certain ty∣mes in the weke, which they cal the ho wéeke, to whip and scourge themselues, to buylde Chappels, found Chauntries, giue lampes & candle-lights to set before saints in mid day, to go on pilgremage¦sing Masses, & such execrable workes of superstitiō. Of which things this saying of Esai may wel and aptly be verified a∣gainst them that vse thē:Esay. 1. Who hath re∣quired these things at your hands, & that not without a cause: for this kind of ser∣uice is so far from being acceptable vn∣to him, yt they are most odious & hatefull vnto him, as may appeare by the many fold plagues & punishmēts, which he lay∣eth daily vpon vs, & that most worthily.
Therfore if our aduersaries finde fault ith vs, bicause we teach not the people  do such works, we are very wel con∣nt to sustein that accusation of theirs. or let thē denounce against vs cōdem∣tion neuer so great nor so oft, our god ne doubt not) will absolue vs: let them rsecute vs neuer so extremely, he will  our defence and buckler: let them put  to most cruel deaths, almightie God il restore vs vnto life again thorough hriste Iesus, who is our only life. Fi∣ally though they burne vs to ashes, he hat raysed Iesus Christe from death, ill likewise rayse vp again oure bodies ute of duste and ashes, for the spirites ake that dwelleth in vs. Rom. 8.Roma. 8. Of the good woorkes of a man that is iustifyed. FIrste we protest and affirme, that our aduersaries do most falsly slan∣der vs, where they say of vs that we cō∣temne the doing of good works, and that we persuade ye people that they ar made
holy and righteous in Christe, and th it skilleth not how they liue. For we pr¦teste the contrary, that that doctrine  neyther the doctrine of the Gospell,  our doctrine, forasmuche as it appeareth manifestlye in scripture, that a good t muste bring forth good fruite, whereby  may appere that the roote therof is god▪ And the Apostle doth plainely teache  the cause, why Christe hathe deliuere vs from the tiranny of sinne, and by h righteousnesse made vs righteous, whe he saith on this wise. For wee also som time were madde, stubberne, wandering out of the waye, seruing diuers lusts an vanities, liuing in malice & enuie, hate¦full, one at deadly hatred wyth another but after that the goodnesse and abundan loue of oure Lorde and Sauiour Iesus Christe was manifested towardes men, he saued vs not for the good workes that we our selues had done, but of hys ow frée grace and mercie, by the fountain of regeneration, and by the renouation of the holy Spirite, the whiche he poured vpon vs abundātly by his sonne Christ,
that being iustified through his grace, we shoulde bée made heyres of euerlastyng life according to hope. Also in an other place he saith, that ye grace of Almightie God our sauiour was declared, that men laying aparte all worldly pleasures shuld wholy bende themselues to true and per∣fecte goodlinesse, righteousnesse and sober∣nesse, looking for the happy hope, and the glorious comming of our lorde God. If these things then be true (as we beléeue them to be moste true) what impudencie were it to affirme, that a man shuld liue idelly in the houshold of God? truely wée affirme, that a man not indued wyth the spirit of regeneration, or berefte of that grace, is altogither vnable to do or speak any thing that can please God, yea so muche as to acknowledge Iesus Christe in his hearte, vnlesse hée haue in hym Gods holy spirite, and therfore we déeme those things that haue béene declared by vs, as touching merits of congruence, and of condignitie, and suche other lyke fonde and foolishe distinctions, to be méere deui∣ses of mans vaine heade, to make sinners
become hipocrites and counterfaiters of holinesse, whiles they vnderstand not the darke mistes of their ignorance, and bée senselesse, as touching their owne misery and destructiō, which they cannot escape, neither by these works preparatorie, nor by any diligence or worldly wisedome, but by the onely goodnesse and mercye of God, whiles hée moueth oure mindes with forcible motions, and openeth oure eies that wée should sée the most misera∣ble estate and condition we be in, & wade out of this moste filthy puddell and sinke of all sinne, where we are almost drew∣ned, and be washed with the moste preci∣ous bloud of the immaculate lambe, that we may our selues be new creatures, the whiche thing we call properly regenera∣tion and newe birth, or sanctification ra∣ther if ye liste so to terme it. The con∣iunction of Christe and his mem∣bers is spi∣rituall.And after wée bée iustified and thus renued, wée are so vnited and knitte in Christ with the band of his holy spirit, yt our works that we do afterwards ought to be accōpted Christes works, & in that respect are most acceptable in the sight of
God, but least any should fondly & vaine∣ly imagine and dreame hereof with him∣selfe, when he heareth vs speake of thys coniunction & felowship with Christe, we do not hereby mean any kind of transfor∣mation or transsubstantiation of ye bodye of Christe, into oure bodies, as if it were néedful, that the true humilitie of Christ, shoulde be laide aside and vanish awaye: God forbid. But for the true and right vnder∣standing of thys misterye, wée requyre a spirituall man, suche one as hathe bene instructed by the holy spirite to discerne and iudge of things rightely,Math. 28. and as they ought to be in due place and order, so that he maye be able to conceiue and compre∣hend in ye vnderstanding of his mind Ie∣sus Christ, our redemer ye son of god very God and very man, glorified and sitting at the right hand of his heauenly father, hauyng all power committed vnto hym bothe in heauen and in earth, the whiche throughe faith, hath hys continuall a∣bode and dwelling in the heartes of hys elect & chosen people. And who so is iusti∣fied
on this sorte, occupy not themselues in buildyng of Chappells, in saying of Masses, in wandering on pilgrimage, nor spende their whole life in such like super∣stitious exercises, but referre all their actions and enterprises and cogitations to that seruice, whiche they knowe God requireth at our handes: speciallye they endeuour themselues firmly to retaine in their myndes the perpetuall and conti∣nuall meditation of the wonderfull con∣iunction they haue with Christe,The badge and token of our re∣generation. whose spirite witnesseth vnto our spirit,Rom. 8. The holy spirite in the mindes of the rege∣nerate. Esay. 59. that we are the children of God, brethren and heires annexed with Christe, the whych testimony is a strong assurance, and most certaine earneste and seale of oure electi∣on, and of Gods gratious goodnes, as E∣saias doth teache vs of the couenaunte which God hath entred with vs. Neither is there anye other meanes to retaine this affiance and adoption, than the con∣tinuall calling vppon the name of God,The en∣crease of faith. The morti∣fication of the fleshe. ioyned with the reading and meditation of holy scriptures, and the mortifying of our olde Adam, and extending charitable
almes towardes our neighboure.Brotherly charitie. And to the intent we may orderly learne whi∣che be the good workes of him that is re∣generate and borne againe in Christ, they may be referred to these thrée principall pointes, the encrease of faith, the desire of mortification of the fleshe, and the so∣cietie of man, consisting in the duties of loue & charitie of one towards an other: to the which places al ye works, & studies of the electe and faythfull bée referred and aptely applyed, as Paule doth teache Rom. 12.Rom. 12. Galath. 5.Galath. 5. Colos. 3.Coloss 3. where hée saith: If therfore ye be risen againe with Christe, séeke after those things whiche be aboue, where Christe sitteth at ye right hande of God, set your affection on thin∣ges aboue, & not on things on the earthe, for you are dead, and your life is hid with Christe in God: whensoeuer Christ whi∣che is oure life shall appeare, then shall you also appere with him in glory. Mor∣tifie therfore your earthly members, for∣nication, vncleannesse, wantonnesse, euil concupiscence, and couetousnesse, whiche is the worshypping of Images, for the
which things sake the vengeance of God is come vpon the children of disobediēce. In which vices ye also walked sometime when ye liued in them: but nowe put ye all wrath, enuie, malice, blasphemie, fil∣thy communication out of your mouth¦lye not one to another, after ye haue put of that olde manne and hys workes, and putte ouer the newe man, whiche is re∣nued into the knowlege, according to the Image of him that made him, where is neither Iewe, nor Grecian, circumcision nor vncircumcision, Barbarian, Scithi∣an, bonde nor frée, but Christe is all are all: put ye on therefore (as it becommeth the electe of God, holy and beloued bow∣els of mercie, kindenesse, humblenesse of minde, longsuffering, forbearing one an∣other, forgiuing one another, if any haue a quarell against another, euen as Christ hath forgiuē you, so also do ye, & aboue a things put on loue, which is ye bōd of per∣fectnesse, let the defēce of god haue victo¦ry in your harts, to the which we are also called to be one bodye: and sée that yée bée thankefull, let the worde of Christ dwell
in you abundauntly with all wisedome, teaching & admonishing your own selues with psalmes and himnes and spirituall songs, singing and giuing thankes and praises vnto god in your harts, & whatso∣euer yée shall doe or say, do it in the name of the Lorde Iesu, giuing thankes vnto God the father throughe him. And these saye I, are the good workes of the faith∣full, not the superstitious ceremonies of hypocrites. Behold (most gracious soue∣raigne) summarily and briefly the righ∣teousnesse of a Christiā man, from whom all these controuersies, almoste through∣out al Christendome, haue gone as out of a heade or spring, & specially in youre ma∣iesties lowe Countries, whereby youre highenesse may well perceiue (if it maye please you to make comparison of oure doctrine and theyrs) that it is no trifle that is in question béetwixte vs, neither doe wée contende of pleasure or will in a matter, wherein we hazarde bothe life and goods, nor it is no small or peltyng quarrell for riches or anye possessions. For they that follow thys profession, and are zealous in this religion are disin∣herited
of their auntient and rightefull inheritaunces: But herein consisteth the knotte of all oure controuersies, in that we affirme all our whole studye and en∣deuoure to tende to this ende, that wée might perfectely and absolutelye enioye, that moste perfecte and absolute benefit of Christe bestowed vppon vs, and whol∣ly possesse and enioy him, in such wise as our heauenly father hath giuen him vnto vs: and that we shoulde moste diligently, and aboue all things take héede that wée be not broughte in opinion to purchase our saluation by golde or siluer, by the vaine and superstitious doctrine of men. And now I referre it to your Maiesties good iudgement and consideration, whe∣ther this our most iuste defence and well meaning, and our earneste zeale of god∣linesse haue deserued thus sundry wayes to be persecuted, by imprisonment, exile, rackes, tortures, fire and sworde, to rid vs out of the waye, whiche haue no other care of oure lyues, but that wée maye fyrste and principallye gyue God hys due honoure, that is, to worship hym in
spirite and truth, and nexte thereto, sub∣itte themselues with all humilitie vn∣ your Maiestie, be obedient vnto you,Iohn. 4. nd doe to your highnesse all loyall and utifull seruice with most willing minds, nd hartie good wil, as faithfull subiectes  their naturall Prince. It maye there∣ore please your Maiestie of your grati∣us goodnesse to consider whether it be a matter incident, and apperteining to your ffice and princely vocation with equitie nd fauour, to heare and to detemine his so waightie a matter, wheren con∣sisteth the life and safetie of youre Sub∣iects, or to permitte them to be taken (as it were) perforce, out of your Maiesties hands and iurisdiction, and without de∣claration of any iust cause, to be tormen∣ted with all kinde of tortures and exqui∣site deuises of tirannye, whose onely re∣quest s to haue the controuersie, for the waightinesse therof, decided by your ma∣iesties determination and defitiue sen∣tence.The vvise sentence of Salomon vppon the tvvo har∣lottes. It is writen of Salomon that pui∣saunt and wise Prince, vnto whom ma∣nye men resorted out of farre Countries
only to sée him, for the reporte was made of him, & the admiration that all men ha him in for his passing and excellent wise¦dome, when the two poore women wer in strife for the liue childe, to whyche o them two it shoulde appertaine, that h disdained not to call them before him in¦to his chamber of presence and estate, to ende the controuersie by his moste wise  notable sentence & iudgement. Whos example herein ought to be a president to directe your maiestie in this our case and to moue your grace to the deuision  determination of al quarrels & controuer∣sies now depending betwixt your maie∣sties Subiects. For as yt most wise Kyng did easily discerne betwixte the true mo∣ther & the false, after he vnderstoode that the harlot forced not,The Ro∣mish chur∣che is no mother but a stepdame. if the King shoulde award that the liue childe should be deui∣ded into two parts: euen so may your ma∣iestie easly perceiue yt the church of Rome (which falsely challengeth vnto hir selfe the name of the Catholike Churche) is not the true mother that bringeth foorth Gods children, bycause shée doeth not onely not shewe some louyng affecti∣on,
and pitifull compassion towardes hose, being not contented (notwithstan∣ing she make accompte of them as of hir un) to sée them dailye condemned & exe∣uted most cruelly, but also moueth and stirreth vppe Princes and Potentates, o practise all tyrannye vppon them, ar∣eth and entertayneth men of warre to estroy them, bloweth the coales, and kindleth the flame hirselfe lyke a moste cruell stepdame, to consume the children that belong not to hir. If then the Pope be our holy father, if he be the shepheard of Gods flocke, why doeth he rather de∣sire to kill them, than with moste louing and gentle persuasiō labor to allure them home to the folde of Chrste. And there∣fore we make our humble request & peti∣tion to your maiesty (most gratious & our most dread soueraigne, to imitate this ex∣āple of Salomō, & to take vpō you ye hea∣ring & deciding of our cause: & forasmuch as this mother Churche of Rome, or to terme hir more aptly and truly, this step∣dame, is procéeded so farre in crueltye and furour, that she tormenteth, māgleth, destroieth, hangeth, draweth and burneth
those whome it hathe pleased almight God to send into the worlde, and of hy goodnesse & fatherly prouidence to grau the fruition of this life, we moste humbl pray and beséeche your grace not to com¦mitte the matter ouer to hir to be deter¦mined, doe not putte the sworde into h handes, nor gyue hir no suche counte¦naunce or aucthoritie, whereby she ma vtter hir spite and malice, and wreak hirselfe vppon your Maiesties poore sub∣iectes. For the iudgements whiche shée vseth and desireth to putte in execution, are suche as all lawes both of god and of man doe abhorre: lette any man who  liste peruse all auntient monuments, and I beléeue he shall not finde anye Record wherin hath bene vsed anye suche procée∣ding in iudgement, that the partie accu∣sed, shuld be made iudge and haue power to condemne his accuser, as we sée by ex∣perience is vsed and practised by the Ro∣mishe Churche in these affaires: For we protestantes (as we be called) haue iuste cause to complaine of the popedome, with all his appurtenaunces, whyche hath be∣rete
vs of our life, & the saluatiō of all the ithfull, that is to saye of Christ Iesus, hiche hath made (as it were) porte sale  him, and chaunged hym into infinite tes of sundry shapes and formes. Not∣ithstanding al the Kings and Princes the world almost did put in commissi∣ and aucthoritie to iudge of this cause, em whiche both be accused by vs and r greatest aduersaries: we reproue the ste councels, and conuince them of er∣r and vntruths, and yet are wée posted er to be iudged by them: we blame the ardinals moste worthily, for that they ue their handes and mouthes embru∣, and their clothes stayned with the oud of Martirs, and they are appoin∣d iudges ouer vs, to determine the mat∣r depending in controuersie betwixt vs nd them: we accuse the Bishops of sa∣ilege, that whereas they ought of dutie  féede the flocke of Christe, they do féed emselues and their own bellies, and yet ey fit in iudgement hereof, and are not shamed to pronounce sentence of vs, to e tormented and oppressed by al means
and for the furtheraunce and spéedie ex¦cution therof, they sticke not to entertai an army, & to make pay with our spoiles nor shame not to iustify the same to be a¦greable to equitie & conscience. In whic case I wot not whych way to tourne m what to do or say, or deuise in such a cas Is this according to ye iustice, equitie, i differency, yt shulde be in such a prince, a your maiesty is, yt iustice & equitie shoul be so long peruerted wtout redresse & du correction, & be countenanced wt your cō¦mandement (as these men affirme) whic they abuse to the spoiling of men of the liues, liberty & goods. And whereas othe princes wer letted, either by seditiō or c¦uil war & other troblesom affairs, yt the haue no leisure to attēd to our cōplainte against ye papists, with such patience & in¦differency, as they ought to do in suche  case, it semeth yt god hath reserued & cōmi ed ye same vnto your maiesty, yt you shul lay aside al other your affairs & diligētly be occupied herein. And in this behalfe I besech your maiestie to take héed lest if i be great to your dishonor, to stād in ned
o the repetitiō of ye example of forraine & nike Princes in this case:The care that the heathen princes had in deciding their sub∣iects causes We reade ithridates sometime K. of Pontus did rne. 22. sundry lāguages, to ye ende that might be able to read & vnderstand the plications exhibited vnto hym, by any his subiects, of what nation or country euer they were, and do iustice to eche of e accordingly. Phillip the king of Ma∣onie thought it the chiefest thing that pertained to the maiestie of a king, to  daily in his chaire of estate at certaine ures to minister iustice to all his sub∣cts according to equitie: whose son Alex er folowing his fathers steps, did be∣ow certaine houres of ye day, to heare & termine the complaints & quarrells of s subiects, vsing to stop the one eare, bi∣use (as be said) he reserued it for ye defen∣nt. Thē if those heathē princes ye knew t Christe, nor Christian religion, did  greatlye endeuoure themselues to ap∣ease the controuersies that arose amōg heir subiectes. Howe muche the rather ight your maiestie, being a Chrstiā K.  encline your eares, and vse al diligence
to decide this quarrell of so great impo¦taunce, that it concerneth the saluatio of all. But I moste humbly beséech you maiestie diligently to peruse the precept that Moses wrote by Gods expresse com¦maundement, concerning the institutio and dutie of a Prince, Deut. 17.Deut. 17. speakin to the Israelites in this wise: When tho art come into the lande whiche the Lor youre God giueth you, and enioyest  and dwellest therein, if thou shalt saye I will sette a King ouer me lyke as a the nations that are about me, then tho shalt make him King whome the Lord thy God shall choose, euen one from amō thy brethren shalt thou make King ou thée, and thou maist not set one which i not of thy brethren: but he shall not mu¦tiplye horses to hymselfe, nor bryng th people agayne to Egipt, to encrease th number of horses, forasmuch as the lor hathe saide vnto you: Ye shall hencefort go no more that waye, also hée ought no to multiply wiues to himselfe, least hy hearte tourne away, neither shall he ga¦ther him siluer and golde too muche, an
when he is set vpon the seate of his king∣dome, he shall write him oute a copie of this law in a book before the priests, and it shall be with him and he ought to reade therein all the dayes of hys life, that hée may learne to feare the Lorde, and obey all the wordes of this lawe and these or∣dinances, for to do them, and that his hart arise not againste his brethren, and that hée tourne from the commaundement to the right hand nor to the lefte, but that he may prolong his dayes in his kingdome, he and his childrē in the throne of Israel. Whereby your maiestie may easily pr∣ceiue what is the proper and peculiar of∣fice of Kings and Princes, and what af∣fection they oughte to beare towards the study of holy scripture, wherein is con∣tained the expresse will of God, that all men alike shoulde giue themselues to the earneste sdy and care of religion, pie∣tie, iustice and equitie, againste whyche lawe of God they offende, whyche denye the reading of holy scripture, and the de∣cidyng of controuersies in religion to ap∣pertaine vnto Kings and Princes? It is
your office (moste mightye Prince) to take awaye from these vniuste iudges of the Romishe Courtes, if a manne maye call them iudges, that are manifestly de∣prehended in sacrilege.) It is your office I say, to take from them this authoritie of iudgemente, as due to youre selfe, and other princes in their dominions of aun∣tiēt right, that your maiestie might with indifferencye determine all these contro∣uersies, bring home again peace and trā∣quilitie vnto your countreis, reléeue and succour poore men that are moste cruelly persecuted, racked, spoiled, wounded, and condemned to the stake, breake the furye and outragious tiranny of these Terma∣gants, whiche vnder the colour and pre∣tence of Christian religion, doe persecute those that accompte nothyng so deare or precious vnto them as Christian religi∣on. Otherwise vnlesse youre Maiestie prouide some presente remedye for these calamities, what other issue can youre Maiesty looke for of these things, but that in stéede of moste faithfull subiectes to o∣bey you, and such as wil be prest and rea∣die
to spende both life and goods in yours Maiesties quarrell: you shall in the ende be no kyng of men, but onely of corses, some hanging on the gibbet or gallowes, some murthered in corners, some burned vnto ashes. For this one thing haue the inquisitours and their complices béene deuising and practising continually, and (no doubt of it) will (as they haue begun long since) bring to passe that these spoils of mens goods, wherby youre Maiestie, and youre Kingdome shoulde haue rea∣ped greate commoditie shall be transpor∣ted into forraine Countries to the greate decay of you and your realme of Spaine. And what doeth youre Maiestye thinke to bée the destruction of your people, the decaye of your realme, the empairing of youre Maiestye, and dammage to youre moste royall person? if thys bée not the verye confusion of all, they that prefer∣red the Monarchie, that is to saye, that kynde of gouernement, and that state wherein one ruleth, were moued so to do by the similitude & likenesse of mās body. For the king or chiefe ruler in a common
wealth maye aptely bée resembled to the heade in the naturall body, the Subiectes likewise to the inferiour members. And this similitude besides the resemblaunce of preeminence, and of subiection, doeth sufficiently declare vnto vs howe greate concorde, and what affection ought to bée betwixt ye rulers & the subiects: how vn∣resonable a thing is it thē, & how vnseme∣ly that the King shoulde wyth hys owne handes delyuer hys owne sworde into the handes of a madde man, wyth the whiche, he may cutte in sunder the mem∣bers of the Princes owne bodye, mangle them, disseuer them one peece from an o∣ther, and yet hée as one without sense be∣holde it with his eies and permit it? who woulde not iustly meruaile at so greate follie and madnesse? or can youre Maie∣stye be ignorant hereof, that you are the person that playeth the same part in com∣mitting to the inquisitors your aucthori∣tie and power, as it were a naked sword into their handes, wherewith they maye cutte and hewe in péeces your Subiectes, the very members of that bodye, wherof
youre Maiestie is the heade, to the greate decaye of your people, and weakening of your estate? For example wherof, it may please your maiestie to consider the king∣doms nexte aboute, whose power and strength, being by these means empaired and decayed, both by lande and sea, haue fallen into moste miserable calamities, and haue bene constrained to praye aide of their enimies to succoure them in their extremities. I omitte here to declare howe farre this disagréeth from the good and iuste kinde of gouernment, described by the wise and beste learned in those af∣faires, for subiectes to bée not onely not defended, preserued, and vnder the prote∣ction of their soueraignes, nor aduaunced by them, but spoiled, oppressed, and most cruelly put to death and murthered. Aristotle in the bookes which he wrote of the state of common weales recordeth (not without great detestation of so hor∣rible a facte) that certaine Barbarians in time paste vsed this maner, that who∣soeuer entred into any place of regiment, before all things shoulde take a solemne
othe, that he shoulde do, nor saye nothing in fauour and behalfe of the people, nor séeke to kéepe concorde and loue among the people, as though loue and felowship would rather cause breach of lawes, than hatred and enmitie. What would Ari∣stotle saye then, if hée were alyue among vs againe? Is it not like hée would saye that the Princes of Christendome are of the same minde, affection and purpose, and that they had determined, conspired, and vowed the same with a solemne othe, that the people shoulde haue none more deadly foe and enimy vnto them, than the prince and ruler, by whose sufferance, commandement or negligence or dissem∣bling, or authoritie, euery good man shuld either be hanged, or banished, or impriso∣ned causelese, & without desert or crime eyther of fellonie, or murder or adultery, or anye suche like offences, but onely bi∣cause hée is contented (wyth hazarde of life and goodes) rather to obey the com∣mandement of God, than in leauing them to folowe the vaine fantasies and deuises of mans braine and the doctrine of false
hipocrites, the whiche thing shoulde bée more manifeste than the lighte of the aye euen to Princes themselues, if be∣fore they were haled so violentlye to most horrible execution, they myght be here∣in ye defence of their cause and innocency. Béesydes, what pleasure can a prince take which feareth not to incurre the ha∣tred of hys Subiectes, and whose con∣science pricketh hym, that hys people loue or regarde hym not as theyr fa∣ther or Captayne, but hate him as their ennimye: how can it bée, that that wo∣man shoulde beare anye good affection to∣wardes hym, whose tyranny hath bene the cause that theyr béeloued husbandes haue béene haled out of theyr armes, and putte to moste cruell deathe? howe can children honor hym that haue séene their parēts most cruelly persecuted and slaine before their faces, & al by his vnmerciful∣nesse. Will not all the whole people bée loath to put their life and goods in ieopar∣dye for him, who hath wronged and iniu∣ried thē most spitefully? The considerati∣on whereof, if it be but of small force to
moue your Maiestie thoughe they be ve∣ry weightie and worthy the marking of all sortes of people: yet let the name of Christian religion, of Christian beliefe, yea the name of Christ moue you, wher∣with we flatter and please our selues, and vaunt our selues aboue other. This bar∣barous tyranny leaue it to infidells, the very name of Christe shoulde be of force sufficient to moue your Maiestie belée∣uing in Christe, and therof bearing the name of a Christian, to haue an earneste zeale, and ardent affection to embrace mercie, charitie, and méekenesse of heart What was meant by the ceremonie of the olde lawe, when it was commaunded that Princes,For vvhat purpose kings vver anoynted. ere they tooke vppon them the gouernement of the state, should be annoynted wyth oile? anye other thing but in following the qualitie of the oile, they shal deserue the good will of the peo∣ple, by lenitie, mildenesse, and gentlenesse and consider that the vertue of the oile is to supple the olde sores, not to make any gréene woundes. And doubtlesse Christiā Princes oughte to be so muche the more
of gentlenesse, mildenesse, and chereful∣nesse, bycause they haue in chardge the people of God, the flocke of Christ, and is beloued spouse the Churche, whyche ey ought with their power and might oth to defende and aduaunce. And here t is worthy the noting, to shew the diffe∣ence whyche Christe putteth betwixte Christian and Ethnicke Princes in these ordes: The Kings of forrayn nations saith he) doe beare rule ouer them, in so muche that they bée both gracious wyth he people for their greate authoritie, and y an honourable title are called , that is to saye, beneficiall. Howbeit I woulde haue you bend another waye, hat the more one of you shall excell ano∣ther, hée béehaue hymselfe so muche the more lowely, and perswade himself, that he rather occupyeth the place of a mini∣ster vnto other, than a ruler of others: and this lesson did Christ teache his apo∣stles, howe muche more reasonable is it than to apply this to al Princes and ma∣gistrates? For they are not sette beside their chaire by this commandement, but
are called to the consideration of the owne weale, and to moderation and boū¦tifulnesse, that calling often to their re¦membraunce, and duely considering tha they haue obtained this preeminence a∣boue others by the onely grace and f of God: and that they ouer whome the beare rule, are not brute beastes, but  created of God, of the selfe same nature that they themselues be of, and that the shal be herafter partakers al of one king¦dome, and are the brethren of Christe, whiche did aswell shead his moste preci∣ous bloud for the moste base and simple soule, as for the moste mightie King an Prince of the worlde: Finallye that they are the members of one Churche, as i they were the partes of a naturall bodye, whereof none ought proudlye to aduance it selfe aboue the reste, but with all mo∣destie of minde, temperaunce, mildenesse and gentlenesse guide and gouerne their common wealth, to the common weale of their subiects, & yet in such wise, yt they do or enterprise nothing contrary to the cō∣maundement of god, who is king, & Lord
Paramunt aboue al other kings, & prin∣ of the earth. It is reported by the hi∣riagraphers, that when Octauius Au∣stus hearde a flatterer on a tyme, call  lord, he refused ye title, desiring rather be accompted a fellow citizen and ma∣strate among his subiectes, than to bée ffed vp with pride of so hautie a name. owbeit we wtout flattery desire to gyue to our princes the most honorable and rincely stile that wée can deuise, foras∣uche as wée knowe that their power d aucthoritie is established by Gods orde,The au∣thoritie of the Ma∣gistrate pro¦ceedeth from God. Rom. 13. so that they in like sort would take tie and compassiō vpon their poore sub∣ctes, making their humble supplicati∣s, and in moste lamentable wise com∣ayning themselues vnto them, and not ffer them before the cause bée hearde, r that they haue pleaded in their owne efence, to bée so wrongfully and shame∣ull putte to execution. And if this reason ught to moue al Christian princes to en¦line to mercy, howe much more oughte your Maiestie be persuaded to extēd mer∣cye & fauor towardes your poore afflicted
subiectes. For with howe many notabl and princelye giftes and ornaments ha God blessed and endewed your Maiestie to the ende that being so furnished y should employ them to the defence of hy Churche, either in part or in whole wit suche feruente zeale, as appertaineth  that behalfe. I omitte here the occasion I ha offred to speake of the excellencie, and an¦tiquitie of your maiesties house and fa¦milie: I will not enter into the discour of ye moste notable and famous victorie and triumphes of your moste noble pro∣genitors, namely and especiallye of th moste redoubted Emperour father vnt your maiestie, whose famous memori wyll bée conueied to al ye posteritie & con∣tinued for euer: one only vertue will I speake of, which I thinke praise worthy among ye residue of your moste noble qua∣lities & ornamēts namely your maiesties moste honourable inclination to gentle∣nes, curtesie and bountifulnesse, which ye hipocrits & pharisies vnder ye cloke & sha∣dow of religiō go about to extinguishe i
your grace, & rob your maiestie of ye due erued renowne & cōmendation for the ne, and by taking the sword out of your iesties hand abuse the same, to ye great rogation of your maiesties honour, to  sheding of muche bloud in your domi∣ons both far and néere, boasting that ey doe it by lawfull commission, and  your Maiesties aucthoritie and war∣t. If they that be your maiesties mor∣ll enimies durste enterprise thus much, n would in no wise suffer it, & can your aiestie abide that these so shamefull ings should be not only attempted, but t in executiō by, and against your own aturall subiectes, vnder your maiesties ountenaunce, and vnder coloure of your ucthoritie? And nowe that your maiesty ath intelligēce herof, it behoueth you to e vigilant, & be redie & willing to with∣tande these iniuries in this wise offered o your subiectes, to the performaunce wherof, your Maiestie hathe no néede of nye prouision in warlike sorte, nor no rmed men, nor greate barbed horses to erue in fielde, to the endomaging of your
realme and spoile of your towns and p¦ple, neither yet to entertaine any stran and forraine souldiors. For your real is full of many faithfull and moste obe¦ent subiectes. Neyther is it any forrai Countrey appertaining to your swor enimies, that you shall inuade hereby,  aboute the banishement of Turkes a Infidells oute of youre Realme and t confines therof, but to remoue and aba¦don out of all Christian congregation all idolatrie, and doting superstition, a the vaine fantasies and deuises of ma idle braine. And therfore our quarrell ¦ing not agaynste bodylye ennimies, b ghostly and spirituall, wée shall haue  vse either of brasen péeces or pikes,  stéele armoure,Armour and vvea∣pons vnne∣cessary in∣struments to remoue abuses. one onely sworde w suffise vs, to witte, the sworde of t Spirite, euen the worde, by the whyc wée maye easilye brydle Sathan, a breake his iawes, quench his fiery dart deface all Idolatrye and superstitio and plucke it vppe by the rootes. T whych sword both beautifull and to t eye, and seruiceable to be vsed, if it plea
your maiestie to take about you, I hope &  it wil shortly come to passe, that you l bring all your subiects of youre lowe ūtreys without the losse of any one mā  sheading one drop of bloud to be most edient to ye law & word of God, as they me bin heretofore most loyall, with all etifull submission vnto youre Maie∣es edicts and ordinances, whose dayly ayers vnto God are only that it would ease youre Maiestie to entermedle in ese matters that are in controuersy, and  determinine them with equitie as it all séeme beste to your wisedome, vsing fficient iudges on either parte, that by iendely and indifferent comparison of th the doctrines of the Papists, and of e Protestants, the euill part may yelde  the good, and your Maiestie sitte an in∣ifferent arbitratour betwixt them. But perhappes our aduersaries will ake answere, that there is henceforth  cause of triall by disputation, for as∣much as our religion hath ben long ago ndemned by many generall Councels, and by all vniuersities namely and prin∣cipally
at the councell of Constance, at which tyme by the sentence and awa of that Councell, Iohn Husse, and Hiero of Prage, were burned for maynteyn that error which Luther of late ren likewise at the counsell of Trent was ¦thers heresy condemned, so that there ¦maineth nothing, but present deathe  them that shal shewe themselues diso¦dient to the decrées and determinatio of councels, forasmuche as they are ¦come rebells, and haue fallen from t faith of their holye mother Churche: the whiche it is not vnknowen, how th all this their tiranny they shew to war vs, hathe taken hys originall and beg¦ning, whiche if a man woulde enter m narrowly into the consideration of, a diligently weighe the words thereof, t shoulde easily perceiue there is no suc matter of importance, why princes shu not be forwarde and willing to defen their subiectes from those lyons mouth which beare themselues so bolde, & boa of the name of the Churche, touchin the preiudice of the Vniuersities, whic
accompte oure doctrine hereticall, and so condemne it. They do al know rigt wel, and their consciences maye beare them sufficient record, that they speak not what they thinke, but for feare of punishment, or losse of their prefermentes and digni∣ties, or confiscation of goods, or for shame, or losse of lyfe, are enforced agaynste their conscience, as might appeare most manifestlye in the condemnation of that moste learned and godlye Doctour Iohn Egidio of Arragon, chiefe Cannon prea∣cher in the Cathedrall Churche in Siuil, where certaine that were iudges and ar∣britratours in the matter (whom the In∣quisitours do call Qualifiers of the cause) repenting themselues of the iniurie offe∣red to that good and godly man, did after∣wardes make protestation accordyng to the truth: whiche was also the cause that a certayne diuine called Maestro Blanco was burned, and Doctour Constantino de la Fuente after he had bin long time tossed to and fro, and vexed by the inquisitours, and caught a great sicknesse by reason of the continuall filth and stench of hys pri∣son,
at the lengthe tooke hys death of the same. And for the selfe same cause lyke∣wise were Ieronymo de Caro, and Luys de Metina, bothe Monkes of the order of Sainct Dominick, executed wyth dyuers other learned and godlye persons, whose names youre Maiestie is right well ac∣quainted withall. It may therfore please youre highenesse to consider thus muche, that if these men hadde indifferent iustice ministred vnto them, and frée pardon of spéeche, to speake frankclye what they thoughte, they woulde haue spoken most notably in defence of the truth. For the diuines and clergie of Spaine, had suffici∣ent trial aswell of their excellent learning as of their singuler vertue. And here I omitte to speake of the great residue, who agréeing in the same profession of faith, whiche the Protestantes of Germany doe professe, dydde with greate constancye of hearte, and stoutnesse of courage ende their miserable life by a far more ioyfull and glorious deathe amiddes the flames of fire. And among these diuines there, and vniuersitie, you shall perhaps fynd some
good men, and yet some so simple and rude diots (God wot) that they thinke it a∣gainste Gods forbod, to bée but one dram wiser than their maysters, (whyche like shepe that followe the belwether) depend wholly either of the Deane or rector (as they call him) of the Vniuiuersitie, or of he Abbot or prior of the couent, or some famous and notable doctour or graduat. And who knoweth not, that these bée the Popes owne tender dearlings, which be∣sturre them on al sides to kepe the coales of Purgatorye alwayes alyue? What iudgement then can they gyue on the o∣ther side: for the other partie, whiche ac∣knowledgeth no other Purgatorie, than the bloude of Iesus Christe, by the whi∣che all men of all tymes and ages were purged from the filthe of theyr synnes, and delyuered from eternall deathe and damnation. Concerning the councell of Constāce, all the world knoweth of what dispositiō Pope Iohn was, and what ear∣nest suters & Antipopes against hym for ye popedome, and what decrées and consti∣tutions were made at the same assembly, as also how all they that were at ye same
counsell wer affected in religion, it is eui∣dent to all the worlde, in that they condē∣ned those men to be burned, who laboured earnestly to haue enormities of the chur∣che reformed, and came not thither nother of themselues wythout sendyng for, but vnder promise of their safeconducte, safe∣ly to returne again. In somuch that that counsell is termed of many men in theyr writings a petie counsell, declaring therby that it was not an assēbly of the pastors and ministers of the Gospell, for the re∣formation and amendemente of the de∣cayed estate of the Churche, but rather of furious and diuellishe persons to ouer∣throwe the poore remanent of the church, forasmuche as at the same most trouble∣some time, thrée Popes were at greate variāce and dissention among thē selues, proclaymed open warre one agaynste an other, were all of them remoued, and in their places was Martine the fifte substi∣tuted Pope. But to speake somewhat in a gene∣ralitie concerning counsels, it is a playne matter, that he that is guiltie will neuer
giue sentence against himselfe. And ther∣fore the Counsell of Trent, whyche was purposely summoned & assēbled agaynst them that impugne the authoritie of the Pope maye aptely be resembled to a con∣federacie of theues and murderers, whi∣che assemble themselues togither in wods and deserte places, and there condemne also the inhabitantes bothe of the Town and Countrey aboute them, for that they lye in waite for them, and séeke to bring them before the Magistrate to examina∣tion. For what other thing do the Popes in all theyr counsells they call? Fyrste and formoste they appoint some strong Citie for the purpose, they prouide garri∣sons of Souldiours to guarde, and to de∣fende them from forraine force, they ba∣nishe al out of that assemblye, that would any wayes disagrée from them, or if they admitte them, it goeth néere to cost them their liues. And when they bée met togi∣ther, and mounted into their seats, thence they sende their threates and curses lyke shunder boltes thicke and thréefolde, to the greate disturbaunce and anoy of all
the world, threatning excommunication, warre, destruction, banishemēt, murder, and lastly fire and fagots. But to whom I beséeche you, do they send these their fiery dartes? Forsooth euen vnto suche a with hartie sorrowe and griefe doe com∣plaine againste them, and accuse them o moste horrible sacrilege, whereby they haue berefte the poore Christian people of their onely health and comforte Christ Iesus, for their own commoditie and ad∣uantage, that they might with more se∣curitie satisfye theyr filthie mindes with riote, ambition, and all kinde of abhomi∣nable luste. Wherefore I referre the matter to your most gracious considera∣tion and iudgement, whether anye such councells and determinations oughte t bée of suche force and power, wherein they claime vnto themselues, as it were by a speciall prerogatiue, an authoritie and iurisdiction aboue al Christian prin∣ces and Emperours, by vertue whereof they might commaund Princes, and rob and spoile their subiectes bothe of life and liuing at theyr pleasure: howe muche
more conuenient wer it to follow the ex∣ample of Constantine, who hauing intelli∣gence of the great quarrells & controuer∣sies that were betwixte the Arrians and the Christians, did not refer the matter to the aucthoritie of the Pope, but by hys owne authoritie called a councell, frée for euery man to resorte vnto, and sate him∣selfe meane betwixte two parts, as an e∣quall & indifferent iudge and arbitratour betwixt them: & when he had caste all the voices & sentēces of euery particular mā into one barrell, hée set thē on fire, decla∣ring himselfe to be chiefe & head of ye coū∣cell: & whē ye matter had bin long time de∣bated on both sides, he found a means to bring al to an vnitie, til Sathan began to stur in ye same matter, & so set thē at vari∣ance, & raised new troubles again. But if it be a matter of impossibility, or of great difficultie to call a generall coūcell togi∣ther, yet surely it is ye office & duty of eue∣ry christiā prince by some cōueniēt & suf∣ficient assēbly of his own subiects to pro∣cure peace & trāquilitie vnto ye church, by taking away al superstitiō and idolatry, which corrupt the puritie & simplicitie of
Christian religion, and are cause of muc vexation & vnquietnesse in the same. An therefore nowe it behoueth all our king and Princes to followe the good exampl of theyr predecessors, in employing thei care and study about preseruing and re∣storing the true worshippe and seruice o God, as did diuers Christian Emperors namely Theodosius, Iustinianus, Charles the great, and sundry others, whose diligenc is singulerly and highlye commended o the auntient Fathers, specially of Augu∣stine in the booke of the reproofe of the Do∣natistes.Epist. 73. Pope Leo in hys .73. epistle doeth earnestly aduise the Emperor so to esteme of his princely estate, and dignitie, as cō∣mitted vnto hym, not only for the gouer∣naunce of Cities by ciuile pollicie, but also for the defence and aduauncement of the Churche by ecclesiasticall discipline. Gregorye the firste dydde maruellouslye commende the diligence vsed by Ricare∣dus king of the Gotthes, in rooting out the heresie of the Arrians. Isidore sometyme Bishoppe of Siuill (as Gratian reporteth) said that princes shall be plagued in time
to come, for suffering the Churche to goe o ruine, which god committed vnto them o foster and cherishe (as saith the spirite f God by the mouth of his holy prophete Esay.) And there is no mā that doubteth ut that the Pope will doe all that lyeth n him to hinder the assemble of prouinci∣ll counsells. Whereby hee doeth mani∣festly bewray bothe the weakenesse of his wne cause, the vanitie and corruption of his doctrine, and the dispaire he hathe in che of both. For who knoweth not, or hath not hearde tell of the greate commi∣nations which Paule the third sometime thundred partely by letters, and partely by his Legates agaynste the Emperoure your Maiesties father of famous memo∣rye, onely bycause hée determined to call a Nationall councell of the states of Ger∣many, to the intent to reconcile and bring to vnitie the Princes of Germany, whose religion and profession we teache & main∣taine in your Maiesties lowe countries: but if the Pope doe truste to the equitie and right of his cause, why is he so loath to haue it bearde and debated, & so feare∣full
to put it to comprimise and arbitr¦ment of Princes? Why trauaileth he t haue their bookes burned of whome he  accused. For if oure accusations be vaine, bée false and fained, what caus hathe hée to feare them? Doubtlesse the woulde fall of themselues wythout any force. Forsooth the Pope and his clergy and the Inquisitors perceiue right well that the people, whyche in tyme to for haue bin blinde and ignorat, haue now their eies and vnderstandings opened, t sée and perceiue their iuggling trickes and moste horrible abuses: and therefor they haue no care, nor zeale at all of pro∣moting true religion, but onely laboure to suppresse oure writings, and to stoppe the passage vnto Princes eares, that the people cannot haue frée accesse to make their complaint to the soueraigne prince, practising all meanes they can deuise to entangle the consciences of men in theyr moste durtie dregges of superstitious ce∣remonies, and treading vnder their féete the moste comfortable Gospell of oure sa∣uiour Christe. It maye please your Ma∣iestie
therefore, to consider and weighe hat greate profite can arise to youre ealme by these their cruell and horrible dictes and proclamations. For admitte hat youre graces Subiects do embrace he Romish religion by force and coertiō, urely those that loue true Religion sin∣erely,The incō∣ueniences that ensue vvhere re∣ligion is forced. and from their heartes will suf∣fer all extremitie before they will submit themselues vnder that yoke of Tiranny againe. But if you doe still licence the inquisitors to vse their accustomed cruel∣tie towardes them, howe déepely shall youre grace heape vengeaunce vppon youre owne heade, in suffering so manye of youre Subiectes to perishe, for whose cause Almightye God doeth so bounti∣fully blesse all nations, and multiplye the fruites thereof infinitelye, for their sustentation and nourishement: as for their soules they are frée, notwythstan∣ding from sense of any of these torments whiche the bodye endureth, as maye ap∣peare moste manifestly by that notable saying written in the book of wisedom. The soules of the righteous be in ye hāds of ye L. & ther is no tormēt yt toucheth thē.
Verily in the iudgemente of the foolish  they séeme to dye, and their ende is thou¦ghte to be euill, and their departure fro among vs to be miserable, where as  very déede they are in safetie. For thoug they be tormented in the sight of men, ye great is their hope of immortalitie, an for a little punishment suffered here, the attaine to merueilous greate benefites  for God dothe trye them, like as golde i tried in the fornace, and finding them fi for hym, accepteth them as a pure and  perfecte sacrifice. And therefore at suche  time as god shall take care of them, they  shall shine & shall run like sparkes of fire in dry réedes, they shal iudge ye nations,  gouerne the people, and be vnder the per∣petuall protection and safegarde of God, vppon whom, whosoeuer repose theyr truste, they shall vnderstande the truthe, and of louing affection cleaue vnto hym wyth all faythfulnesse: for grace and peace shall happen vnto hys holy ones, and hys Electe shall bée hadde in re∣garde, but the wicked and vngodly shall
bée punished according to their owne de∣tes, for neglecting the truth and god∣nesse, and forsaking the Lorde. For they at despise wisedome and learning, are iserable, and their hope is vaine, theyr oure loste, and their workes fruitlesse nd vnprofitable. Thus farre that wise mā ste wisely. Moreouer, if your maiesties ubiectes of the lowe Countries, either r weakenesse of minde, or frailtie of bo∣ye, fearing the extremitie of torments, hall rather fall from the knowne truthe, nd renounce Christe and hys religion, han patientlye and manfullye to suffer eath, your grace shall encrease the facte nfinitely in greatnesse of mischiefe (for∣asmuche as your grace thereby shall not onely destroy their bodies, but also theyr soules, to euerlasting death and damnati∣on. In whiche respect a farre more peril∣lous iudgement dependeth ouer youre heade by the hande of God, who hath spo∣ken by his son Christ in this wise: Looke with what measure yée measure vnto o∣ther, by the lyke it shal also bée measured vnto you. O moste terrible and feare∣ful
iudgement, if that moste seuere a iuste Iudge, doe purpose to execute th same vpon our bodies, and soules, an in his wrath drawe oute his sworde  shew vengeance vppon vs. Besides this who séeth not howe greate a blotte an stayne it is to the name of a christian, t practise so great tyranny which maket forreyne nations, as the Turks, Iewes and Indians to abhorre christianitie, a the cause of so greate troubles, warres and persecutions. What shall I néed here to reherse that hēce as out of a hea and spring infinite quarrels, dissentions and mortall enmities haue issued an procéeded. Forasmuch as no continuanc of tyme can be able hereafter to wear out of the memorie of the posteritie, th horrible crueltie and tyrannie that hath bene practised by confiscation of goodes & landes, rasing of houses to the ground, destroying of families, and lastly in bur∣nyng their corses, after long and loth∣some imprisonment. Lykewyse who wold not deme those Princes to bée moste vnhappie whome,
their subiects haue in hatred and disdayn, se persons although they be strongly arded, can not for al yt be quiet in their nd. For the most sure and safest defēce  Prince, consisteth in the loue & good  of the people, and they ar thought to  strengthned accordignly as they bée nded: And to haue so many souldiors defend them as they haue trusty frēds illing subiects to obeye & serue them. st of al,The armor of Christi∣ans against persecutiō by silence and hope. whereas all the professours of  Gospell are not all alyke taught and structed in true pietie and godlynesse,  so muche that manye are withoute at Christian pacience whiche GOD  earnestely requireth in tymes of ad∣ersitie and persecution, in commanding  rather to praye for oure ennimyes  persecutoures, than to reuenge in∣rie wyth doyng the lyke againe: they  saye, eyther for impacience of mynd,  for the hatred they beare vnto suche fences, doe putte on theyr Armoure gaynste theyr owne fellowes and com∣anyons, and dare presume to committe he tryall of the quarrell to the sworde.
Albeit in my opinion this is a thing fa vnsitting the godly zeale, mildenesse p¦ence and forbearyng that shoulde be i Christian man. But yet forasmuche it doeth come to passe many times, I séech your Maiestie (moste gracious so raine) to weigh and consider how ma greate mischiefs and inconueniences ensue of this ciuill dissention and disco robbing, spoiling, and murdering wi out measure, honest matrons are corr¦ted, chaste virgins defloured, mens goo and substauece taken perforce, all kin of murther and manquelling put in pr¦ctise and exercise, some by the sword some by fire euen in their owne house some shall be slaine with the sworde, so burned wt their houses ouer their head sowe drowned in the riuers, whereby t aire infected with the filthy corruption  the dead carcasses, bredeth a plague, wh¦che is alwayes incident vnto warres, an commonlye accompanyed wyth great dearth, bycause where tumultes and v rores be raised, there can be no tillage husbandry maintained. And what then
when the countrye and common weal ath bene so sore shaken and wasted, it is ot possible within twentie yeres or mo,  recouer the losse, and to be in as perfect lighte againe, as it was before: for af∣er that weapons haue putte lawes to si∣ence, and men acquaynted themselues with spoile and rapine, and the sheding f bloude, it is a verye harde matter to ring the people to order, and agréemēt, nd vtterly to breake them of their olde aunte, that they learned in war.Forced re∣ligiō hard∣ly taketh depe roote In the hear Moreo∣er, what shold it auaile either your ma∣estie or vs youre subiects? or what esti∣mation would Christ haue of it, if men shoulde by violence, and by tyrannye bée brought to allowe of the Popish doctrine (admitting it to be true.) For whosoeuer professe anye religion against theyr own consciences as we sée by daily experiēce, do neuer embrace the same sincerely, and from their heartes, but contrariwise be∣come more frowarde and waiward, or to what purpose is it to ouercome a man by extremitie of tormentes, and by feare of deathe and to make him recant, and saye
that the Romishe religion is consonante wyth the Gospell of Christe, or rather to be the very Gospell it selfe, if the partye notwithstanding be contrarily affected in his harte, and thinke with hymselfe se∣cretely and in his owne conscience, that he is to be detested as the very and vn∣doubted Antichriste, and that all hys ad∣herents, which séeke to driue simple men to their moste filthy doctrine by terrors & by tormentes, bée the Popes féed hang∣men and executors. As for example, your maiestie knoweth full well, and can te∣stifye, that those whiche haue continued in youre maiesties realme of Spaine to this day, both Iewes and Turkes, could neuer be brought by compulsion, or by a∣nye violence to allowe of oure religion. And albeit they were baptised, that is to saye, outwardely washed wyth the ele∣ment, yet notwithstandyng they neuer forsooke their olde heresies, but embrace them tooth and naile, in so muche that the Inquisitours haue worke inough wyth thē, and are plentifully enriched with the eschetes that growe vnto them by th
Iewes and Turkes: and therfore it is a playne matter, yt there is no true religiō except it be freely & sincerely receiued and beléeued. For the outward shew and be∣hauior of the body, be it neuer so Saint∣lyke in appearaunce, is altogyther both vnprofitable to the partie, and displeasāt and odious vnto god,The vvay to vvinn men to Christia religion. except the sincere af∣fection of ye heart & conscience of man bée ioyned with yt outward professiō: yt which we cannot attaine vnto, but only by leni∣ie, grace, & mercie, gētlenesse, & by frend∣ly conferēce & persuasiō, by ye imitatiō of honesty, and integritie of life, by pouring out praiers vnto god without ceassing, ye  wold please him of his infinite goodnes & mercy to encline & mollifie their harde heartes to ye study of true religiō, & to take awaye al threates of tormēts, al feare of ire and murdering one of another: And I dare auowe it to youre Maiestye (moste gracious soueraigne) that they whyche goe aboute so to moue you vnto rueltie, bearyng you in hande, that to ée the onely waye to make peace in youre lowe countrie, those I saye I dare
auowe, and doe openly proteste, do gy you suche councell, as is muche against the weale of youre Countrey, and most derogatorye to youre honour and prince¦ly Maiestie, séeking onely to enriche an aduaunce themselues by your incommo¦dities, and to sette other men togither b the eares, that they maye in the mean while fall a rifling and scambling, and ob¦taine a greate praye. And why can we not learne to beware by other mens ex∣amples? hathe not experience proued i true euen in our nexte neighbours adioy¦ning, that wheras some proude and am¦bitious counsellers, that soughte thei owne priuate lucre vnder pretence of re¦ligion, did moste cruellye entreate man good and godly persons: they themselue haue séene, that the mo they persecute and putte to deathe, the mo did arise an spring vp againe daily, as it were of th ashes of the other. For it is moste true that was sometime saide of a wise and godly person, that the bloude of the mar∣tyres is the séede of the Gospell. Wher Stephen was stoned to death,Act. 8. the blind
Pharisies thought that the Church was tterlye destroyed: notwithstanding it came otherwise to passe, that it encreased wonderfully thereby,Hereto maye in a sorte be applied that of the Poet. Niti∣mur in veti∣tum semper cupimusque negatd est. VVee striue for that vvee moste are forbidde. as testifyeth saint Luke in his booke that hée wrote of the ctes of the Apostles. Wherevppon that perverse and wicked councell beganne to e condemned, as a thing that had done muche harme, and no good at all, not on∣lye to the Churche, but to the common weale. And therefore after that Princes had graunted libertie to euery one fréely to say their opinion of religion, and that was determined and resolued vpon, that was moste consonant vnto the worde of God, peace was foorthwyth restored a∣gain, and had continued, if it had not tur∣ned all thinges topsie turuie agayne, by vnruly Popes. But forasmuche as I knowe myne owne weakenesse and my poore estate, I can hardely hope that my aduice can haue anye credite with your Maiestie: howbeit I moste humbly beséeche you to vouche∣safe in this one pointe to followe the ex∣ample of them that be sicke and diseased,
who perceiuing by proofe that the prescr¦ptions of the experte Physitions doet them no good, will sometyme vse the ad¦uice also of the empirikes, as they cal them, and those that be merely Practic¦oners, bycause it happeneth sometym that chaunce is better than cunning, an that these shal doe more good by theyr ex¦perience, than the other by methode an booke learning. As did lykewise Pharao i my opinion, who when he could not lern the interpretation of his dreame at th handes of his witches & soothsayers, wa not ashamed to aske counsell of poore Io∣seph, that was in prison and bandes, b whose diuine wisedome and foretellyng he prouided for the dearth that was t come in Egypt. Wherfore consideryng my poore estate, being brought almost to penurie in these moste miserable dayes, and that I am not greately fauourous with your highenesse, I doubte not but those that be of your maiesties counsell will deride my trauaile bestowed herein, & disdain therat, that I shuld be so bold as to presume to perswade your maiestie to
things cleane contrary to ye aduise is giuē you by them: but time (I trust) shal de∣clare which of the two is the better coun∣sell. For whereto goe they aboute to per∣swade you? forsoothe that youre Maiestie would establish a law, wherby your sub∣iects of the low countries (whō they fals∣ly charge with ye crime of heresie) shoulde be most cruelly entreated & put to death: but I to the contrarye rather, and that you should rather giue eare vnto Christ, who willeth you and all men to vse mer∣cie, gentlenesse, & compassion euen towar∣des those that shal erre out of the waye. Besids, your maiesty ought to consider yt this crowne & scepter is not giuen you to ye intent you shold kill & destroy your sub∣iects, but to defend & preserue thē, so that both pure religion & ciuile gouernement may be maintained amōg your subiects: neither is there any thing yt I more ear∣nestly desire & pray for, than yt your Ma∣iestie according to your honorable incli∣natiō to gentlenesse & mercy engrafted in you by nature, and the duty of a christiā magistrate, shuld be a mean to pacifie al
these ciuile warres and cruel persecutiōs in youre lowe countries, till you might in your owne person, make final ende of all controuersies, and determine all mat∣ters of religion by some lawfull parlia∣ment of youre Princes and estates. By whiche pacification, as it were by a kind of truce, there shal not only nothing hap∣pen derogatory to youre highnesse, but al they that dissent from vs and from oure holsome aduise and councell, shall easilye see, and perceiue, that they will not onely vndoe the common wealth, but also ca∣ry many soules with them into vtter de∣struction: and then shall the sequele of the matter plainly declare, whiche of vs hath giuen youre Maiestye more honeste and profitable aduice. Albeit wée oughte to praye vnto God moste hartilye, that hée suffer not their moste pestilent and perni∣cious councell to take that effecte, that they meane and séeke for. But to draw towardes an end (moste excellent Prince) I beséeche youre Ma∣iestie for oure Lorde and Sauiour Iesus Christes sake, the redemer of mankinde,
that you woulde in so weightie a cause as this, call vppon God for the aide and assistance of his holy spirite, who (I trust) will not faile you, if you committe your selfe wholy vnto him in all your dooings and enterprises, and do not followe the rude multitude, nor the importunate ex∣clamatiōs of these doctors, be they neuer so many in number, that can cry nothing, but crucifige, crucifige, war, warre, fire, fire, euen as it is reported of Achab, who ra∣ther folowing the iudgemēt of .400. pro∣phets, than the will of God, rashely and vnaduisedly entring into battell perished in the fielde:Micheas a∣lone prea∣cheth the truthe a∣gainste 400. false Prophets. 1. Reg. 22: Psalm. 34. Wheras if hée had rather leaned vnto the councel of poore Micheas: albeit in the eies of the world simple and abiecte, it had bene far better with him. For God oftentimes reueleth his secrets and hidden misteries, to base and obscure persons, and hideth them from the wise and noble in this worlde, neither oughte we to iudge of councell by the wisedome, or multitude, or nobilitie of men, but by the onely feare of God, who communica∣teth his secrete misteries to them that
feare and reuerence him, & that saying of an olde writer, is very true, yt those whi∣che will well guide & gouerne the commō wealth, must not so much haue regard to ye multitude of voices, as to examine and try them by the waighte & truth, whether they leane therto, or be grounded of coue∣tousnesse, hatred and ambition. And vn∣doubtedly if there be anye nation & coun∣try vnder your maiesties dominions, that deserueth to haue your fauour & clemen∣cie extended towardes it, it is this youre maiesties country of Flaunders, whyche hath brought vp ye most famous & noble Emperor your maiesties father, & nou∣rished your maiestie almost frō your ten∣der infancie, and borne so faithful allege∣aunce towardes you, that she may wor∣thily think hirselfe to be preferred before al other: how can your maiestie then, but shew pitie & compassion towardes youre faithfull & obedient subiectes, the inhabi∣tantes thereof, howe can you suffer the bloudthirsty ouer them, & not deliuer thē, how can you but giue eare vnto their pi∣tifull complaintes, which they doe dailye
make vnto you, crying oute in moste pi∣tious sorte, that they are most cruelly en∣treated, tormented & murdered by youre ministers and officers. What shal it néed me to rehearse their most curteous vsage & entertainmēt towardes strangers of al nations & countries wherein they doe far excéede al other,Flaunderrs a place of good enter¦tainment. & doe allure & draw ther∣by great resorte vnto them, in so much yt there is none more worthy to enioy per∣fect peace & trāquilitie thā this? For wher haue ye Italians ye best entertainmēt? very∣ly in Flaūders: where do the Frenchmen soiorne moste to their contentatiō & plea∣sure? forsooth in Flaunders: where is the moste famous & plētifull marte for ye Al∣mains the englishmē, ye Scots, ye Turks? where but in Flaūders? I reporte me to youre selfe al ye yt be of the Spanish nati∣on, what good cause you haue to estéeme Flaunders, as youre moste deare and tender nourse, whiche hathe aduaunced you to highe preferments and dignities, and prouided you wealth to enriche you abundauntlye. For in what place of the world haue ye
bene better aduaunced by mariage than here in Flaunders, whether your respect, honestie, or pleasure of societie? where haue euer anye suche virgins so beau∣tifull and amiable in countenaunce, and so well borne, bene so fréely bestowed in marriage, euen vnto such as had nothing to take vnto, by meanes whereof they haue afterwardes attained vnto greate wealth, and bene aduaunced to places of dignitie and honoure. And therefore I maye well exclame against vnthankful∣nesse, forgettyng so greate benefites, permitte suche moste pestilent and cruell enterprises, to bring those men in daun∣ger both of life and landes, that haue de∣serued so well at youre handes. And for the other, wyth whome yée deale so vn∣thankfully, what opinion can they haue hereafter of suche vnthankefull people, causelesse, yea contrary to their deserte, to enter into their countrey, inuade, spoile, waste it: and whereas they ought by all meanes to procure the Prince to extend mercy and clemency towards the subiectes, do incense the Prince againste
them: and with the breath of their mali∣cious breaste puffed into hys eares, doe kindle hys wrath and indignation, to vse crueltie and tyrannye towardes them, whose most iust cause (being a quarrel of religion) could neuer obtaine to come to hearing, as right & reasō is it shold, least they might be thought to giue sentēce of the cause before they heard it debated. But of a number of moste horrible facts to remēber vnto your maiestie one, I beséech you to giue eare to a thing that happened at Antwarp in mine own sight and presence, but to my great griefe and sorrow, the twelfth of March anno. 1567. When as certayne Cities of Henhault wer sacked and spoiled, by desperate and furious persons, and all the Citizens in great daunger and distresse, the inhabi∣tants thought to flée and to leaue to their ennimies bothe houses and goods, rather than  yéelde to theyr furie and rage. And therfore escaping through the fields is the number of .1000. persons, and hea∣ring that the horsemen woulde set vppon them, they determined to drawe as nighe
to Antwarpe as they coulde, thinking thereby either to saue themselues, or to obtaine some reasonable conditions of peace: but if the enimy shoulde make any assault vpon them and offer any violence, they determined rather manfully to re∣siste, than cowardely to yéelde. Albeit this determination of their in mine opinion doeth muche differ from the pacience that is commaunded vs in the Gospell: but indéede all that pro∣fesse the Gospell, doe not followe the preceptes of the Gospell. When as the poore soules hadde fledde vnto the walles of Antwarpe, as it hadde béene to a Sanctuarye, hoping that by meanes of the Lordes of the Towne, there myghte some order bée taken for theyr safetye, and the auoiding of theyr pre∣sente perill, a greate number of horse∣men and footemen fell vppon them on a sodayne, beyng wythout armoure and weapon, and hauyng more confidence of their safetie in flighte, than in fighte, shewed vs a moste lamentable specta∣cle of a moste bloudy and cruell slaugh∣ter,
neyther vsing mercye towardes them that prayed mercye: nor pitying th complayntes and lamentations that fell prostrate at theyr féete, and caste away their weapons: nor regar∣ding them that fledde, and hidde them∣selues in caues and corners (whych thin∣ges are wonte to assuage the furor of the most fierce enimy in the world) but ranne some of them thorow with their swords, others they fiered in the barnes and out∣houses where they fiedde to hide them∣selues: other they shotte at wyth pistolets and barque busiers: others they drowned in the riuer, others they hanged vppon gibbets, other they caste into moste fil∣thye dongons, where they dyed in moste miserable tormentes. The Citizens of Antwarp beholdyng this sorrowfull sighte from the walles of their Citie, bewailed theyr case, and this most piteous sight, with such shrikes vppe to Heauen, and suche signes of sor∣rowe and compassion, as was possible to bée vttered. For the women behelde their owne husbands slaine most mise∣rably béefore their faces, the children saw
the throates cutte of their owne fathers al other their kinsemē, or allies, or friend and acquaintaunce moste cruelly slayne and murdered, in so muche that it séemeth to be rather a rauening of brute beast than a skirmishe of men, and conflicte of Christian people. The whiche most hor∣rible examples of crueltie and brutishe butcherie, if your Maiestie had behelde and séene, it coulde not be, but you should haue ben preuoked to sheading of teares, and inwardly moued with pitie and com∣passion towardes them. For men by na∣ture wil haue compassion one of another, and howe muche then ought youre highe∣nesse sincerely and vnfainedly to vse the like towardes youre naturall and Chri∣stian subiectes. In the mean while, they of Antwarp pretending to helpe and succoure these poore afflicted, so beset on euery side with their enimies, some broke the bridges, some locked the gates of the Citie, other that would be thought to be more faith∣full and loyall to your maiestie, than the rest, sent certayne spies, who vnder the
pretence of friendly talke, should betray the poore and miserable wretches, others gatte them into cockbotes and whirries, to compasse them by water, that were already beset on euery side by lande, and so stoppe their passage all wayes, preten∣ding that they didde all this, leaste they shoulde be worse thoughte of, as béeyng scarcely your maiesties dut ful and faith∣full subiectes. What opinion thinke you, would the Turkes and Iewes, and other forraine and vnchristned nations haue of Christi∣an religion, if they shoulde eyther haue séene these thinges, or at the leaste, if it come but to their eares, what affection coulde they beare towardes the name of a Christian? what way woulde serue to bring them to embrace, and to professe the Gospell, when they themselues deale more indifferently with vs in the lyke ca∣ses? For those whome they haue ouer∣come, they either permit to departe pay∣ing theyr raunsom, or kéepe them in pri∣son vntouched. But wée false harted and Pharisaicall Christians, leaue no barba∣rous
and deuillishe tyrannye vnpractised towardes oure bretren and euen Chri∣stians, onely bycause they will not em∣brace the Romishe religion, but cleaue faste to the commandemēts, and doctrine of almightie god. And what more? For∣sooth the whole Citie of Antwarpe riche in treasure, beautifull in buildings, very populous, and of greate resorte was in great daunger and perill of vtter subuer∣sion, if almightie God of hys goodnesse had not put to hys helping hande at that instant, and preserued the citie. For the protestants being touched with that vn∣worthy fight of the miserable slaughter of their parents, brethren, kinsemen, al∣lies, and friendes, put themselues in ar∣mour to the number of fiftéene thousand: and to helpe them in this distresse, some practised to open the gates of the Citie, and to issue oute and rescue them, some placed men in array in the streates, other filled the houses wyth armoure and ar∣med mē to be in a readinesse for defence, that they myghte saue themselues, and the Citie from the ennimy, if they should
offer anye violence, yea some of thē were in suche a furye and rage, that they moste desperatly broke into ye common armory and store house of the citie, and into those places where were certaine péeces, spe∣cially mounted to kepe off the ennimye. In whiche greate confusion and hurlye hurly of the whole citie, what feare think you the whole Citizens wer in? for mine owne parte I wot, what I then thought, and thinke yet, that I neuer sawe a more horrible and lamentable sighte in all my life, than to sée euery man readye to run another through wtout respecte or choice. In the which tumultuous sedition, what profitte coulde youre maiestie hope shuld growe vnto you? or what woulde the ouerthrowe and destruction of the Citie haue auailed you, beyng either the chiefe Citie vnder youre Maiesties dominion, or at the leaste not inferiour to the beste and chiefest whatsoeuer? But to let these thinges passe, and to consider diligentlye wyth oure selues, what is the iudgement of God in these our affaires? for we must doubtlesse one
day al appere before hys dreadefull seate of Iudgement, and giue an accompte of our déedes be they good or bad. And what shall it auaile vs, if we flatter our selues in oure owne deedes, or pleade not guiltie to the facte, and the Iudge find vs giltie, and pronounce sentence vpon vs of euer∣lasting paine and woe. Neyther doe I speake these things, as allowing the rashe & vnaduised attempts of these Protestantes, which go about to resiste force by force, & as it wer to driue backe one naile wyth another. For I know, (I thanke God of hys grace ther∣fore) howe greate pacience, lowlinesse, and humilitie the Gospell requyreth of them that will be professours thereof: but I bring it in rather to this ende and pur∣pose,A perillous matter to riue a multitude nto de∣paire. to giue your Maiestie to vnderstand howe perillous and dangerous a matter it is for Princes, that their subiects shuld bée driuen to extreme desperation. It is an olde sayde sawe: The multitude is a monster wyth manye heades, whyche beyng distressed and in despaire of life, forgetteth both himselfe and hys duty to∣wardes
God, and rayseth manye tymes greate tumultes and vproares. And ther∣fore many mightie Princes and Monar∣ches haue oftentimes either pardoned or winked at those matters, wherein the whole multitude hathe bene faultie, by∣cause (as saith the Poet) They haue no other hope, but boldely giue the aduen∣ture and trye extremities, when all extre∣mities are feared. So that a common er∣rour séemeth as it were of good righte to challenge a generall pardon, althoughe the prince wer very well able to reuenge and punishe the same. As wée acknow∣ledge your Maiestie to be: but that god of his infinite goodnesse and prouidence hath endued your grace with such méeke∣nesse and mercifulnesse, that if there were anye that were obstinate and rebelling a∣gainste you, you were not onely able to subdue them with youre maiesties might and power, but also to win them by your moste gracious vertues and bounties. Albeit in this case here is neither feare nor suspition of any rebellion, when as youre Maiesties subiectes for the auoy∣ding
of present perill doe flée their coun∣trey, desiring nothing more hartily than that they might haue accesse to your ma∣iestie, and pleade their cause before you, and professe the Christian religion, and shewe their dutifull and obedient hartes to your maiesty, as vnto their most dread and redoubted soueraigne. But what thing should be of greater force to moue youre maiestie,The cle∣mency of Charles the ifte to∣vvards the Spaniards hat rebel∣led. than the example of the Emperoure your father, who perceiuing ciuile war to bée a brée∣ding, al Spaine in a tumulte, not muche after he was crowned king, woulde ney∣ther bée auenged of the iniuries of the people, nor chastise them by his lawe, but established the Lawe  and made open proclamation, that al shoulde be bothe forgiuen and forgotten: where∣by he gatte suche good will, and so obtay∣ned the heartes of his people, that the re∣mēbraunce of his excéeding loue and cle∣mencie towardes his subiectes, will en∣dure while the world lasteth. As I doubt not but youre Maiesties subiectes of the lowe countries woulde in lyke case doe,
if they might haue experience of lyke clemencye and pardon at youre graces handes. But perhappes some of youre coun∣sellors aboute you, hearing mée speake so muche in commendation of a gene∣rall pardon, will suspecte that I goe aboute craftylye to insinuate my selfe into youre graces fauour, and thinke that I pleade not so muche the common cause of my Countreymenne, as mine owne priuate case, for the satisfying of whom, and to the intent that they maye plaine∣lye vnderstande my verye hearte and conscience, I aunswere in this wise, wythout all dissimulation: That I haue a greate desyre and an earnest af∣fection towardes my deare countrey, and my dearely beloued parents and friends. and féele the lacke of them, by being ab∣sente from them, and wishe with all my hearte that almightie God would vouch∣safe so to shine vppon youre Realme of Spaine with the beames & brightnesse of his gospell, that al Idolatry & superstitiō might be remoued thēce, & quite abando∣ned,
so that al we whych are banished, and liue in exile from oure natural countrey, mighte returne thither in safetie againe: for otherwise (as the case is at thys pre∣sent) wée ought rather choose to remayne: in pouertie, penurie, néede persecution, banishement, and to suffer al other extre∣mities that shall betide vs patiently; than to defile oure soules with wicked and su∣perstitious Idolatrie. And for mine own part, I haue much to giue God thanks for, and by his grace will be alwaies mindefull of hys greate Graces and bountyes towardes mée, that hathe of his prouidence so aided and assisted me in al this my pilgrimage, that suche as had neuer séene mée, nor knowne me before, haue bene very beneficiall to∣wardes me, as if they had bene fathers vnto me, or some speciall friendes. And therefore I haue no cause to thinke my selfe a straunger or pilgrime in those pla∣ces, whether the Lorde hymselfe hathe broughte me, and so prouided for me, that he hath stirred me vp many friends and wel willers, in places wher I do becom,
who like so well of me and my company, that they bothe visite manye times very curteously, and entertain me lesse friend∣ly, when I resorte vnto them. The whi∣che thyng was a speciall occasion that moued me to go to Antwarp: for I went not thither of any vnconstancy or flitting brayne, neyther came I béefore I was welcome vppon any purpose to trouble the state of the common wealth with no∣uelties and innouations, or to helpe for∣warde the tumultes that then were ray∣sed and to make them worse. For I pro∣test vnto youre Maiesty vpon myne othe, and will besides proue by euident testi∣mony, that I was earnestly required by many mēs letters and entreaties to come to thys Citie aboue foure moneths ere I came thither, and therfore if your ma∣iestie haue conceiued anye sinister opini∣on of my comming thither, by meane of some false and vntrue reportes, I besech your maiestie to remoue the same. For this is, and euer hathe béene, and shall be my minde and will, to serue and obey your maiestie, and especiallye to preach
the Gospell of peace. As for tumultes, sedition, rebellion, and discorde, I abhorre them from my hearte, and detest them worse than a tode, or present plague: nei∣ther was I euer of that minde, that any good coulde arise to the encrease and set∣ting forwarde of the Gospell, by sedition and discorde: but that it was a great hin∣draunce rather to manye weake consci∣ences, and an vtter vndooing to the whole estate of the common weale, as I haue alwaies thoughte and taughte bothe pri∣uately and openly, as often as opportu∣nitie serued me thereto. Mary true it is, that I am at this present purposed to de∣parte againe: for though the great good will and curtesie which the Citizens and others of this Countrey doe shewe mée, as also the earneste zeale and affection they beare towardes mée, doeth ioye mée maruelously: yet notwithstanding séeing suche preparation on eche side of men for war: and hearing nothing but the sound of armoure, and that there is nothyng in euerye mans mouthe, but horse
and armoure, and Souldiours, shotte, and pellet, and preparation to besiege, and to batter holdes and castels, to make poile and hauocke of all, to kill and slaye n all sides, I thoughte it better for mée to wante my deare friendes, than to bée tossed in thys sorte, and ouerwhelmed with these tempestuous troubles. Finallye he that is faultlesse and gilt∣lesse in his own conscience, hath no néede to craue any pardon. And I take God to my iudge and recorde, that I haue pre∣termitted no part of my duty (as I trust) that appertayned to me to shew towards my Prince and Soueraigne. Neither wyll I at anye tyme when occasion shall be offered, be afraide or ashamed to shew my face in youre presence, or béefore a∣nye whome it shall please youre Maie∣stie to appoint to enquire of my faythe and conscience: bycause I sustayne my selfe wyth assurance of an vp∣righte conscience: the whyche if it shall in anye pointes disagrée from the deter∣minations of the late councell of Trent,
or from the Romishe doctrine, I force no greatly thereof, sith they are aduersarie to the doctrine of the Gospell: Neyther resteth it in the power of man to bée abl to beleue euerye thyng, what hymself willeth or listeth. For the spirite of God ingrafteth and imprinteth in our heartes and mindes, whatsoeuer is requisite and necessarye for vs to beléeue, whose sug∣gestion I earnestlye wythstoode aboue twentye moneths before I departed ou of Spaine, when as by my poore world∣ly wisdome and pollicie, suche as it was, I foresawe long before what greate pe∣rills bothe of life and goods hung ouer my heade, if I should forsake the Popes religion, and flée to Christes folde. For as the Apostle warneth vs: Such as wyl purelye and sincerely worshippe Christe all their life, shal incurre the hatred and displeasure of manye. Howbeit there is a singular comfort remaining vnto those that are faithfull in Iesu Christe, whiche reuealeth their consciences, whē they are assured, that these things happē not vnto them throughe their owne deserte.
Neither is there anye man I thinke, moste mightie prince) which in his own orrupte sense and iudgement would not ishe to followe some pleasing and plau∣ble religion, suche as shoulde fansie the eople, and offende none. But forasmuch s it hathe so pleased Almightie God by ys diuine prouidence, to saue mankinde nd to preserue hym from euerlasting pe∣ill throughe Iesus Christe crucified, so hat they bée partakers of hys death and assion, to the ende they might bée lyke∣ise partakers of hys resurrection: it re∣teth not in the power of the elect, & those hat are adopted into the inheritaunce of he euerlasting Kyngdome, to suppresse he force of the spirite, and to hinder hys worke, or breake his purpose and course, which vseth his force and efficacy in their mindes that bée thus elected and chosen, forasmuche as calling and adoption of God is franke and frée, without respecte f fauour or desert of any: for God whom e will, doeth lighten, and whom he will e blindeth: and who is then able to re∣siste hym?
And doeth not youre highenesse thin that your subiectes of the lowe countrie are hartily sorie and inwardely grieue to sée your Maiestie abhorre their relig¦on, whiche is built of so sure and certai a grounde, woulde they not be conten with al their heartes to purchase your fa¦uoure and good will, wyth the losse of a that euer they be worthe, that it myght be lawfull for them wyth safe conscienc to serue God sincerely, according to hy prescript worde? suppose you it not  maruellous griefe vnto them to want their owne naturall Country, their pa¦rentes, children, and wiues, and to wan¦der they wotte not whether, without an certain place of abode & resiāce, & to hau their life in hazard euery houre? Howbei they are miserably tormēted in their con¦science, and do féele terrible threates o gods spirit, yt set before their eies ye euer¦lasting torments prepared for them, tha for fauor and pleasing of men, forsake th knowne truth, or defile the seruice & ho¦nour they owe vnto God, by intermed¦ling it wyth Idolatrie and superstition.
Wherefore in moste humble manner, I eséeche youre Maiestie (moste gracious Prince) to haue compassion vppon youre oore afflicted subiectes of the low coun∣ry, whiche séeke to liue wyth a frée con∣cience, who if they coulde bée perswaded that the doctrine of the Romishe Church were pure and holy, or holsome for their soules, I am very well perswaded, and are affirme vnto youre Maiestie in their behalfe, they woulde neuer giue you, nor ny of your officers, any occasiō at all to be displeased wyth thē, much lesse haue a will to trouble and ouerthrow the estate of youre common wealth, by tumultes and ciuile warres, the whiche notwyth∣standing are laide to oure chardge, and that by the iuste iudgement of God. But to conclude thys matter nowe at the lengthe, and ceasse from troublyng your Maiesty any longer with my long speach, I thinke, and am verily perswa∣ded, that if it myghte stande wyth youre good pleasure to vndertake the hearyng of thys cause, you shoulde easilye iudge of it your selfe, that this holye and
godly zeale of your subiectes is not onely to be acquit and discharged of al punishe∣ment, but rather worthye to be greately estéemed and highly commended. And i you haue regarde to your owne honour and kingly Maiestie (which as the Philo∣sophers teache, shoulde be farre from ty∣rannie) if you consider those moste excel∣lent giftes and graces of your Maiestie most royal heart, among the which your clemencie, lenitie, and gentlenesse, i surpassing all the reste: (whiche are ma∣ny tunes wanting in men of high estate, and such as are placed in aucthoritie) you oughte rather to employe the same to the safegarde of all your Subiectes vniuer∣sallye, than to the hurte or destruction of anye one. For consider, that you are not to deale with brutishe and sauage beasts, but with those, which by the handy work of almightie god, are made like vnto your self in shape, are endued with naturall re∣son, as youre selfe, and be euen as you, Christians in profession and name, and your very brethren in Christe, hauing the same redemer and sauior that you haue,
being endued with the selfe same spirite, and they professing obedience to the com∣maundements of God, as your maiestie doth, beyng also your naturall subiectes. and submitting themselues like true and dutifull subiects to your Maiesties lawes and ordinaunces, and haue not bin vn∣faithfull at any time, or in any point hi∣therto, but séeme naturally to be enclined to all lowlinesse, loyaltie, sinceritie, sim∣plicitie, truth, & curtesie, but especially to a singular kinde of obedience and duti∣fulnesse, whiche hath appeared so abun∣dantly in them towards the magistrates and rulers, that they haue rather chosen to endaunger themselues, and to hazard all, and suffer greate extremitie, than to resiste your highnesse, or your highnesse officers. For it is euident, and to be pro∣ued, that wythin these .30. yeares, there haue bene executed for religion to the number of thirtye thousande and aboue, who in al their torments and anguishes, were neuer hearde to vtter any one word that sounded to sedition and tumult, or to the reuiling of any of their tormentors &
persecutors, but contrarywise did har∣tily forgiue them the wronges and iniu¦ries they had done them, and praied mos earnestly to almightie God, at the very laste instante of their life, for their con¦uersion and saluation. Who then can bée so harde or stony harted, as not to pitie these mē, and they cases? but weighe wyth youre selfe dili∣gently, and consider further what they woulde haue, where aboutes they goe, and what they desire. Is it for the main∣tainaunce of anye heresies agaynste the worde of God and holy scripture? no for∣sooth: what is it then? forsooth a moste iuste quarrell that youre maiestie, who are placed of god, their supreame head & gouernour ouer thē, might haue the hea∣ring, debating and determinatiō of their cause, the which thing, if you haue no cō∣uenient leysure presently to do, by reason of youre Maiesties manifolde & waigh∣tie affaires:The petiti∣on of those of the lovv countries. yet that it woulde please you to permitte them in the meane while to enioye the libertie of their consciences, the preaching of the Gospell, and exer∣cising
of true vertue and godlines, recei∣ued by tradition from the Apostles and Bishops of the primitiue Churche, and that they mighte haue youre Maiesties protection & warrant for the same, for the better safetie & suretie in this case, & if it please your maiestie, further to enter in∣to the search hereof, and to see howe great & horrible abuses and superstitious cere∣monies, the pope would intermedle wyth our religion: you shall easily perceyue how vnreasonable a matter it is. For it is very vnfitte and vnconuenient, that in the pure church of Christ, the most filthy & abhominable rites and customs of wor∣shipping their idolles & false gods, should be retained, which thing he laboreth ear∣nestly to bring to passe. And in the meane season, while the matter is referred & wholy reserued, till youre Maiestye maye conueniently haue the ordering therof, they of the religion, of the refourmed Churche and congre∣gation in the lowe Countries, proteste, that they will do nothing in case of reli∣gion, to the offence of the consciences of
the other sorte, which either of ignorance or for feare of afterclappes, sticke still to their popish ceremonies, and haue deter∣mined with themselues not to gainesaye nor withstande it: but will rather in way of charitie and brotherly loue, estéeme of them, as of their brethē, or deare friends, and praye vnto God for them continual∣ly, that hée woulde vouchsafe hereafter, when his good pleasure shall be, to lighten their heartes and vnderstandings wyth the light and shining beames of hys gos∣pell. And they doe also greately mislike the bolde attempts of children, and foolish women, and other abiect persons, that haue presumed, contrary to the willes of the wiser sorte, of their own heads with∣out aucthoritie or commission to plucke downe and to breake Images that stoode in the Popish Churches, the which rash∣nesse and headinesse, they do in no wise allowe, but thinke it a matter very incō∣venient, and farre vnmete for them to doe whiche desire to fauour and further common peace and tranquilitie among the people.
But perhaps some will obiect agaynst me,VVhether men of di∣uers religi∣on maye be at peace one vvith another. that where as be mē of diuers religi∣ons, there cā in no case vnitie & cōcord be maintained. But this question is not pro∣per to this time and place, but requireth some especial discourse at large, wherof I purpose godwilling to entreat, at some o∣ther conuenient leysure, & to dedicate it in like case to your Maiestie. And yet thus much wil I say by the way, yt those men, whiche be of that opinion, do greate iniu∣rye and wrong to Christian Princes, in derogating from them that wisedome, & worldly pollicie, whiche we may plainly sée to be in the aduersaries of our religi∣on. For who is ignorant, that the Turke doeth not onely permitte thrée seuerall sortes of religion in the Citie of Constanti∣nople, but dothe séeke to maintaine them? and yet there is as greate diuersitie bée∣twixte them as is béetwixte chalke and chéefe. For howe muche trowe you dothe the Turkes Alkoran differ from Moses lawe? Or what affinitie & likenesse hathe either of these twoo wyth Christian reli∣gion, séeing that bothe those sectes detest
and abhorre Iesus Christe our redemer & high priest? notwithstanding it is a mar∣uellous matter to consider what greate loue, what peace, what amitie and friend∣ship is among them in these common and ciuill affaires. How much more likelye is it then, that they which are partakers of one selfe redemer and sauior, the same Gospell, the very same spirit, & beliefe & profession, should liue and dwell togither in amitie and concord, considering they differ not so muche in the groundes and chiefe articles of religiō, as in the consti∣tutions of man, the worship of idolles & false gods, & certain foolish and vayne su∣perstitions and ceremonies. The Pope giueth en∣tertainmet to Ievves & levvishe ceremoniesWhat should I néed here to rehearse, that the pope himselfe is not ashamed not only to entertayne in his owne Citie and country, the Iewes, who be the very pro∣fessed enimies of Christ, to fauour them, to cherishe, to take them into his professi∣on, but which is moste shamefull and ab∣hominable aboue al other, to appoint the certaine churches, streats and dwelling places apart frō the Christians, in which
they may fréely & without controlement or interruption of any, renue the olde ce∣remonies and sacrifices of the Mosaicall law, the which are wholy abrogated and dissanulled, by the commyng of Messias & sauiour Iesus Christ, by which exercises, who is there of so simple consideration, but hée maye easilye perceiue howe foule a spotte of impietie and ignominie it is to the blemishing of the name of Christe. For if those things be of any vertue and efficacie nowe in these daies: then was it in vaine that Christe tooke thys fleshe vppon hym and came into thys worlde, and that his most cōfortable and whole∣some sacrifice, which he did vpon the aul∣tar of his crosse, is to be estéemed, but of little price. O notable lying and blasphe∣my, O moste horrible mischiefe and vil∣lanye vnneth to be satisfied wyth all the most terrible torments and punishments, that mā can deuise or endure. Wherefore, if thys holye man maye for hys priuate lucres sake, and on∣lye for hope of a little peltyng com∣moditye to bryng so hatefull and de∣testable
a kinde of religion into his coun∣tries and seignories, and into the societie and felowship of Christian people. How muche more reason is it, that youre Ma∣iestie shoulde embrace and receiue twoo manner of religions within youre Ma∣iesties Realmes and dominions, whyche haue some likenesse and agréement togy∣ther, forasmuch as they do both acknow∣ledge and confesse al one redéemer and sa∣uiour of mankinde, differing in effect on∣ly herin, that the one sorte affirmeth that we be fréely and of méere grace and fa∣uoure reconciled to God the father, by the redemption of oure Sauioure Iesus Christ, without any respecte of oure me∣rites, or paimentes of money? the other addeth to the perfecte and absolute worke of Christ, many other ceremonies and circumstances of their owne good déedes & merites. The which controuersie might very easily by compounded betwixt thē, if it woulde please youre maiestie to en∣termedle in thys matter, and to vse that aucthoritie which of right you ma, the whiche good worke and enterprise of re∣conciling
these two Churches toguther that are at this iarre betwixte thēselues, I am verily perswaded, would be moste profitable to your countrey and subiects, moste acceptable vnto God, mste glori∣ous to your highenesse, and sounde most to the continuance of youre honour and renowne, to all the posteritie, that euer youre Maiestie coulde or maye take in hande. The fame and memorie whereof will for euer be recorded in the writings & remembrāces of al men and the sound of your praises therfore moūt alofte and ascende aboue the skyes. By occasion wherof, youre subiectes of the low coun∣tries, in all things most dutifull toward youre Maiestie, and mindefull of so great a benefite bestowed by youre highenesse vppon them, your poore vassalles will be more and more inflamed in hearte and minde to pray vnto God continuallye for youre Maiesties most happy, prosperous and flourishing estate in abundaunce of honoure and felicitie. But forasmuche as the heartes of Kings and Princes bée not in their owne power and willes, but
in the hande of God to dispose and tur them as it séemeth best to his holye wi and pleasure, as well sayeth Salomon. Omitting many other reasons wyth th which your Maiestie might be drawn t haue compassion vpon your poore subiect miserably oppressed & complayning the selues most lamentably, I will conuert and direct my selfe and my whole spech to Almightie God, our moste mercyful and gentle Father, in moste humble wise beséechyng his fatherly goodnesse, that he woulde vouchesafe to looke vppon vs moste myserable caytifes wyth hys mer∣cifull eies of compassion and pitie, not as vppon the offspring of our olde parent A∣dam, but rather as vpon hys dearely be∣loued children engrafted and implanted into the bodye and stocke of hys béeloued sonne Iesus Christ, through whose only mediation, intercession, and benefite oure heauenlye father putteth all oure offences oute of hys remembraunce, by the whyche wée haue prouoked hys wrathe and indignation againste vs, for the whych wée are dayly plagued, while
Kyngs and Princes, who oughte moste carefullye and tenderlye to tender the weale of Christes Churche, forgetting theyr duetye in that behalfe, doe offer the same to the spoile and rauine of moste deadlye ennimies and desperate cutte-throates: euen hym I saye, the father of oure Lorde Iesus Christe, I moste har∣ily and humbly beséeche to stirre vppe youre Maiesties mind with some sharpe ricke and touche of hearte, to vnder∣take the hearing and debating of thys quarrell, that hée woulde inflame youre mynde wyth some feruent zeale and affection of hys holye Spirite, that youre Maiestye by meanes thereof béeyng excited and prouoked to séeke the honoure, and glorye, and encrease of hys sonnes Kyngdome, beséeching him in lyke manner, that hys holye Spirit abidyng alwayes and remainyng wyth you, hée woulde graunte vnto youre Maiestye a moste happye and long lyfe vppon Earthe: And as hée hymselfe was raised vp from deathe moste glori∣ouslye, so likewise hée woulde exchange
this your mortall and corruptible ly wyth the fruition of his heauenly an ¦ternall lyfe, and make you partaker that euerlasting ioye and blessed∣nesse which he hath prepared for all those, whych wyth a sure and an vndoubted fayth, embrace hys Hea∣uenlye pro∣mises. FINIS.
AN EPI∣stle or Godlye Admoniton, sente to the Pa∣stors of the Flemish Church in Antwerp, who name thēselues of the cōfession of Au∣spurgh: exhorting them to concord with the o∣ther Ministers of the Gospell. engraved compartment CONFIDI EGO VICI MVNDVM. IO. XVI.
A prayer to Iesus Christe, for peace and vnitie in the Churche. O Soueraigne Lorde, who being the eternall worde and true God with God thy father, didst take our nature to visite in forme of man the poore children f Adam, lost by their infidelitie, distrust nd peruerse opinion against their Crea∣r: and also by thy meane and remedy, ast eftsoons restablished the confederati∣n betwéene God and vs, approuing the ne most painfully in the mortall mar∣irdom of thy most innocent body bleding n the crosse for the expiation of our sins: e beséech thée (O Sauior of the world) hat euen as thou art come to cōsūmate nd confirme our recōciliation, thou wol∣est also recōcile our harts, knit our wil∣s, and send thy spirite of truth amongst s, to the end, that we all concurring in ne iudgement and opinion, may remem∣er that we are called to be members of ne body, wherof Lord, we acknowledge hée to be the chief and supreme head, and
so detesting in ciuill partialities, we ma be of one opinion, agrée in one mind, an vse one mutuall and charitable directio touching the matter of our religion. Thou hast left vnto vs (O Lord) the cel¦bration of thy holy supper, as a memora of oure communion and spirituall vniti with thée, and also to instructe vs in suc lawes of charitie, as ought to be of fam¦liar conuersation amongst vs all. And ye we (such is the nature of our fragilitie  condition of our vnworthinesse) as we a¦buse the excellēt benefit of that most hig fauour, séeing that in place to tye and cō¦ioyne our selues with thée, we doe more e¦strange vs from thée, and that by reasō o our quarrells and questions of contentiō. In place to cōsider that we are one body, one church, and one bread made of sundry graines, we shewe our selues proud, and giue sundry proues of our ambitiō in sée∣king to establishe a speciall estimation o our peculiar & priuate opinions: in hand∣ling very often thy presence in thy holye supper by subtill disputation, we become farre from thy true and liuely presence: in
contending whether the sinners and vn∣ithfull may cōmunicate thy bodye, we ake our selues sinners, & incapable to eceyue and enioy thy benefites: lastly, nd in effecte, oh Lorde, our zeale is so discrete, that in stryuing to entertaine he puritie of the doctrine of fayth, we reake the league & law of charitie, yea, nd in persecuting with rebuke such as e accoūt to be heretikes in the doctrine f fayth: our malice, with want of dis∣retiō makes vs séeme transnatured into heretikes of charitie, corrupting ye mea∣es of cōmunication & brotherly vnitie. I beséech thée therfore (oh son of God) et thy gracious pitie fal vpon vs, and so opē the eies of our vnderstanding, as we may discerne ye true fruite of thy holy in∣titution & ordinance, take from amōgst vs all sectes & varieties of opinions, and reduce vs at last to ye obediēce of thy ho∣ly & only worde: reueale vnto vs thy ho∣ly spirite with this priuiledge of grace, yt by his vertue he may drawe vs all into one corporation and bodie, whereof thou (O Lord) mayst be heade, and lette him
breath into vs strēgth and power to per¦seuer in workes of true Iustice, innocen¦cie and holynesse, during our course i this tragicall and miserable pilgrimage, and in the ende, let (we beséeche thée) th same holy spirite translate vs into the e¦ternall life, (purchased to our vses by th sacrifice and oblation of thy most preci¦ous death) wherein thou raignest now gloriously with the father and holye Ghost, and there shalt remaine infinitely. A∣men.
To my most dearely be∣loued in our Lord Iesus Christ, the onely redéemer and aduocate of men towardes the heauenlye Father, my brother Ministers and Pastours in the Churche of ntvvarpe, naming themselues of the Church of Au∣urge, Grace and peace from God and hys sonne Ie∣su Christe, to the ende, that by the bonde of his holy spirite, vve may all be knit in the vnitie and Confession of the Gospell of Christ. AT my first com∣ming to this towne of Antwarpe (right honou∣rable in Christ) and that at the request of certain the Faythfull there, I founde cause of singular comforte in the vewe of the wonderfull worke raysed vppe by the Lorde, by meane of his seruauntes, and that in so shorte tyme, as sauing to such as haue assisted it, it maye séeme no lesse impossible than incredible. For if wée wonder in certayne Trées and Fruits, who somtimes yéeld encrease a∣boue custome, or against ye cōmon course of Nature, when as the Lorde were of
purpose to releue and restore some cou¦trie afflicted with hunger: what may w say of these spirituall plantes which th father of mercy so sodenly and agayn all hope of man, hath set and planted  these Low countries, & speciallye in th citie of Antwerpe? Truly we are boun to acknowledge it as a worke of strang maruell of our God, and to say with t prophet, this incredible increase hath b made by the Lord, whō we find worth of admiration in our eyes: it is the rig hande of God which hath reuealed h vertue: it is the right hand of God th hath exalted vs: it is the right hande  God that hath manifested his power,  shall not die at all, but we shall liue  declare the doings of the Lorde: where¦as as I entred more déepely into the vie and consideration of these things, so  thought it also an office and dutie in  to crie with the sayd Prophet: Confir Lord, and aduaunce the worke thou h begon in vs: build vp again the wall of thy holy temple: restore the ruines thy heauenly Ierusalem, to the ende th
the Kings and Princes of the earth may come to doe thée homage and offer pre∣sentes: gather togither againe O God, the dispersed of Israel. This was the cause wherein I reioy∣ed for certayne dayes with glad conti∣uance, till vpon further viewe of the matters of estate within the Citie, I ounde occasion to mixe some sorrowe with this my ioye, as séeing on euerye ide with what diligence Satan labou∣ed to hynder the aduauncement of this Church, not onely by meanes of open nimies, but also by the indiscretion and ant of regarde in such as name them∣selues maister Masons in the house of God: for such as feared God and wished a publication of his glorie, cryed oute and exclamed that the chaire of truth was become the chaire of dissention, ser∣ing no more as a Pulpit to preach Ie∣us Christ, the appeaser of troubled cōsci∣ences, to pronoūce an vnity, a brotherly charity, nor ye mortificatiō of ye old Adam with the wicked motiōs of cōcupiscence, but rather it was vsed as a place of inue∣ctiues,
& iniuries,In the Pul∣pit ought not be pre∣ched other vvords thā of God, to knovv and serue Christ with wordes of malice tending to a mutual hate of one towards another, & dissention of doctrine, wherein vpon inquirie of such fault, with the cir∣cumstance & authors of the same, I finde your side not least guiltye, as being such amongest you, who in open assemblye, with words and libels of malice, are not ashamed to call the other Ministers of the Gospel, Heretikes, Sacramentaries, rebels against the state, and people vn∣worthie of place in the common wealth, with other wordes improper and vnfitte for the maiestie of such a place, which is consecrated purposely to teach the word and will of our God. Nowe (brethren) if such or such lyke matter of reproche should be pronounced in the Pulpit, of certain Monks or mon∣strous Friers, the very organs of the Ro∣mane Antichriste, sent of their suppostes to trouble the Church of Christ, to darkē his glory, and resist the aduancement of his kingdome, we woulde endure them with pacience, as knowing well inough yt such sorte of Prophetes be the disciples
of Balaam, who sell their toungs to curse the people of God, yea somtimes against the sense of their proper conscience: wée assure our selues that the mouth of suche hypocrites cannot bring forth other than wordes of infection and full of taste of all euill:Descriptiō of the false Prophetes and prea∣chers of the Papistes. for they as they are painted sepul∣chres, so canne they not vomit vp other matter than such as is couertly couched within, that is to say, all infection and fil∣thinesse. And we are most certaine, that those kinde of people addicted to Baall and contentment of their belly, séeing the fall of their Marmit by little and little, will enforce themselues to exclayme a∣gainst them that discouer their abuses, hypocrisies, and villainous trumperies: wée beléeue also that such supporters of Sathan, who from the beginning hath bene the Author of dissention, a louer of murther (with desire of effusion of blud) wil labor in the imitation of their father and maister, and that (vnder the pretence of the Gospell) they will proclaime sedi∣tion & trouble, and as the Prophet sayth, vomit furious matter against suche as
stuffe not their bellies according to their fancies and fashions of custom: Of such sorte of raylers we receyue no greate care, séeing we are not ignoraunt wyth what iudgement and punishment, God will visite them though he bée long: for they be of that sorte of whome the Apo∣stle Iude speaketh in hys Epistle Catho∣licke,Reade the Epistle of S. Iudas the Apostle. as vpon whom euill shall happen, for they followe the traine of Cain: they abandon thē selues into the error of the hyer of Balaam, they shall perishe accor∣ding to the contradiction of Core: they are spottes at the Banket of the chari∣table and Faithfull, féeding themselues without feare: they are clouds without water, caried away with euery winde: trées whose fruite is rotten, and of no commoditie, pulled vp by the rootes, and already dead: they be raging waues of the sea, giuing vp their villanies: errant starres for whome is prepared the sha∣dowes of the euerlasting darkenesse: they are murmurers, quarrellers, wal∣king according to their couetousnesse, their mouthes pronouncing wordes of
venemous substaunce, and louing men uly for their profite: they incense di∣isions, and are people of sensualitie, parting nothing with the spirit: they re the very painter and portrait which he Apostle speaketh of in suche sorte of reachers. And therfore we doe esteme f them as they deserue, not fearing any arme they can doe to the troupe or fe∣owship electe of God, for they discouer fficientlye their poyson and the leuen f the Phariseys. But touching you (deare and honou∣able brethren) one worde procéeding rom your mouth, pearceth the heart, nd giueth vs cause of singular sorowe, ith feare least the same stirre vp slaun∣er to the flocke of Iesus Christ: And o be to him that shall be the cause of uch slaunder agaynst one of the least, t were better that such a one had fastned o his necke a great Milstone, and caste nto the bottome of the sea, than to be uffered to offend & put dissention in the church, which the Lord begins to norish n this town, and who now being in hir
cradle, is in more necessity to be fed with the true word of God, releued in hir affli∣ctions, & comforted in hir persecutions, than to be disquieted with subtill and cu∣rious questions, diuisions and debates vpon the matter of our confession: wher∣in as we both féele and sée the wonderfull benefits which the Lord hath layde both vpon you and vs, hauing drawne vs ou of the miserable quagmier and marish o superstition and idolatrie amongest the Papistes, so let vs wish (that as true mi∣nisters of God) we may employ our sel∣ues with one accorde to set forth the glo∣rie of him,A meane to accorde questions concerning the do∣ctrine. who of prisoners of darknesse, hath made vs happie members of his most cleare light. If there be anye thing which you iudge not well vnderstanded of vs, were it not better to come to con∣ference with vs, or vse brotherly admo∣nition and conference, than to exclayme in the Pulpitte, and fill the Bookesellers shoppes with Inuectiues and Apologies of spite? were it not better (with inuoca∣tion of the name of the Lorde) to com∣pounde and order quietly the affaires of
the aduauncement of his glorie, than to uie warre against our selues with the t of the pen, whose woundes are farre ore daungerous and incurable,VVarre of learned mē most slaun∣derous. thā the aylings eyther of the bowe or Cros∣we: bicause the one offendes but the odye and fleshe, and the other péerceth th déepely and bloudily the renoume of e person, which euerye one holdeth in lue more deare and precious than ey∣er golde or siluer, with all the riches in e worlde. Alas miserable and wretched that wée re, what condemnation, what iudgemēt e we heape vppon our heades when e preach to the Souldiers to lay awaye heir armes, and forbeare to offend com∣on wealthes, and we, euen we our sel∣es, do carie in our Inkhornes weapons ost sharpe, with arrowes of poyson to hunder vpon such as doe not offer them∣elues wholy to our aduise and opinions, nd refuse to hazarde their fayth in the nterpretations which we make of Gods orde? Thys arrogant ouerwéening is the
cause why the Lorde suffereth that the fruite of our preachings is eyther none at all,VVhereof it cōmeth, that the au∣dience in the refor∣med church to be de∣formed in liuing. or at least of so little effecte, that our Audience in their life and conuersa∣tion, doe declare what slender know∣ledge and feare of GOD they learne by our exhortations. God suffereth al∣so to fall vpon vs Inquisitours and per∣secutors in the very same sorte, that we presume to be the Censors of the fayth of others. And bycause we will rule all the worlde by the touche of the Sen∣tence and aduise of this or that man, the Lorde incenseth the verye children themselues to call vs Parciall Secta∣toures, and Admiratours of the opi∣nions of menne, namyng some Marti∣nistes, some Caluinistes, some Ozean∣drines, some Melancthonistes, and some Brentiens, with dyuers other lyke names, and that with good righte: by∣cause we haue not our eyes fixed on the onelye aduauncement of the glorye of Iesus Christe and his Church, whiche is Catholike and vniuersall: But euery one will deale aparte, euery one entyce
and drawe his audience aparte, euerye one maintayne the renoume of his in∣stitutour, and that which worse is, eue∣ry one as supreme Iudge, giues sentēce of condemnation withoute appeale a∣gainst others. Of thys miserable cause it commeth to passe, that this Churche being at this day deliuered from the insupporta∣ble inquisition and tyrannie of the Pa∣pistes, and that by the grace of GOD, and goodnesse of our King and Soue∣raigne Magistrate, we haue notwith∣standing amongest our selues supreme inquisitors, who with an arrogancie a∣boue the Phariseys, call the other dogs, and worldlings, not considering belike, (such is their arrogancie) that this word worldling, or of the worlde, signifieth a diuision and partition from the bodye of Christe, according to that he himselfe doth saye, that the worlde is his enimie, and that he wil not pray for it: Al which condemnation is foūded vpon that that the worldlings (as they call them) wyll not conforme themselues to the ad∣ministration
of the Sacraments in thei fashion, nor giue ouer themselues to i∣maginations and questions of subtiltie, but are contented in the simplicitie o the worde of God, with direction of th holye Spirite to instructe their consci∣ences. Other there bée who of their Confes∣sions, Catechismes, Commentaries, and traditions, make as it were a fifth gospel, giuing no lesse authoritie to their parti∣cular interpretations, than if they were of the Articles of Fayth, not refusing to call al thē Heretikes, who point by poyn doe not folow their imaginations, which although were good and substantiall to e∣difie, yet are they none other than the breath of men, and therefore vnworthie of comparison with the eternall worde. These things (Brethren) with the cō∣sideration of thē mouing no small sorow in my minde, foreséeing (as it were) the breach which Satan might make in the house & troupe of God by such a meane, procured me to attempt familiarly one o your brethren and companions in the
worke of God, who as he séemed of some superintendence and authoritie amongest you,M. Yllyrye so I imparted with him the greate aunder growing to the Churches ther∣about, and else where, by such differences and dissentions manifestly published, not onely by bookes of infamie, but also in in∣iurious inuectiues, in open assemblies, whome I requested in the name of the Lorde, to exhort his companions to for∣beare their further procéedings in suche sort, with discontinuaunce of their slaun∣derous order of dooings, altogither vn∣worthie of the ministerie of Christ. Hys aunswere hereunto argued hys sufficient forwardenesse, complayning al∣beit against others, and saying that the best meane for accorde, were to bring in disputation, and to handle chiefly the que∣stion vpon the Lordes Supper, vpon the diuers and sundrie construction whereof, sprong both the disorder and dissention: I sayd there was slender hope of present accorde this waye, if both the one and o∣ther would not disclaime their stoute & straunge order in proponing their opini∣ons
and interpretations: For (sayde I) if they obserue no more modesty in thei words, than they haue vsed temperanc in their bookes and wrytings, neythe can the cause be determined, nor the er∣rour reduced: for whiche respecte I ac¦coūt it not out of purpose to take a con∣fession of Fayth, and imparte with th people those Articles wherein we all a∣grée, leauing the reste that maye bring likelyhoode of dissention, or slaunder t the Church. Herein he séemed to approue my ad¦uise, with persuasion that to take th Confession of Auspurge were most ne∣cessarye to enforce this accorde, subsig¦ning suche Articles, as with good con¦science we myghte receyue, and inter¦prete the other according to our vnder¦standing, which we haue already done with meaning to bring them to light t the edification of the Church, to the en euery one maye sée that the controuersi is not so great as is giuē out to the peo¦ple, who being both troubled and ama¦zed with such diuersities, knoweth no
what path to tread, hearing some preach that Christe is here, and other saye hée is not there, but here: The church of Christ is not suche one, but oures is the righte Churche: wée are of Paule, and they be of Cephas, and others of Apollo. Alas are we baptised either in the name of Paule, Iohn or Martin? Is not only Iesus Christ our Redéemer? Is it not in hys name that we are baptised and broughte into the Church? Is not he the soueraine Doctor, graduated not at Paris, but in Paradyse, whome our Heauenly father hath orday∣ned for our chief schoolemaister wyth ex∣presse commaundement to heare hym? Why then do we séeke so many maisters and forgers of doctrine? To conclude, I desired the said minister to abstaine from iniurious inuectiues and words of quar∣rell in bookes, with exhortation to his cō∣panions to modestie and séemely tempe∣raunce in their preachings: also to per∣swade the people to faith, mortification and brotherly charitie: which albeit, they haue not obserued, but rather in the con∣trary haue vsed words of slaunder in the
very Pulpit, teaching by that mean their audience to imitate their disorders: And whiche worse is, you other my brethren, euen of late haue caused to be imprinted certain Libels wherin you haue reuersed the names of persons, and by conuersion and change of letters haue moste iniuri∣ously hādled a certain minister of the gos∣pel, calling him a brand of hel, or such like name of reproch, a sutletie far vnworthy your vocatiō. If these matters continue I fear me (good brethren) that ye iudgemēt of god wil thunder vpon our heades, whē (beleue me) the liuing god wil know how & where to find vs, though we be vnder ye protection of great princes, for the Lorde wil not leaue vnpunished such insolencies and mistakings of his deare Church, the whiche he hath bought with his bloud & deliuered from the tiranny of Antichrist, so now such men would efsoones raigne and ouer-rule hir, vnder coloure of pietie and instruction of certain persons, whom the Lord hath stirred vp to minister and serue in his temple. And to speake more cléerly in this matter, know ye (good bre∣thren)
that touching Martin Luther, Philip Melancthon, with other like mē,The autho∣ritie of Lu∣ther and o∣ther Do∣ctours of the Gospel. we esteme thē true seruants of god, to whom as the holy spirit hath plentifully imparted his gifts & graces, so haue they labored with an earnest care bothe to wéede vp ye abu∣ses crept into our Christian religion, & al∣so to manifest the truth of the Gospell of Christe: albeit we must & do acknowlege thē to be no more than men, & so by conse∣quēce subiect to be ignorāt in many thin∣ges: for so god vseth to bestow his gifts & graces vpon mē, as the condition of their ignorant nature may shew yt they bée not gods vpon earth. Besides that, it hapneth many times, that the seruants of God do obserue a certain special wisedom, as not willng to reueale al they do vnderstand, fearing their audience not to be as yet ca∣pable of such doctrin, the same happening euen to saint Peter the Apostle of Christ,The vvis∣dome of S. Peter. who albéeit hadde receyued visyblye the holye Spirite, yet hée estéemed the time not yet conuenient to manifeste to the Iewes the abolition of the Lawe, fea∣ring leaste by such a mean the preaching
of the Gospell shoulde be broughte in ha∣tred, and the publication of the same hin∣dered. On the contrary, Saincte Paule was of opinion,The zeale of S. Paule. that in a matter of so great importance oughte to bée no dreade of daunger, but to make open and pub∣lyke manifestation of the lybertye,Galath. 2. whi∣che the Lorde hadde broughte vnto hys Churche. In lyke sorte wée haue rea∣son to presume, that these good seruants of GOD, Luther and Melancthon, sée∣ing the greate resystaunce of the worlde agaynste the preachyng of the pure do∣ctryne, and the abolition of the Papi∣stes abuses, iudged it an acte of wisedome to giue a little place to suche surie of the tyme, and to gaine the heartes of the peo∣ple gently, not to alienate them vntime∣ly by the teaching of the true doctrine of the Sacramentes,Reade the utles of Melancthō to Luther, but chiefly the second. expecting from daye to daye more proper and fitte occasion to restors and bring in wholy the true exer∣cise and vnderstanding of the holye cere∣monies, wherin we may be confirmed by the procéedings and degrées of the do∣ctrine whiche wée doe sée in the bookes of
the said holy men.Reade th beginning of Sleidan historie. For who can deny that Martine Luther was ignoraunte in manye things at his beginning to preach, which the Lorde reuealed vnto hym after, af∣fyrmyng in the wordes of hys owne mouth, that GOD hadde sente him, not so muche to edifye and reestablishe the Churche of Christe, as to ruinate and batter the kingdome of Antichrist, wher∣in he founde dayly such change of abuses vnworthy to be supported in the Christiā Religion, that in the ende hée protested that the Masse deserued to be abolished, whiche Melancthon in the ende of the con∣fession of Auspurge, maintained contra∣rilye, professing the Masse to bée yet re∣tayned in their Churches. All this not∣withstandyng, you (my brethren) of thys tyme, will not as farre as I fynde, agrée that the Masse is yet retayned in youre churches, no not in the sorte that the con∣fession of Auspurge propoundeth it: The wordes of Melancthon bée these: Falsò ac∣cusantur ecclesiae nostrae, quòd Missam abole∣ant: Retinetur enim Missa apud nos, & sum∣ma Reuerentia celebratur, seruantur ei vsitatae
Ceremo∣niae ferè omnes, preter quam quod latinis conci∣onibus admiscentur alicubi Germanicae, quae ad∣ditae sunt ad docendum populū, that is to say: Our Churches be falsly accused in that they abolishe the Masse, for the Masse is reteyned with vs,VVhat sup¦per the Protestants had in the beginning. and is celebrated with great reuerence, with an vse & obseruatiō of almost al the accustomed ceremonies, sauing that in some places there bée cer∣tain Canticles in the Dutche, intermed∣led with those that are sōg in the Latine, and that to teach the people. Sée (brethren) howe you would now aduow so goodly a reformation of Masse, being assured that suche institution is the true heape of vanities inuented by men, and tending to the prophanation and a∣bolition of the holy Supper of the Lorde: but if others in the verye tyme of Luther and Melancthon, haue bene moued wyth the spirit of God, and wyth a zeale of S. Paule haue resisted such simulation (wel affected notwithstanding to the glorie of God) proueth it therfore in vs any duety of obseruation of suche Ceremonies, ha∣uing regard only to the authoritie of Pe∣ter?
God defende. No, let Peter remaine still as Peter, and Martine as Martine, that is to saye, as a man that may fayle, and let the spirite of God be encreased by the organs and instrumentes whyche hée shall stirre vp to manifest the truth of his gospell, whether he be Paul or Zwinglius, or Oecolampadius, or anye other of lesse au∣cthoritie than they. And for oure partes, suche organs and instruments of God, let vs receiue, honour, and haue in singu∣lar respecte, without perswasion or belief that they be innocēt, or that they can not erre, or that they bée not ignoraunte of some things. Let vs béeléeue, that from day to daye our Lorde will stirre vp such lyke organs and instruments to aduance hys glorie, and to augment the lighte of hys holy Truth, if our own vnthankful∣nesse be not a barre to such liberality be∣gon by our GOD. Béesides (brethren) I consider the la∣mentable tyme, wherein those holy men didde lyue, as béeyng employed rather to purge and clense the filthinesse of Pa∣pistrye, than to study or consider of the
introduction of the pure Truthe: they were rather vsed in the resistaunce of the furye of Antichriste and hys supposts, to flée from one coaste to an other, to make Apologies and defences, to aun∣swere the falsehoodes that were laide vp∣on them by dyuers, and to dispute wyth the Monkes of their Purgatorie and Bulles, than that they hadde leysure and quiet libertie to searche by meditation the truth of the Christian doctrine mani∣fested in the diuine worde. By which oc∣casion it came to passe, that their wri∣tings were stuffed wyth so many oppro∣brious and spitefull wordes vnworthy of the true seruauntes of God, and perfecte pronouncers of the Gospel of peace, whi∣che notwithstanding as we supporte such infirmities, as hauing regarde to so wic∣ked a time: So now that god hath sent vs so many beames of his light, let vs leaue to liue and remaine so blind, as in times paste, when we hadde but a glimmering, as it were by suddaine lightning. My meaning (deare brethren) in al this discourse, hath not ben to other purpose
than to declare the smal occasion we haue aswell one as another, to make Gods or (to say more truly) idols of our doctours, and for their occasions to maintaine par∣rialities, dissentions and debates vppon the matter of our doctrine, to the greate slaunder of the poore and weake conscien∣ces, and notable hinderaunce of the pro∣pagation of the churche: wherein if the Corinthians haue béene rebuked bycause they made Partialities to maintaine the renoume of Saint Paule, the chosen ves∣sell of GOD, Apostle of Iesus Christ, doctour of the Gentiles, and to speake in one word, a man indued wyth moste sin∣gular and excellent giftes, how may God laye it againste vs, who contende, quar∣rell, make continuall warre, and (as a man woulde saye) deuoure one another as Dogs and Cattes, breaking alwaies the bonde of charitie, which Iesus Christ hath lefte of suche estimation. When the Lorde woulde marke hys disciples and children of hys father, hée willed them not to folowe the confession of Auspurge, nor the Catechisme of Mar∣tine,
or of Iohn,The marke of the Chri¦stians. Ion. 13. but he saith: In this me shal know you are my disciples, if ye lou one another: Alas most blind and misera¦ble that we are, whilest wée dispute of th true and false interpretation of the word of the Sacrament of vnitie, wée break the verye vnitie it selfe: in contendyng whether the wicked, infidel, and vnwor¦thy receiue as well the bodye of Chryste, in the Supper, as the children of GOD wée robbe our selues of the very Christ and make oure selues of the number o them that receiue him not at all: in sear∣chyng whether Christe come in fleshe, i Spirite, or in Sacramente, wée doe de∣priue oure selues of the true communion of Christe: for he that hateth his brother, Christe dwelleth not in him: in siftyng curiously whether the body of Christe b giuen to vs in the bread, vndere ye bread, or with the bread, wée cut our selues of frō the true body of Christ, and make vs members of sathan, the father of dissenti∣ons, quarells, contentions and debates. And for my opinion vpon the matter of the holy Supper, I wyll say in few
words (good brethren) what I vnderstād, leauing to euery one his libertie to folow that which God shall teache hym. Wée now right wel, that the meaning of our redéemer Iesus cōming into this world, was to manifest to men the good wyll of hys heauenly Father towards them: and ow his diuine Maiestye had prouided to remedy the fault, transgression, and diso∣bedience of the first Adam,Doctrine of the holy Supper of Christe. by the innocē∣cie, most pure iustice, and obedience satis∣factory of the second and heauenly Adam. And that men might bée deliuered of the ire and iudgement of God, putting them∣selues vnder the wings and couerture of this Soueraigne and eternall Sacrifica∣tour. And forasmuch as the diuine worde doth shew vnto vs the malediction of mē and transgression agaynste the wyll of GOD, by words taken of oure corpo∣rall nouriture, saying, that as man hathe eaten the fruite of a trée forbidden hym by hys Creatoure, and that by meane of the same eatyng,The summe of the Do∣ctrine  Christe. hée hath made himselfe mimy of the Lorde: In like maner Ie∣sus Christe our Redéemer declareth to
vs by similitude of eating and drinking the Reconciliation towardes GOD that hys obedience hath brought vs, as hée would clearely say, that Man hauyn eaten of a forbidden Fruite, hathe pu¦chased malediction, whereas in eatin nowe of a fruite giuen hym by the hand of GOD, hée hathe wonne benedictio The fruite and Trée of life whyche w oughte to eate,Christe is the Fruite of the Tree of life. is euen verye hée whych bringeth vs suche happye newes, wh with his vertue & power vnspeakable, i so tyed and ioyned with vs by the mean of Faithe and bonde of hys holye spirit that he maintaineth our soules in spiritu¦all and Heauenly life, euen as the brea and wine nourisheth oure bodies in co¦porall lyfe. Vsyng this similitude the Lord sayet in the sixth of Sainct Iohn, that hée him selfe is the breade of lyfe, and gyuin life, which is descended from heauen, an that who eateth of this breade shall lyu eternallye: That is to say, he shal escap the Curse procured by eating of the frui defended. He saith also that his flesh is th
true meat, and hys bloud the true drink: nd hée that eateth hys fleshe, and drin∣eth hys bloude, dwelleth in Christe,The true vnderstan∣ding of the vvordes of Christe. Iohn. 6. and Christ in hym, who is our seconde and eauenlye Adam, within whose bodye  is necessary that wée bée incorporated,  that he incorporate hymselfe in vs, to e ende that wée maye bée able to ap∣eare béefore GOD, couered wyth the antell of hys moste innocente fleshe ful f all Iustice. And bycause our nature is moste dull n farre from the true vnderstandyng f these misteries,Cause of the celebra¦tion and in∣stitution of the Supper oure Redéemer Iesus s not only content to propounde vnto vs e coniunction which wée ought to haue ith hym, by these similitudes and com∣arisons of eating and drinking, but also th soughte to shewe vs by some visible eremonie, the very same thing that hée the taught vs by worde, to the end that t onely our eares might receiue the in∣truction of hys preaching, but also oure es féede of some visible representation f that whyche we ought to be in Christ, nd Christe in vs, that is to say, that wée
be members of him, nourished wyth h proper vertue, and that hée hemselfe  oure foode. To this ende (I beléeue) th our soueraigne doctor Iesus Christ, aft he had supped with his Disciples, and c¦lebrated the ceremonie of the Pascal lā according to the law, to shew vnto ye pe¦ple and all the Churche to come, a liue representation of the coniunction which hée tooke with his membres by meane  the sacrifice of his death, resurrection an glorification: He tooke bread, and hauyn giuen thanks to God his father, he bra it, and distributed it to his Disciples, say¦ing: Take, eate, this is my body which  deliuered for you: And after he tooke th cuppe and saide: This is the cuppe of th new Testament, take and drink you all & do this in memorie of mée: that is a much as if he shoulde say, to the end yo vnderstand what I am to you, wha remedy I bring vnto you,Interpreta¦tion of the vvordes of Christe in the Supper. what coniun¦ction it is necessary you haue wyth mée and I wyth you: knowe yée that I am bread brokē, offered, & sacrifised for the sa¦tisfaction of your sins, which bread as I
my selfe, so it is néedful yt it be in you, d giue you heauenly nouriture euen as e material bread giues you corporal re∣ef. And touching the Cup, vnderstande , that the same doth shew you the new estament and confederation whiche I actise with you, the whych Testament albe ratified with my bloud, and do this  memory of me: that is to say, when you all breake the bread, as I doe, haue re∣embraunce that you certifie and assure our selues that you bée mine, and I am ures, yea youres in suche sorte, as the eade is youres whiche you breake, eate, d digeste, and the Wine whiche giueth  nouriture. Nowe (brethren) I beséeche you in e name of our redéemer Iesus, consider ithout affection, if the interpretation of is hole Ceremonie and of these words e true or not: If it bée true, to what pur∣ue doe we searche so many questions, so anye subtilties, so manye vbiquities, ith other like inuentions to entertayne e worlde in blyndenesse? To what pur∣se doe we trouble the people with visi∣ble
ceremonies, with perswasion that  ye mean they may receiue Iesus Christ▪ We leaue behind vs, alas and (as it we altogither buried, the doctrine of penanc Iustification, regeneration, Sanctifica¦on,The Spirit of God is not lincked to out∣vvarde ce∣remonies. mortification of the olde Adam, a charitie of one to an other, thinges m important and necessary, and in the me while we employ and bestowe our selu and tyme in the interpretation of certa ceremonies, without the which, god is  power to shewe vs that whiche they d teache vs. We know also that many h¦ly mē be deceassed very deuoutly, hauin receyued Christe, wythout receiuing th eternall signes and visible Elements  the supper.The recei∣uing of the sacraments serue no∣thing to suche as vvil not re∣ceiue Christe. And to what end wold it seru me to eate all the bread whych is in A¦maine, giuen by the handes of the Min¦sters wyth the wordes of the Supper  Christ, if I haue not experienced my r¦nuing, if I haue not tasted my regenera¦tion, if I be not certified that God hath reconciled me with him, and receiued m to hys mercy, and that by suche féeling o taste I doe not assure my selfe to haue re¦ceyued
Christ? This is the doctrine, this (say I) is the eaching whiche we ought to preache nd repreach, repeate, and remember al∣ayes to the people, restore to the yndes of the ignorant, and propounde  those that come to learne of vs, not by e subtilties of the right hande of God, biquities, and such like imaginations. Thys is a thing verye miserable in oure me, that those which speake of the com∣unication of Iesus Christ, be such as ast proue such a cōmunication in them∣lues, a thing to be séene by their wry∣ngs: for they speake of Iesus Chryste, yther shut within an armorie, or enclo∣d in past within bread, vnder the bread,  with the breade, or from vs by xiiij. or v. thousand iourneys, as though the true Temple of Iesus Christe, is any other hing than the heart of a faythfull man, nd he that sercheth it without, shal both se his paines and remaine frustrate of is hope. Let vs speake (my brethren) of Iesus Christ and his communication, as peo∣ple
prouing and féeling in our selue what is to be nourished in our consci¦ences and soules, with the presēce & ver¦tue of ye same, otherwise to what vse w serue vs our subtill interpretations an particular declarations which we brin forth? In the ende, the worlde is not s blynd, but they can and will vnderstan and finde, that we are rather ledde by  spirite of stomacke, than of the true zeal of Gods glory, in the end euery one wil sée that those preachers searche no othe thing than to maintaine themselues i the friendship of the worlde. The vn∣derstāding of the vvordes of the holy supper.But nowe to returne to the confir∣mation of the interpretation that wé haue giuen to this place of the holy sup∣per, let vs consider, that if in all thing that Christ our Lorde hath propounde to manifest the necessitie that we hau to be in him & be in vs, we should searc a presence corporall and fleshly, it shoul be (as who say) neuer to come to ende  for in the olde Testament Christe hat bin propoūded to vs in diuers creatures as a lambe, Manna, Water, Stone, Ta∣ble,
meate, bread, feasts, & other things, as may be séene by such as reade the ho∣lye Scripture. He himselfe in his prea∣chings doth cal him a way, a doore, bread of children, a vyne,Note the absurditie of the false interpreta∣tion of the vvordes of the supper. with other like thin∣ges. Now, if in place where Christ said: I am the doore, who entreth not by mée shal not be saued: he had said this, I am he, shewing with his finger a doore, shall we say for al that ye Christ hath transfor∣med or transubstantiate himself into the matter of a doore: if our redemer in place where he saide, I am the vine, & you are the brāches, had said, this am I,Note the interpreta∣tiō of these vvordes. shewing the vine, and that are you, handling the branches, could we say for all that, that Iesus Christ would cōmunicate his sub∣stance into a grape, & that the Apostles should be transnatured into braunches? sure who were of such opiniō, discouered sufficiently his ignorance & infirmitie. Notwithstanding, (you others my brethren) make your principal piller vp∣pon such maner of speakings, and all to make the poore ignorant people beléeue that Christe hath made promise to giue
himselfe with the bread, bicause that ha∣uing taken bread, and breaking it, he said this is my body: which wordes (simplye vnderstanded) are as much as to say, my body which is broken, offered, deliuered, and sacrificed for you, is bread, or like to this breade which you breake, eate and digest for the nouriture of your body: In like sort, I being the heuenly bread, shal be broken for you, to the ende you maye haue spirituall and eternall life: there∣fore doe and celebrate this, that is to say, this breaking and receyte of bread in re∣membrance of me. Comparisō betvveene the first and second A∣dam.To make conclusion of this matter, I vnderstande that our redéemer Iesus is the fruite of lyfe, who hauing put himself on the trée of the Crosse, hath defaced the sinne and transgression, which the fruite of the trée forbidden brought to vs: And euen as Adam, hauing eaten of suche a fruite, did make himself enimie of God: in contrarie manner, when we partici∣pate with Iesus Christ crucified, we are receiued into the good fauour and loue of oure heauenlye Father, and that by the
onely bountie, merite, and intercession of the self hée, who on the trée of the crosse did constitute himselfe the fruite of lyfe for vs, being assured that the participati∣on of that precious Fruite is not done either by water, wyne, breade, or any o∣ther creature whatsoeuer, but by the vnspeakeable worke and operation of the holye spirite, who hauing called the chosen and predestinate of God, dothe teach them their sinnes and abhominable transgressions by meane of the presenta∣tion of the holy Lawe,Meane to receyue Christ. Election. Vocation. Penance. he sheweth vnto them their damnation and sentence of e∣ternall death, the whiche they féele so in their heartes, that by experience they may well assure themselues, that the ire and wrathe of God hath bene so mani∣fested to them that they haue swallowed pangs of death,The true preparatiō to knovve Christ, is to knovv the necessitie vve haue of him. and haue séene before their eyes the throte of hel confound and deuour them: there they finde the fruite of the trée of knowledge of good and euil: they sorowe and wéepe with a penaunce most bitter the miserable bankets or re∣pastes whiche they haue taken of such a
meate and fruite, not only in the person of their father Adam, but also with their proper mouth. After that by such meanes, the holye spirit hath abased the arogancie of man, his pryde and presumption, and shewed him by experience the definitiue sentēce & arest irreuocable of the eternal against sinners, he beginneth to comfort & giue him good hope,The faith∣full feele the presēce of Christ in their heart. shewing him (as a far off) the Trée of life, and the viuifying fruite hanging vpon it, the which by little and little, degrée and degrée, fayth and fayth, and vertue and vertue, makes him eate, swallow and digest the heauenly breade Iesus Christ, yea with such experience & féeling, that no meat in the world of how great nouriture soeuer it be, is so sēsible in the bodye, as the fruite of life (Iesus Christ) is in the soules of the faythfull, with such manifestation by good workes outwardly, that others may sée & knowe with what meate they be fed. For when wée eate of euerye other meate, the bodie of him that eateth pro∣ueth only the presence of the meate. But
in suche as eate Christ, the true fruite of the trée of life, is discerned such an exam∣ple in their persons, such ioy and paciēce in afflictions, such care to mortify the old Adam, such a renunciation of the things of the world, with affection to the life e∣ternal, that their neighbours and frends accompanying them, maye sée that they eate other meate than the deuourers of ceremonies doe. When they haue truely, essentiallye,The life of a Christian shevveth that he hath Christ in him. and really participated of the bodye and bloude of Christ (by fayth as is sayde) of Iesus Christ, all entier, true God, and true man, they assure themselues of such a coniunction with him, that they haue no néede to go to searche him, eyther in the armorie of Priestes, or betwene the hands of mē, to receiue him eyther with the breade, or with the water, as being fully assured that Iesus Christ dwelleth in them, and that they be fleshe of his flesh, and bones of his bones. And yet for all this, they forbeare not to approche the holy table of the Lorde, to celebrate the holye supper with their
brethren and children of the same hea∣uenly father: Neyther go they thither to receyue Christe of newe in breade or in wyne, neither his fauour or merite: but their firste cause of going thither is, to certifie to all the Church that they are of the number of those that receyue Iesus Christ for their onely redéemer and saui∣our, for their eternall sacrificator, their Captaine, their King, Lord, Soueraigne Prophet and Doctor to teach them in all truth. Secondly, they take the holye supper as a gage and assurance of the good will of the heauenly father towards them, the same being so constant and firme, that it will neuer chaunge. For euen as GOD hath promised by othe, that the sacrifica∣tor shall be eternall, euen so shall be the sacrificature and sacrifice for expiation of our sinnes. Thirdly, they receyue in the Supper, the seale of ratification and confirmati∣on of grace, with reconciliation pronoū∣ced by the preaching of the Gospel, to the ende, that by such meane, fayth might be
augmented in them, séeing that God is t nelye contented to giue them the orde of reconciliation, to assigne his omise with the bloude of his proper nne, but hath also signed and sealed his Gospell of reonciliation with seales, de∣laring in a wonderfull maner, the very hings conteyned in the letters patentes nd promise of the Gospell and happye ewes. Fourthly, the faithfull sée in the holy upper, as in a table and liuely portrait, he communion and participation which hey haue inwardly in their hearts with esus Christ, knowing also that all the uriture and spiritual vigor which they e in them, commes of the presence of m whome they consider and beholde fi∣ured and represented in the holye and sa∣red ceremonie of the Supper: by meane f which consideration,Sacrifice of thanks gy∣uing in the holy sup∣per. they render than∣es to the Lorde for the fayth, hope, ortification and constancie which they éele to be communicated to them by the ower and benignitie of him that dwel∣eth in them. And by this meane, their
faith being augmented, they participt more and more with Iesus Christ nc receyued. Confirma∣tion and augmenta∣tion of Christ re∣ceyued in the supper.Finally they learne in the holy Sup¦per, the vnitie and charitie whiche w ought to haue one with another: And se¦ing we protest in the receyte of the holy Sacrament to be one body & one church members of one soueraigne head Iesu Christ, it is good reason also yt we learn to imitate the Sympathia and mutual cō¦passion whiche we dailye sée in our hu¦maine bodies, whereof if one of our ar¦mes be hurt, the other serueth and com¦forteth it,The holye supper re∣presentes vnto vs a brotherly charity of one to an other. the féete refusing their prope office to marche and go, are content  kéepe themselues in bed, to the ende th arme being hurt, may be in rest, the st¦macke is satisfied with a slender repas to the end to ease that part that is distre¦sed: in effect, euery one of the outward inward members, do so accōmodate the office and function to the ease and com¦fort of the hurt place, that in them may be noted a wonderful harmony & leag of one part with another, the same al
being liuely represented and expresly re∣ōmended vnto vs in the celebration of he holy Supper of the Lord, to the ende hat euery one of vs, may with most di∣gent care, labour to preserue the vnity f the bodye of Christ, & supporting one nother, may learne to couer the faults f our brethrē, pardon their wrongs, not  rebuke and exaggerate too much their norances, but rather to interpret them  the best, and to teache them with cha∣itie. Let vs learne in the celebration of he holy sacramēt, to make vs partakers f the afflictions and persecutions of our rethren, whome we confesse in the re∣eife of the supper, to be the members of Christ with vs. Behold here (in effect my deare bre∣hren) one parte of the spirituall fruites hat the children of God receyue in the eceite of the Supper of our Lord truly administred and simplye vnderstanded, nowing right well that Christ had no other meaning in the institutiō of those acraments, than to manifest by visible wordes (as Saint Augustine sayeth) the
good wil of God towards them, that is, purge, washe, and make them cleane  the water of his grace, and by the blou of his proper sonne, to conioyne, knit and incorporate them with him, euen  the meate is made one thing with ou flesh, in such sort, that euē as by the ex¦rior preaching of the Gospell, the Lor doth offer and presente to all the worl the benefit of reconciliation by Christ, like maner the sacramentes be as a tab or open shop, wherin the benignitie, me¦cie and charitie of our God, be exposed  euery one, offered and represented liu¦ly in the tables: And miserable shall th be, who not searching the life and liuel refection and true washing within, d embrace the corruptible and deceyuab elements, and double miserable shall th be, who naming themselues Doctors  the truth, and pastors of the troupe  GOD, woulde féede the soules of the shéepe with meates that will perishe a corrupt. The occa∣sion of the vvriting of this EpistleBut nowe to returne to our purpo begon, I tooke occasion (my dere belou
brethren) to write you these few lines, as eing the small fruite of my request on our behalfe, when I spake to Monsieur Mathias Yllyricus, who was sayd to be the uperintendent of your Churche, wyth home I persuaded very modestlye to ew vnto you, and consider himselfe the fancie of this Churche, persecuted and reatened on euerye side, assayled with any enimies, and battred with diuersi∣e of opinions, with aduise besides, that e time was more proper to preach and eache to the people the fayth and hope hich we ought to vse to mortifie oure icked affections, with a regarde of care  intertaine the league of charitie one ith another, than to imparte with the mple and ignorant sort such debates and uestions, as we haue raysed vppon the atter of our confessions: Séeing with∣ll, that such dissentions are rather pro∣ounced of a iollitie of the hearte to pre∣erre eloquence, and procure to our sel∣es a peculiar estimation amongst men, han of purpose necessarie for the edifi∣ation of our pietie: which albeit he sée∣med
to like of, with a disposition to ad∣mitte and performe my requestes, yet contrarilye, I sée he is eyther the author or instigator of a cōfession of faith which you haue set abroache in this Church of Antwerpe: in whiche confession, I can not only finde any one poynt of the thrée mentioned in my conference with him, but also it semes to certen, that you haue raised this confession expresly to trouble this poore afflictted Church. The Lorde of his goodnes giue you true knowledge and repentance of that which you doe: for touching the chiefe poynt of our re∣ligion, that is to say, Fayth, I finde not in your confessiō many texts nor places which kindle the hart of man to imbrace the doctrine of Iesus Christe. A thing which I coulde easily appointe with my finger, if I woulde as vainely employe my tyme in confutation, as I sée a num∣ber do at this day in disputation: only I thanke GOD that by other meanes he hath taught me the doctrine of his truth▪ for if at my first arriuall, I had encoun∣tred your confessiō of faith, to learne m
to be a christian, I could not haue much profited in a lesson of faith so full of que∣stions, debates, and dissentions. Deare brethren, if you will with iud∣gement reade ouer that, which your au∣thor hath writtē in your name, you shall finde, that neither Scotus, nor any other Sophisters of the Papists, haue so much ndarkned the doctrine of Iesus Christ, nor cladde it with so many questions, as certaine of you haue done: whereof (for example) let vs suruey briefly foure cer∣taine pointes, and that more to reueale the slender edification that their readers may hope for of such lessons, than to en∣cumber our selues with the confutation of such vanities. Touching that which you say of our inheritance of the originall sin,Reade the Articles of the confes∣siō of faith of Yllyric, the better to vnder∣stande the Articles folovving. and frée will lost, the worlde it selfe doth declare well inough at this daye, that euery one hath gotten a good lumpe of the inheri∣tance of the corruption of Adam, and the originall sinne, as they call it, and your writings shewe that you haue had youre parte thereof. And I beléeue
(as you say) that men nowe a dayes haue not any Frée will, séeing it maye be fur∣ther beléeued, that there be a great many that haue slender sense, and well worse vnderstanding, as being altogither ruled and caried ouer by their affections. Touching the matter of the incarna∣tion of the sonne of God, and redemption of man, I coulde well haue pardoned you the obmission of the subtill questions you vse therein, searching curiously the house wherein Christe dwelleth. Item, what make we of ascension? or the significati∣on of this worde heauen? or the righte hande of God? so that you woulde teache vs the true meane to receyue Iesus Christ into our selues, séeing it pleaseth him, in respecte of his goodnesse, to make his dwelling in the hearts of the faythful and regenerate. Otherways, of what vse is Iesus Christe to vs, being so far from the hart of man, as you make him? B. 4. Touching youre place of iustifying fayth, I vnderstande not your language, where you say that only fayth, by meane whereof we take (as of a hande) the be∣nefite
of Iesus Christe to obtaine iustifi∣cation, regeneratiō and health: the whi∣che indéede is true: but immediatly after you say, that by the Sacramentes, are imputed and applied to vs the iustice and merite of Iesus Christe: B. 4. Item, in the same doctrine of Iustifica∣tion, you say it is a moste harde question to know what is that true Iustice which makes vs iust and agréeable to god, with atteinment of eternall life: but I had ra∣ther that without so many argumentes, confutations, and subtilties, you hadde shewed to the poore and ignorant people, what is the christian iustice, and by what meane shée is giuen to vs. B. 5. In the tractate of good workes you saye, that the workes which men oughte to call good, are those whyche God de∣maundes in hys worde, and that those which be regenerate and guided by ye spi∣rite of God, are they whiche shewe the fruites of a good Trée: I beléeue it well, and conclude vpon your saying, that who hath not zeale, loue, charitie, who suffe∣reth not all things with pacience, taketh
euery thing in the best part, couereth the faults of his neighbor, and laboureth not to put peace in place of dissention, can not haue regeneration. And touching the rest of your questions, whether good workes concurre in iustification, as a cause for∣mall or efficient, the simple people haue not to doe, contenting themselues wyth this beliefe, that regeneration and faith without good works is a méere hipocrisie & thing dead, and that it is necessary, that our new obedience serue as witnesse of our reconciliation and iustification. Nowe (deare brethren) as I am voide of intent herein eyther to examine or exaggerate the newnesse of youre con∣fession, and much lesse to confute it by ar∣gumentes, so I will leaue to the conside∣ration of the Reader, youre excuse in cut∣ting off the commandement of the liuing God, vnder pretext of certaine gloses and distinctions vnworthy to be vttered: for here we doe not dispute whether the com∣maundement not to make anye images of veneration, be a commandement par∣ticular, or an appendix of an other, whe∣ther
it be ceremoniall or morall: but wée will here mayntaine that it is an auda∣citie moste cursed to cut off from the law of oure God any one worde, séeing speci∣ally that that summe and content of cō∣mandement is so shorte and compēdious, that it conteineth but ten commandemē∣tes, the which if god woulde haue abrid∣ged, he knew better how to do it, than wée and therfore such as vndertake to correct his stile and accuse him of prolixitie, giue sufficient proofe of their abhominable te∣meritie. But let vs nowe come to the princi∣pall poynte of your debate and auncient question, the which vpon a brauery you séeme to renue vppon euery purpose and place, without hauing respect to the gret slaunder of those that bée weake. Firste you vtter the summe of your confession of the Supper in these wordes:The opi∣nion of Math. Y lyricus & his compa¦nions tou∣ching the Supper. Credimus igi∣tur Christo affirmante, quòd corpus & san∣guis eius verè ac realiter in sacra Coena ad∣sit, detur{que} externo modo accipiendum cùm Pane & vino, non fide tantùm, aut spiritua∣liter, id{que} tam ab indignis, quàm à dignis
sumantur, & contraria docentes, cum Augu∣stana confessione consentiendo, damnamus. That is to saye: Wée beléeue in Chryste who assureth vs that his body and bloud be truly and really in the sacred Supper, and that it is gyuen vs in taking it out∣wardly wyth the bread and wine, not on∣ly with faith and spirituallye: the whyche body is eaten aswell of the vnworthy as of those that be worthy: And those that shall teache the contrary, wée (sticking to the confession of Auspurge) do condemne them. Sée here (my brethren) youre goodlye entrie of the article of your supper, whi∣che we may, not improperly, liken to that of the newe inquisitors, who condemne, anathematize, excommunicate, and call Heretikes, and cut off from the commu∣nion of the Churche, all those whiche re∣ceiue not their cōfession, which me think you doe also as of purpose to maintayne yours of Auspurge, as though it were a fifth Gospel, or new article of the Créed. What shall we say (brethrē) to these mat∣ters? haue you no shame that men of good
iudgement and vnderstandyng, shoulde reade suche arrogant and rashe wordes? Who are they that haue se the authour of the confession of Auspurge, or that of yours in such aucthoritie or degrée of the Churche, that they may pronounce sen∣tence of damnation agaynste suche as will not admitte theyr interpretation vp∣pon a place or Texte of the Scripture? What is hée of anye iudgement at all, who will not feare to forsake the tyran∣nie of the Papistes, to euer into an n∣ther, almoste of like condition? Wée call the Pope Antichriste, tyrant and but∣cher of mens consciences, bycause that wythout libertie to heare men speake, he cōdemneth and excommunicateth them: and yet your doings are nothing inferior to his crueltie, in pronouncing condem∣nation, not onely agaynste your enimies, but also againste suche as you receiue for youre brethren and companions in the worke of the Lorde, and wo no lesse for the duety of Christians, than to take away the slaunder from the Churche of Christe, doe searche by all theyr possible
meanes to lyue in loue and friendshippe with you. I coulde willingly say to the authour of youre confession, as the Apostle sayth: my brother, my friend, what art thou that condemns the seruants of another? Who hath giuen thée such power? Art thou his redéemer? Art thou his iudge? Art thou he in the name of whome he hath bin bapti∣sed? Hath he not a maister, who, if he fall will raise him again, and hath the power to do it? But of what purpose are these words, whē we find our harts so hardned that wée féele not at all the very chastise∣mēts, which God lets fal vpon our heads Lette vs marke and consider what miserable issues our preachings, confessi∣ons, writings, and commentaries, bring forth: Let vs also behold what fruits are broughte to our audience by our words, what reformatiō of life in our churches, wherein raigne still wantonnesse, lubri∣cities, gluttonies, drunkennesse, vsurie, deceites, with a thousand such like vices, whiche we lette passe, making our selues many times (by winking) companions to
those that commit them, swallowing (as our Sauiour Christ saith) the Camels, & streigning the little Gnats, whiche mea∣neth that we pronounce condemnation a∣gainst suche who pierce not the subtilties of oure interpretations in Christes Sup∣per, making smal reckning of the crimes and dissolutions whyche are committed dayly afore our eies. I praye you what may meane so many sortes of communi∣cations of Christe, the one phisicall, and the other mysticall, an other spirituall, and an other sacramentall, togither also with those which you putte in your con∣fession, the one common bothe to the good and to the euil, when they say, This is my body, & the other whē they say: Do thys in remembraunce of mée. Those wyth suche lyke communications of Chryste, wée neuer learned in the worde of God, but of the contrarye, wée knowe for truth that there is but one meane to receiue Iesus Christe, and haue communication wyth hym, that is to saye, liuely faith, and that accompani∣ed with repentance & penance for our sins
passed & newnesse of life to come, I would to God we were well taught and exerci∣sed in this maner of excommunication of Christe: for touching the rest, what assu∣rance may we take of the doctrin of your article, whyche is not drawne oute of the word of god, but rather of the interpreta∣tions of men? I pray you shew me where it is that Christe affyrmeth, that hys bo∣dye and bloud be truely and really in the bread, vnder the bread, or within ye bread of the Supper, and that hée giueth hym∣selfe to be eaten exteriorly with the bread and Wine, the same béeing done not on∣ly by faith, or spiritually, but that hée is eaten as well of the vnworthy as those that be worthy. Mée thinke (deare brethren) that, sée∣ing you will be estéemed so diligent in the obseruatiō of the wordes of the scripture, as preferring nothing whiche is not dra∣wen out of the same, it is necessarye you know,Vhat niunction etvvene hrist and eliall. . Cor. 6. that in all your article there is not one word of the words of Christ: but wée know that both he himselfe and his Apo∣stle teacheth vs the contrary, saying, that
the vnbeléeuing and vnworthye can not possesse Christe, nor be members of hym, séeing they haue not a mouth of fayth to receiue hym. Besides, I sée that your very confes∣sion doth not accorde at all, wyth that of Auspurge, wherof you make so greate a buckler, no lesse to mayntayne you in the good opinion of the worlde, than to bring youre selues in, vnder the prote∣tion of Princes and potentates, who at the beginning, vsed very wisely and chri∣stianlye the presentation of thys Con∣fession. For the wordes of the Authour bée these, Article, 10. De Coena Domini do∣cent, quòd cum pane & vino verè exhibean∣tur corpus & sanguis Christi, vescentibus in coenae domini, that is to say: Touching the Supper of the Lorde, they teache, that wyth the bread and wine be exhibited the body and bloud of Christe, to those that eate the Supper of the Lorde. In these wordes the Confession of Auspurge, make no mention to receyue the body of Christe really and exteriorly, as you say in youres, neither make they
mention at all that the worthie and vn∣worthie doe receiue it. But herevnto you saye, that we hau not the true and incorrupte confession o Auspurge, but that you haue certayn Co∣pies and exemplaries thereof beste corre∣cted, whyche you folow in your doctrine: is it possible (brethren) you shoulde bée so negligent in the correction of youre con∣fession wherof you make so great value▪ I am not of opinion that the princes pro∣testants wold suffer to be printed in thei townes, Articles of their confession, con¦taminated and imperfect: truly you trou¦ble greatly the world: for if those whic follow not your confession, be condemne by your sentence, and you onely haue th true copie of this confession, wée must  thē necessarily come to you as to a spring or fountatne of truth and helth: some ma saye (as in derision of those things,) tha wée muste come on pilgrimage to searc youre Registers and Libraries, as in ty∣mes past they went to Ierusalem, Rome, o S. Iames. Oh good God, what mockerie what presumption of people? But, to pre¦uent
you of cause of complainte againste vs, and that your inconsideratiō be more manifestly discouered, we wil receiue the article of your incorrupt confession, whi∣che as you say to bée reserued with you, so you shall fynde it beareth not a worde of that which you haue vttered. Youre wordes bée these: Sequimur igitur in hac controuersia sententiam decimi articuli Augustanae confessionis: porò ar∣ticulus ille decimus ita habet in incorruptae confessione, quàm sequimur: De Coena do∣mini docent, quòd corpus & sanguis Christi verè adsint, & distribuantur vescentibus in Coenae domini: & improbant secus docentes. That is to say: Wée followe in this que∣stion and debate the aduice and sentence of the tenth Article of the Confession of Auspurge, which tenth article is written in this sorte, in the confession whiche wée followe, whiche is not corrupted: It is taught, touching the supper of the Lord, that the body and bloud of Christ be tru∣ly presente, and bée distributed to suche as eate in the Supper of the Lorde, ney∣ther are they approued which teache o∣ther
wayes. Nowe (brethren) I praye you shew mée where it is that you finde here you realities, and vbiquities, or that the vn¦worthy doe eate the body of Christe, wit other sortes of doctrines which you hau preferred, and wold authorise them wit the confession of Auspurge, whyche not¦withstanding, wée will not receyue as  rule of oure Christianitie, and much less the Confession of anye other man that i vpon earth. Wée will be Christians, and so be cal¦led, we will folow the confession of faith whyche oure GOD the father, and Ie¦sus Chryste hys Sonne haue lefte vnt vs: that is to saye, the dyuyne word in the olde and newe Testamente th summe of oure Religion: Wée receyu the simbols of fayth receiued of olde tim in the Churche: we haue not bin bapti¦sed in the names of Martine, Zwinglius or Caluin, but in the name of the Father the Sonne and the holye Ghoste: by whyche meanes wée detest and abhorr all those names and surnames of Par∣tialities,
that is to saye, Martinistes, Zwinglians and, Caluinists, with other ke, knowing very well that GOD is reately displeased wyth suche separati∣ns and partialities in the doctrine of re∣gion. And I wish with al my heart, that he doctours whiche haue taught here be∣re, and suche as at this day doe preache e Gospell, were of more modestie and isedom, and purely consecrated to search he glorie of the Lorde, and not theyr wne proper praise: then should the peo∣ple bee in more lybertye of conscience, nd the worshippers of one onely God, nd not of mortall men, ignoraunte and ynde, who, makyng themselues as Idolles, doe desire to bée followed and olden in greate admiration: I woulde  God that euery one woulde saye with Sainct Iohn the Baptist, it is méete that Iesus Christe be exalted and magnified, nd that I be diminished and vnknown: t is to Iesus Christ, to whome we ought o send the poore soules, desirous to finde nowledge and iustice, and not to youre confessions, institutions, catechismes, or
commentaries. For the reste (brethren) you séem to complayne of the greate diuersitie  interpretations that many haue pronoū¦ced vpon the words of the Supper, wh¦che partly I can not denie, bicause man desirous to make their churche apart, do raise their value or estimation of them selues among their audience, wyth pr¦tence to celebrate their owne names: fr whence it procedes, that hauyng but on truth, and one simple intelligence in th wordes of Christe, all suche as digref from the same, to vse some strange an newe order, do euery one bryng into th Churche his innouation. But I beséech you cōsider, whether a¦mongst those that receiue the tenth Art¦cle of the Confession of Auspurge, ther b any diuersitie of interpretatiō, to the en that if you wil haue all the worlde (for  eschuing of the condēnation of your sen¦tence) to folow your confession: you fir labor to establish an accord amōgst you selues, and then euery one wil deliberat vpon that he hath to doe. For you bein
deuided amongst your selues,Thei of the cōfession of Auspurge, agree not amongest themselues vpon the vvordes of the supper. Reade the booke na∣med Anti∣these of the true & fal exposition of the tenth Article of the Cōfes∣sion of Au∣spurge, the Authour of the same is Sybran An¦dreas. Touching the dissen∣tion of M. Ylliricus, vvith Phi∣lip Melan∣cthon, and those of the confessiō of Auspurge, read the e∣pistles of Melancthō in manye places, but chiefly the Page 452. Also the Acts Synodals imprinted in the yere, a thou∣sande, fyue hundred fiftie and nine. Also the ansvvere giuen to the legate of Saxon by Philip Melancthon. & of diuers pinions, we are ignorāt in the part we ught to folow to escape your cōdēnatiō. First you know well that Mathias Yl∣ricus, whome I thinke to be the author f your confession, is not of opinion with hose that haue composed and presented he confession of Auspurge, and you and e are not ignorant of the contētions, de∣ates, and dissentions, which be euen till his day betwene him & others: Al which I will not here repeate, bycause my in∣ente is not, to kindle the coales of dissen∣ion, but rather to quenche them, I will ot bring to lighte the faultes of others, ut rather couer & hide them, albeit it is asie for euery man to sée, both how thin∣ges haue passed, and how they are now v∣ed, and that by Bookes that are printed. Touching the breaking and brusing of breade, you sée I am sure, that in thys owne of Antwerpe, the Ministers be not of accorde. I leaue aparte the truthe of the Question, which you call indifferent,
notwithstanding that the institution  the Lorde beareth by manifest wordes the breaking of the bread. S. Paule ca¦leth yt holy Supper the breking of bread whych also all the auncient church do ap¦proue. And for my part, I am of opinio that in the ceremonie of the holye Sup¦per, the breaking of breade oughte to b obserued, as signifying and assuring t vs that Iesus Christ was offered & bro¦ken for vs: for the reste, as when Chris celebrated the supper, whether the bread he had then betwene his hāds,Seeke the confession. K. 10. &. 11. was grea or little, I leaue the decision of that que¦stion to Monsieur Mathias Yllyricus, wh saith that Iesus Christe in the Supper brake the breade, bycause the cakes wer too great, and hée had not made prouision of little waffernes as we vse, so that ne∣cessitye forced hym to breake the breade without hauing intent to teache vs any thing by the breaking of the bread. The Churches of the moste noble Prince elector and Countie Palatine, re∣ceiue the confession of Aspurge, and yet in youre Catechisme you teache that the
vnfaithfull and vnworthye doe not eat the bodye of Christe in the Sacrament, the which is against your article, and cō∣setly against the confession of Au∣spurge. The Diuines of the renoumed prince of Hess haue receyued the confession of Auspurge, and yet Andreas Hyperius do∣ctour of the vniuersitie of Marpurge be∣longing to the sayde Prince, receyued the Confession presented by the Straun∣gers out of the towne of VVesell, against which confession Heshussius his compani∣ons and yours, haue raised many deba∣tes, to banish from the countrey such as folowed the said confession, the same ar∣guing manifestly, that you and your com∣panions be not of accorde with the chur∣ches of the sayde Prince. Ioannes Pimeerus; a man learned, and no lesse deuoute, as you knowe, albeit be receyued the confession of Auspurge, writ notwithstanding, a booke against the said Heshussius, refuting the opinions of the Supper, and other things, the whiche Heshussius nameth himselfe to be of the
confession of Auspurge, and your adhe∣rent and confederate to maintayne this dissention. In the yeare 1565. the righte noble Prince elect of Saxon, presented to the v∣niuersitie of VVittemberge, the writings of Ireneius and Iames Andreas, as vpon meaning to examine thē touching their opinion of the supper, where vnto the v∣niuersitie aunswered, that the sai en∣rius and Andreas, vsed in this matter di∣s and sundrie orders of speache, both now, dangerous & altogither vnknown to the auncient Church, that is to saye, that the humanity of Christ was disper∣sed into euery place▪ that the humanity of Christe was Creatour of all things, that Iames Andreas confounded the com∣munication of languages or properties in the person of Christe, and that they shared that the vniuersitie of Tubinga & the church of VVittēbergh were troubled with these innouatiōs of doctrine, exhor¦ting them to cease from such disputati∣ons, with contentment onely to beléeue that the wordes of Christ be true, when
he sayth, this is my body. Now my bre∣thren, what part I pray you shoulde we follow, séeing both the one and the other be of the confession of Auspurge? Paule Eberus denyeth expresly, that the vnworthy eate the fleshe of Christ, who being of the confession of Auspurge, doth neither agrée with you, nor yet with Brentius, who maintaineth, that Iudas (in the Supper) did as well receyue the body of Christ, as S. Iohn, or S. Peter. The eyght article of the confession of Auspurge doth teache, that the vnfayth∣full are not members of the church, and therefore receyue not but the outwarde signes of the Supper. So that when you lay that the vnworthie receyue the body of Christ, you are there contrary to your own proper confession. I pray you what coniunction is there betwéene light and darknesse? What acquaintance betwene Iesus Christ and Beliall? No, let vs ra∣ther remember and retayne that whiche the Prophet sayth, that God loueth not the wicked nor their wickednes, neither shall the vngodly dwell with him.
Philip Melancthon, author of the con∣fession of Auspurge, in the Apologie of the same confession doth teache, that the participation of the body of Christ is re∣ceyued of the faythfull by the meditation of his benefits: then to receyue Christ, it is not néedefull to gnawe him or breake him with our téeth. Besides, the wicked which haue no meditation, nor godly re∣cordation of the benefites of Christ, al∣though they chaw the bread, yet can they not receyue Christe by the saying of the same Author, to whome your doctrine is contrarie in this poynt. Martine Luther hath ben estemed a good interpreter and vnderstander of the con∣fession of Auspurge, and yet he fayth that the very iuice and mary of the holy Sup∣per, is to receiue an assurance of the re∣mission of oure sinnes by the sacrifice of Christ. Those then that say, that the vn∣faithfull and vnworthy receiue the bodye of Christ, which is the iuice and marow of the sacrament, be contrary to the said doctor: and by consequent, to the confessi∣on of Auspurge, the which you do in you
Article. The Duke of VVittembergh, willeth and meaneth that his confession agrée with that of Auspurge, and yet the arti∣cle of the Supper in his confession is in∣terpreted by the wordes of Ezechiell, say∣ing this Quarey or tyle is the towne of Ierusalem. &c. That is to say, doth signi∣fie or meane the towne of Ierusalem. &c. Who then will not receiue this place in the interpretation of the Supper, disa∣gréeth with the confession of the sayde Prince, and by consequent, with that of Auspurge, amongst whom is Kemnitius, who reiects wholy this place in the mat∣ter of the Sacraments. Touching this worde (vnworthye) and who ought to be called so, you be not of accorde: for Heshussius your compani∣on, with large argumentes goeth about to proue that the faythful cānot any way be called vnworthy. Kemmitius (in the cō∣trary) maintayneth that the place of S. Paule treating of the vnworthinesse of such as receyue the Supper, ought to be erstanded and interpreted by the o∣ther
place of the Gospell, where the Cer¦uriō saith that he is not worthy that I¦sus Christ enter into his house, as the a¦cient doctors haue interpreted it. Whic of these shall we beléeue, séeing they be  contrarie opinion, and yet both the o and other followers of the confession o Auspurge? The xiij. Article of the Confession o Auspurge, teacheth that the lawfull vs of the Sacrament demaundeth necessar¦ly Faith, without which vse, the Sacra¦ment is no Sacramēt. Those then whic haue not fayth in the administration o your Supper, haue not also, neither Sa¦crament nor body of Christ, and therfor the Communion that the vnworthie do make, resistes your owne confession. The xxj. Article of the confession  Auspurge sayth, that for the difference  ceremonies and traditions of men, a m ought not to accuse the other Churches and much lesse condemne them of erro nor call them aduersaries, who are of contrarie opinion: And yet you (my br¦thren) call the other Ministers of thy
Church, aduersaries, enimies, and peo∣ple cut off from your companie, bicause they do not blesse at the aultar the bread efore they doe distribute it, with obser∣uation of other ceremonies that are of ustome in your Supper. Touching this worde (with) when you saye the bodye of Christ is receyued with the breade, you are not of accorde: for certain of your cōfession affirme that Christ is enclosed within ye bred, others, vpon the bread, others, as the fire with∣in the hote water, others, as ye fire with∣in the burning iron, others, as the grāge or house within the letters or wordes of contract: in effect, who woulde recite all the similitudes & interpretations which they of the confession of Auspurge, haue made vpon the words of the supper, and all to maintaine the doctrine of the pre∣sence of Christ, linked with the exterior lements, should find the discourse long, and the matter of small purpose. In the ende, Iohn Alasco, superintendent of the Church of London, being in the Church o Frankefort, and séeing such dissentions
tending rather to dissolue the vnitie  the Church, than to redresse it, is of opi¦nion, that, that worde of the Confession of Auspurge, where Christe is receyued with the breade, signifieth, that when th faythfull eate the breade in the Supper with their corporall mouth, their spirite with the mouth of Faith receyues Iesus Christe, whiche is on the righte hand of GOD. And suche interpretation o this worde (with) was receyued of th Senate of the towne of Frankefort, as a declaration agréeing with the confession of Auspurge, whereby the poore straun¦gers which are withdrawne thither, liue in peace and quiet, vntill by reason of o¦ther quarelles, this Question was eft∣soones renued, by whiche meane they be¦came in effect the cause of the dissipatio of so flourishing a Church. There be al∣so amongst you that say, that the body o Christ is present in the Supper, as Iesu crucified, was present to the eyes of th Galathians, and as the day of Christ wa present to Abraham: and yet are they re∣ceyued into the company of these which
maintaine the Confession of Auspurge. And bicause Heshussius, being at the vni∣uersitie of Hidelbergh, made himselfe eni∣mie to this interpretation, and troubled the Church with debates and questions: it is sayde he was banished from the said vniuersitie, like as diuers haue alreadye put in wryting many things belonging to this dissention, and others whiche we haue mentioned. Beholde (brethren) one chiefe occasion much hindring manye men to embrace the true religion, and to bring themselues into your assemblye, as séeing amongest you so great diuersitie of opinions. And for your partes, touching the matter of the Sacraments, you pursue them so e∣gerly, so sharply, and with such bitternes and stomacke, yt the very blinde themsel∣ues discerne in you, more desire to obteyn victorie, than zeale of God to instructe your ignoraunt brother. For when we haue a direct will towardes our neygh∣bour, with a liuelye touche of compassi∣on of his ignoraunce, and haue a Chri∣stian desire to manifeste vnto him the
truth, we do not procéede by iniuries, ex∣cōmunications, nor condemnations, the same being in déede the very effects and motions of a contentious and arrogant spirite, with a minde full of felonie. But of the contrarie, we vse swéete and softe words of inducement, with persuasions of modestie, as knowing assuredly, that man is a kynde of creature so fierce of stomacke, as he is not to be qualified o∣therwise than by gentle admonishment, and specially in the case and question of his religion, which hauing hir true foū∣dation in the bottom of his hart, it is im∣possible to plant persuasions of religion afore we haue ouercome & gayned that place with gentle allurements, and then with frute, to plant there the doctrine of fayth. Besides also, you labor vs greatly to enter into disputation in this Church vpon the poynt of the supper, which we will not refuse, so that it may be done in good order, and with the consent of the state: we would also that you agrée first amongest your selues, to the ende we might knowe what part to maintayne:
Wherin albeit I cannot but feare, that your intent was rather to search matter of triumph without victorie, with occa∣sion to sende of your bookes to the nexte fayre of Frankefort, than of a zeale & pur affection to pacifie this afflicted Church: toward which God graūt vs the zeale of his glory. And I pray you, of what pur∣pose wold it be to vs vpon the disputatiō to agre with you: seing that by such mea∣nes, we shuld fal into ye euil wil of a gret part of the Princes Protestants of Ger∣manie, who abhorre alredy the opinions you haue vttered of the person of Christ to be in the presence of the Supper? by the same meane also, we shuld make our selues companions and adherents to Yl∣lyricus, your Superintendent, or author of your confession, who is hated of the moste noble Churches and vniuersities of Germanie, and chieflye in VVittenberge, who hath bin ye mother nurse of the first Protestants. These things considered, I sée neither order to dispute, nor reason to come to accord with him & his adherēts. The seconde point, wherein I reque∣sted
Mathias Illyricus and you, to take some paynes, was, in the doctrine of mor∣tification, a thing most necessary for this lamentable time, wherin we sée so many Epicures, so many Libertines, so manye Atheists, and people abandoned to all fil∣thinesse and dissolution: of which so prin∣cipall a matter you touch not one worde in all your cōfession, but rather with your vnbridled order of procéeding, shewe to ye people great example of immortification. By the which, those that haue iudgement in spirituall things, maye sée that youre doctrine and Scripture is not a doctrine taught by the spirite of God, and recey∣ued in his schoole: but rather certayne textes and propositions gathered oute of the papers and Bookes of others, who (peraduenture) haue proued better than wée, that whiche they haue taughte and left in writing. The last part of my request to M. Illi∣ricus, was, to exhorte you to intertaine a charitable and louing vnitie, to the ende al the church might be edified, as well by the one as the other, which he hath done
quite contrarie in your cōfession, as wit∣nesseth the words of ye xvij. article in this sort: Quod aduersariorum coena impie cele∣betur. Si quis hactenus dubitauit, vtra sen∣entia sit verior in sacramentaria cōtrouersia, lli sanè vel ex solis ipsorum agendis ac formuli sacra communionis, & ipsa praxi coena statue∣e haud difficulter poterit. Tantis enim corru∣ptelis, sacrilegijs, in tam sacrosanctis mysterijs assantur, vt citra horrorem ac tremorem eas ophanationes, pia mens cognoscere non possit. as igitur vastationes ac violationes tanti my∣sterij hic breuiter exponemus, vt sibi pusilli Christi cauere à tantis piaculis & ira Dei pos∣snt. Multis ergo modis eorum liturgia impiè ragitur. That is to saye: If any by the things aforesayde, be yet in doubte, not knowing whiche is the truest opinion in the matter of the Sacramentes, he may easily be certified of a truth in beholding their actions and ceremonies in the cele∣bration of the Communion:A sharpe poynt of M. Yllyri∣cus in his confession. for there be so many corruptions and sacrileges in so holye mysteries, that a Christian mynde cannot behold such prophanations with∣out horror and feare. We will then de∣clare
briefly in this Epistle, the destru∣ctions and violations that are commit∣ted in so great a mysterie, to the ende the little ones of Christ maye stande vpon their gard against such execrable crimes, but speciallye againste the ire of God. Their ceremonie of the Supper (that is to saye,The prea∣chers of the confes∣siō of Au∣spurge ac∣cuse the o∣ther mini∣sters. of the sacramentaries as you call them) is celebrated with impiety in ma∣ny sorts. First you say, that we make no benediction vpon the bread. Secondly, in that, that when we giue the breade, we exhort those that receyue it, to haue re∣membrance of Iesus Christ broken, of∣fered, and sacrificed for our reconciliati∣on to the heauenly father, and satisfactiō of our sinnes with the diuine iustice. Thirdly, bicause that in this, we séeke to be folowers of Iesus Christ, who cele∣brating the supper, sayd to his disciples: Take and eate. &c. Fourthly, you accuse vs in that we forget in the Supper the wordes of consecration. Fiftly, for that we pronounce not the wordes of conse∣cration, to the ende the bread may per∣ceyue our voyce, and so vnderstande the
worde of God, and so be conuerted into the body of Christe. Sixtlye, you accuse vs, bicause we persuade the assistantes, not to settle their eyes vpon the conside∣ration of the visible & exterior elements, but rather raise our minds & cōsideratiō to Iesus Christ, the true heauenly bread for the nouriture of our soules, who be∣ing already immortall, is glorified vpon the right hande of the Father. The sea∣uenth impietie which you saye we com∣mit, is, That we tell the assistantes that they take the breade and wine in remē∣braunce of Iesus Christ. In the eyght, you saye we fayle, in that we vse the wordes of Christe, saying: Take and eate, and haue remembraunce of Iesus Christe employed for you, wherein ac∣cording to your scoffes of custome and poeticall sleightes, you make vs like to the Beguiars and Beguines, when they féede in their repastes. The Lorde pardon you such orders of teaching to your neygh∣boures, and reueale vnto you the mo∣dest grauitie whiche he demaundes in those that professe themselues pastors of
the shéepe, and pronouncers of the Go∣spell. Ninthlye, you blame vs in that we doe not counterfeite Iesus Christ as the Priests of the Papists doe, as obseruing not point by point, and worde by worde, the ceremonies that he made, and speake not in the same order the wordes which he pronounced. Your tenth and last accu∣sation is, in that (as you saye) we rob de∣ceitfully the supper of the wordes of con∣secration, by meane whereof the body of Christ ought to come thither, and yet we say to the assistants that they receiue the bodie of Christ. Beholde (deare brethren) one part of the accusatiōs wherwith you haue char∣ged vs touching the matter of ye Supper, whervnto I will not aunswere, as being things so vaine & of so small importance, that there is none participating with ey∣ther pietie or godlinesse, which accoūt not the time lost, or at least euill employed in the debate of such things, for as the Lord hath made vs once to vnderstand (by his grace) what it is to receyue Christe, and that we haue felt the fruites of his pre∣sence,
so all youre accusations and Ar∣gumentes of persuasions to the contra∣rie, are but superfluous. And therefore in place to make you aunswere, and fall into the faulte whiche I sée in many, who doe nothing in all the tyme of their life, but dispute and debate, I will praye to that good God, to giue vs all a grace of participation wyth his lighte, whyche chaseth awaye all darkenesse of error and ignoraunce. I praye you what fruite can procéede in writing a newe booke of the questions and differences, that these .xxx. yeares haue bin so sharply argued, and yet with∣out profite. Would it be any other thing than in causing to bée reprinted sundrye repetitions, to fil the faires of Frankeforte and set the bookeprinters on work? A va∣nitie moste greate, and yet followed of manye men of knowledge, who, desirous by these meanes to borrowe themselues an estimation, wish that the world knew that they haue such a facilitie to compose bookes, that in one euening after supper, they can write as many quaires, as may
suffise a spéedy Printer to imprint in a wéeke. Considering (alas) not at all, that the deuotion of a christian consists not in wordes, nor in the multitude of papers and bookes, but in the true feare of God, accompanied with liuely faith and care∣full mortification, with study, by all oure possible means to preserue the bond & lea∣gue of charitie one to another, giuing the worlde to knowe, by oure lyfe and exam∣ples, that our confession is the better. I coulde haue wished (deare brethren) that where in your confession, you haue disgorged so manye iniuries at youre pleasure, againste suche as desire youre wealth and honour, at the least that you had giuen a shew of a christian modestie. But it séemeth that you woulde make this youre vncharitable dealing an eui∣dent witnes & proofe of the hate and euill wil you beare against your neighbors, & that without any iuste occasion in them, calling them aduersaries and ennimies, prophaners of the Supper of the Lord, & darkening wyth corruption the words of S. Paule. You call them sacramentaries,
people that know not what meaneth the ascention of Christe, what is hys righte hand, nor what is glorification of the hu∣manitie of the Lorde, wyth other lyke thynges. Let vs leaue, let vs leaue (good bre∣thren) such maner of disputation, and let vs forget to maintaine oure owne inter∣pretation: yea let vs search the edification of the church of Christ, and not our own glorie. Let vs studie to leade men by our preachings to Iesus Christe oure Soue∣raine doctour, and not to followe neither the cōfessiō of Auspurge, the Catechisme of Martine, nor the interpretatiōs of Iohn nor Peter. Lette vs make it knowne to all the princes and potentates of Germanie, that al those questions be banished, and wée desyre to lyue in reconciliation and friendshippe: And let not the weake haue occasiō to say, that we serue most as mat∣ches and bellows, to kindle the hearts of such personages, to make them shew thē∣selues enimies of those who confesse one selfe Gospell of Christe with them. Truly the Doctors, Pastors, and Mi∣nisters
of the Gospell, ought to bée suche now, as by word and writing, to become suters to the Princes Protestants, to take into their protectiō, and vnder their wings, the churches which the Lord hath stirred vp in these lowe Countries, and that they maye become humble interces∣soures to the king of Spaine, oure soue∣raine Magistrate, for pitie ouer hys poore and moste loyall subiectes, who without any offence vnto the Maiestye of theyr Prince bée persecuted, murdered, afflicted as seditious and rebells, and hādled with more crueltie than may be beléeued but of such as haue séene it. In the meane whyle, wée triumph in the Pulpit wyth béestowing here and there, captious Inuectiues, callyng some Caluinists, some Sacramentaries, some seditious and rebelles, breakers of Images with other lyke. Wée sende oure Confessyons stuffed wyth Iniuri∣ous matters, debates, and quarrells, to the Princes of Almayne, to the ende they may sée what valiant champions we are on this side. And howe (at the least) the
Confession of Auspurge triumpheth in the towne of Antwerpe by oure meanes. In the whych meane while, the glorie of Iesus Christe is buried, or altogither forgotten, and we haue so hardened our harts, that the afflictions of our brethren and neighbors doe not touche vs at all, but we heare them reckened, and recken them our selues with scoffes and mocke∣rie, thinking to escape better cheape, by∣cause we are couered with the confession of Auspurge. No no (brethren) it can not be so, for God knoweth how and where to find vs, though it be in the bottom of the sea: he hath his armes so long, that he is able to draw vs from the lappe of the greatest Monarches of the earthe. And therefore lette vs not put our truste in the strength of the fleshe, but rather let vs march with all feare afore GOD, and search only his glorie. And in place to make factions and separations of the Churche, let vs go with one courage and heart to batter the kyngdome of Sathan, wyth the supersti∣tions and Idolatries broughte into our
Christian religion by him and his suppo∣stes.VVee ought so to preach and vvrite a∣gainst the abuse of the Papists vvyth a Christian modestie. Let vs make warre against vices, and not against men, whiche be the crea∣tures of God (bée they Papists or other) discouering so the abuses, as neyther the abusers nor they that be abused thynke, that we crie out against them rather by iniurious malice, than for a zeale wée haue to drawe them to one estate. Of what purpose is it to vs to fill our Bookes and writings wyth iniuries a∣gainste the Pope, Cardinals, Bishops, Priestes, and Monkes, and to studie for exquisite words and infamous epithetes to breath vppon them in the pulpit? Are wée so forgetfull that wée remember not what we haue bene our selues? Lette vs beare in mynde, that there haue not pas∣sed manye yeares since wée were in the same pitte and quagmier plunged vppe to the chinne, yea euen to the top of our hea∣des, from whence, if the Lord of his good∣nesse haue drawne vs, bestowing the tre∣sures of his mercie vpon vs, followeth it therefore that we shoulde either exclame or crie out against such as vnhappily re∣maine
yet in the place, from whence we are come? Were it not better to offer thē our hand to helpe to pull them out of the pitte, and to exhorte them gently to ac∣knowledge the myserable estate, wherin they are? for it is impossible euer to gayn their hearts by the way we take, bycause man wil be in libertye touchyng hys be∣léefe and religion: and the more he shall be resisted, the more eigre will he be foūd in the pursute of that that is defended vn∣to hym: employing hys bodye and goods, wyth lyfe and all (if nede be) to preserue his libertie in these points, and lastly wil estéeme those as hys sworne ennimies, who by anye other meanes (than gentle∣nesse) will séeke to spoyle hym of this li∣bertie. To thys (brethren) you maye aun∣swer me, that the tirannye of the papists is so abhominable, that there is no heart possessed with anye Religion,The tirāny of the Pa∣pists vppon the spiri∣tualtie & tēporalitie. whose paci∣ence maye endure so intollerable a yoke into the church of God, séeing they ar not contented to bury the benefites of Iesus Christe, to rob and vsurpe his dignitie, to
make themselues merchāts of his bloud and redemptiō, to beguile and seduce the poore people and their consciēces sending soules to hell, in place to draw them out of purgatorie, and lastly as a full of their tirāny haue subdued and put vnder their féete the Monarchs, Emperours, Kings, Princes, and Magistrates of the earth, forcing them to an humilitie vpon their féete: they haue vsurped Seigniories and principalities by violence and effusion of mans bloude, to t ende to make them∣selues princes and great Lords and theyr children, neuews, and allies, hauyng at∣tyred themselues gorgiously with stolne feathers, like to Esops crow: and where afore they were so simple, that they hadde scarcely wherewith to fill their bellies, nowe some of them are béecome Prin∣ces, some Dukes, Earles, Marquesses: others triumph at theyr pleasure, deuou∣ring the goodes of other men: all whych is tollerable with them, bycause that the Pope their father hath put them in pos∣session of suche wealth iniustly vsurped. And if anye one (kindled wyth the grace
of our Lorde) be priuie to such abuses, and goeth aboute to discouer them to the people, incontinent the Popes, their Parentes and Allies, with open mouth doe call suche Preachers Heretikes, A∣postates, banished Strangers, and peo∣ple vnworthye of reliefe in a Common state, and will enter forthwyth into de∣uise and trauaile, and that with all dili∣gence, to commit them eyther to the fyre and fagottes, or otherwise to extirpe them quite from the earth: bycause they feare that the preachers of truth, discouering their pot of roses (as the prouerbe saith) and that the worlde vnderstanding their tirannies, euery one will withdraw and take away his fether rightely belongyng to hym: and so in the end, the Crow will eftsoones become a crowe, and this ioily fellowe dothe returne to his first begger∣lye estate. Herevnto I aunswere and saye, (good brethren) that you haue greate reason, and I woulde in GOD the stones had mouths to manifest suche abuses. But yet there is necessarye to our side a
sober obseruation of modestie in ye words we vse to speake:The cause vvhy the papists and heir allies ake vvar against the Gospell. for my part, I dout not at all, that the diligence of the Popes, Cardinals, with their parēts and Allies, is not rather to maintaine their vsurped estates, than the glorie and zeale of God: for if they had anye religion, they would shew it in their life and cōuersation. But (alas) all the worlde séeth that the grea∣test zealors and defendors of the Papists, shewe almost no feare of God: and the Popes thēselues, deride with open throat our sauiour Christe, according to the exā∣ple of one that died not long since, who ha∣uing lefte behinde him many lordships to his children and nephews, vsurped by ty∣ranny, saide (in sorte of railing or madde scoffing) that this fable of Iesus Christ, had greatly profited many houses, who of shifting roysters and disordered people were become possessoures of large reue∣nues. Marke this blasphemie, consider what religion this holy S. Peter and vi∣car of Christe hadde in his hart, who not∣withstanding vsed his tymes and occcasi∣ons so conueniētly, as he forgat nothing
that concerned his profite. But my hope is in God, that he will destroy that Baby∣lon, and the tyrant Nemroth, that defen∣deth hir, his parents and Allies, who to preserue their vsurpations, raise warre against the children of GOD, and mur∣der them. Expecting (deare brethren) this hor∣rible iudgement and moste assured pu∣nishement that wil fall vpon them, let vs vse pacience in the wrong they offer vs: If they call vs heretikes, bicause we will not folowe the faith of their Popes, but embrace that which Christe hath taught vs. Let vs estéeme oure selues happie, if they call vs Apostates, bycause we bée come forth, or rather the Lord hath won∣derfully deliuered vs frō the Idolatries and superstitions of the Papistes. Lette vs accompt our selues neuerthelesse hap∣py: for my part, I protest afore the Lord, that it is to mée a title and surname of glorie and dignitie, to be called Apostate of the Pope and the Antichriste of Rome. If they call vs banished from our coun∣trey, let vs rather reioyce than discom∣fort,
knowing that God hathe not bani∣shed vs from his grace, neyther is it Christe that hath throwne vs out of hys spirituall kingdome: but it is the inquisi∣tours, who woulde either haue banished or burned vs per effigiem, in spending their rage vppon the strawe and papers, by∣cause they coulde not execute it vpon the flesh and bones of the members of Iesus Christ. Let vs giue thanks to god in that such banishments and persecutions pro∣céede not to vs as being guiltie either of thefte, murder, or treason to our Prince and magistrate, nor attainted of any o∣ther offence worthy of punishment, but bicause we search the health of our soules in the simple and pure word of God. If they call vs straungers, let vs re∣membre that the heauenly father,The chil∣dren pf God are ne¦uer out of their ovvn countrey. which hath aduowed vs for his children, is lord of Heauen and Earth. And into what part so euer we shall go, we be in the coū∣trey of our father, we be his proper inhe∣ritaunce, as the Prophete sayeth in the Psalm. 7. That the righteous shall dwel in the Earth, and be lawfull possessors of
the same. Let vs comforte oure selues in this, that neyther oure running oute of the countrey, nor oure absence from the lande of oure birth, hath béene moued by any vsurpation of the possessions or goodes of other: but onely to giue place to persecutions. Such fléeing awaye is not shamefull, but rather honourable, séeing we are companions of oure heade and redéemer Iesus Christe, who from his childhood was a stranger in the coun∣tries of the Egiptians, shewing the per∣secutions of Herode. If our persecutours doe curse vs, let vs blesse them, if they search or séeke oure death, let vs pray for their life: And when ther shall come question to discouer their abuses, tyrannies, and extortions, let vs vse it with sobrietie, modestie, and gra∣uitie, that it may appere euen to themsel∣ues, that we are not led by any malice a∣gainste their persones, but of a spirituall zeale to the glorie of God, the aduaunce∣ment of the kingdome of Christ, chiefe of the church, and to the health of the soules of the poore and simple people beguyled,
and seduced euen vntill now, by the prea∣chers of dreames and fables, who vnder the colour of Iesus Christe, haue marti∣red his church: and being in déed very ra∣uening Wolues, doe name themselues pastors and sheepherdes, of the troupe of God. Lastely, lette vs endeuor to liue in peace one with an other, whether they be of ye Romish religiō, or reformed church, praying always to the Lord that he will lighten vs in our ignoraunces, whiche wée ought to shewe to euery one wyth all modestie and gentlenesse, accordyng to the example of our mayster and Redée∣mer Iesus,Iohn. 3. who hath not disdayned to re∣ceyue gently, and teache myldly his very enimyes persecutyng hym dayely,Luke. 7. and making coniurations to take from him his life. Let vs remember that being euē vpon the crosse, pinched with the extreme pangs of death, not mynding his owne paines, he had remembrance of his eni∣mies, with prayer to his heauenly Fa∣ther, to pardon their offences: let vs imi∣tate the Lorde our creator, whose mercy and goodnesse are so plentiful, that he ma∣keth
his Sunne shine both vpon the good and the euill. Let vs not vse regarde, that this man hath suche an ignoraunce, nor that man will receiue any article of oure confession. Let vs loue all, helpe all, em∣brace all, and support the ignorances and infirmities of all. For better were it that we failed in this point (if it be a fault at all) than to make vs iudges of the con∣science of an other, and giue out sentence of condemnation against those that agree not with vs. For ende (deare brethren) I beséeche you take in good parte this my Epistle or Letter, mouing no otherwise than of an affectioned hart towards you, wherof the Lorde is my witnesse, and I assure it in myne owne conscience: and let it not (I praye you) be an occasion to you to write Bookes nor Pamphlets, eing I haue no meaning to enter into defiance, or warre with the pen, neither doth the tyme serue for it, but rather of néede to vs all to ap∣ply our selues to better things, and lette vs labour to encrease our knowledge in that which we want to be doctors of the
Gospel: for the acknowledging of our ig∣norance oughte rather to incense vs to a will to learn, than to make our selues in∣quisitours and censors of the Faythe of others, with employing the tyme to fill bookes and papers, wyth questions alto∣gither impertinent to edification. I humbly beséech the soueraine maie∣stie of our good God and heauenly father, that it will please hym to furnishe youre iudgements and vnderstādings wyth the knowledge of hys holy wor, to the end that by the meane of youre preachings, youre audience may learne a true faithe, an assured hope in Iesus Christe, and a carefull mortification of the olde Adam, and that the same Lorde, so renue youre harts and enflame your wills in the affe∣ctiō of charitie towards your neighbors, that from henceforth, wée, béeing ioyned with you, and you with vs, in we liue in peace, and tranquilitie of body and spirit in the assembly of our Lorde Iesus soue∣raine pastor of our soules, who, hauyng bought vs by the inestimable price of his obediēce, and bloud most precious, it may
also please him to garde vs agaynste all dissentions, & make vs liue in the vnitie of himselfe, vntill, that being spoyled of this corruption, we maye perfectly re∣ioyce in the coniunction of him and the e∣ternal glorie promised vs by his meane, of the which in his own person, ye rather to make vs inheritors therof, he hath al∣redy taken possession, sitting on the right hande of God with all power in hea∣uen and earth. To whome be all glorie and empire for euer. A∣men. In the tovvne of Antvverpe .ij. of Ianuarie, 1567. Your affectioned brother in Iesus Christ, and humble companion in the vvorke of God, Anthonie de Corro, of Siuill.
¶ To the Church of Antwerpe. THis onely (deare brethren) was intēded by this Epistle, to imparte it by conference with the Preachers of the Church, naming themselues of the con∣fession of Auspurge, withoute meaning to communicate it by publication, albeit bicause diuers written copies are cōmen into the hands of sundry and seueral per∣sons, I thought it to better purpose to spread abrode and deliuer it in print, thā to suffer it to be argued in secrete, least the same mighte moue cause of sinister iudgement against the simple and sin∣cere integritie of my meaning, wherein as the labour was peculiar in my selfe, without the enterviewe or counsell of a∣ny, so if it include any matter to edifie or confirme your consciences, it may please you to be thākfull to the Lord, as author of all goodnesse. And for the errors, I be∣séech you let them he layde wholye vpon
me, as vpon a man, who liuing yet in the peregrination to our heauenly country, where (we shal haue perfect knowledge) may erre and faile in many things. For we knowe that we are trauailers & ior∣neymen in this body,2. Cor. 4. we are absent from the Lord, and walke by faith, and not by vewe. For ende, I wipe my hands afore God & you all, of any intent eyther to re∣darguate or confute the articles presēted by those that call thēselues of the Con∣fession of Auspurge, but rather to let thē sée vpon what smal causes they haue for∣med great quarrels, maintaining dissen∣tion for a thing of small importance, and forbeare to deale in matters more neces∣sarie. Seing also (good brethren) that vpō the impression there remained certaine leaues voyd & vnfurnished of matter, I thought it not out of purpose to fil them with certaine places of holy Scripture, persuading the faithfull to actes of Cha∣ritie, with brotherly vnitie one to ano∣ther, yea not to forbeare to loue our pro∣per enimies, and such as pursue vs with persecutiō: a vertue at this day most im∣portant
and necessary, the rather for that Sathan employeth a wonderfull diligēce to sowe séedes of dissention and quarrels with speciall endeuor & straunge meanes to corrupt the league of charitie left vnto vs by Christ of such commendation: and all this vnder a pretence of diuersitie in religion, wherein as we ought to stande vpon our gard against the subtilties and policies of ye diuel, so assuredly, God hath not left vs either licence or libertie once to thinke that it is lawfull for vs to hate any man, in respect to maintaine our re∣ligion, séeing we are expresly enioyned by the words of the same, to loue such as de∣spise vs, and pray for those that persecute our bodies and doings. But alas, we are slipt into a time so miserable, and infected with such corruption & blindnesse, that in the maintaining of the integritie of oure faith, we become preiudicial to the league of charitie, with a negligent care of the vertue of the same. For my part I allow iustly such diligence as is vsed in the pur∣gation of abuses & errors, to the ende our holy fayth and Religion maye the rather
be purified, and remayne without spot: albeit I wishe a precise obseruation of Christian charitie, least in making war against the heretikes of our faith, we be∣come not heretikes against charitie. For whiche cause, and to the ende that euerye one be priuie to the bonde and obligation which God in this purpose, demaundes at our handes, I haue here collected out of the diuine word certaine speciall texts importing our charitable dueties & office vnto our neighbour, desiring you (deare brethren) to construe in the best my in∣tent, tending simply and altogither to re∣fute those Fables, dreames, and errors, whiche I sée sundrye with no small dili∣gence, labor to support and maintaine in the Church of Christ, wishing they parti∣cipated rather with a spirite of humilitie and myldenesse in the correction of the o∣pinions of others, than to striue to be∣come inquisitors of other mens faith, and much lesse to enter into sentēce of iudge∣ment against such as refuse their inter∣pretations, vntill they be assured by the spirit of god, that such opiniōs are direct∣ly
against the heauenly word, & that we haue witnes in our conscience, that God calleth vs to do it, for thē he himself will cloth vs with the affectiō of his Apostle, who to gaine and reduce his brethren, would not sticke almost to abandon his proper helth:Rom. 9. euen so when we féele such a zeale moue in vs, euen then also shall we proue in our selues, that God will blesse our enterprises. Let vs thē embrace peace, & entertaine mutuall accord, seing that as there is nothing that leuyeth a more sharpe warre within vs, than our owne discordes, disdaines, & partialities: so, of the contrary, if we marche vnder ye ensigne of charitie, supporting one ano∣ther in our infirmities, it shall be moste hard either to breake our aray, or put vs to flight:Eccle. 4. For as Salomon sayth: the accord of thrée strings is very harde to breake. My litle childrē I am yet for a litle time with you,Iohn. 13. you shal serch me, but as I said to the Iewes, yt whither I go, they could not come, I saye also the same vnto you now giuing you this new cōmandemēt, that you loue one another (as I saye) I
haue loued you, to the ende also that you loue one another. By this all men shall know, that you are my disciples, if you loue one another. That is the principall mark of our christianity, all others that we may inuent, may be folowed of ye hi∣pocrites, but this is inimitable, bicause it is peculiar only to the regenerate, and those that be renued by the spirit of god. Be you desirous of the most excellent giftes,Cor. 12. & 13. & I wil shew you a way yet more excellent. If I speak ye languages of mē and Angels, and haue not charitie, I am as the mettall that soundes, or Cimball that tinks. And if I haue the gift of pro∣phecie, and know all secretes, and euery science, & if I had such faith as I might transport the mountaines and haue not charitie, I am nothing: if I distribute al my goodes to the reliefe of the poore, & de∣liuer my body to be burned, and haue not charity, it profiteth me nothing: Charity is not easily incenied to anger, but she is mylde. Charitie is not enuious. Charity is not insolent, she swelleth not with an∣ger, she doth not vse hirselfe dishonestly,
she searcheth not hir profit, she is not des∣pitefull, she thinkes no euill: She taketh no pleasure in iniustice, but reioyceth in the truth: she endureth all, beléeueth all, hopeth for all, and suffreth all: Charitie neuer falleth. And a little after he sayth: These thrée things remaine, Faith, hope, and charitie: wherof the greatest is cha∣ritie. Those be the effectes of Christian charitie, which is neyther vaine opinion nor curtesie in outwarde shewe, but ra∣ther a vertue bringing forth wonderfull fruites. 1. Tessa. 4.Touching brotherly Charitie, there is no gret néede I write to you therof, seing you are taught of God to loue one ano∣ther, for euen so you do towards all your brethren which be in Macedonie. Brethrē, we exhort you to surmount more & more with diligence to liue peaceably: If the vnction of the spirit of God haue not yet taught you to loue your neighbors, let vs feare that our doctrine is not rather lear∣ned of men, than in the schoole of God. . Iohn. 2. & 3.He that sayth he is in the light, and ha∣teth his brother, is in darkenesse to thys
houre: who loueth his brother, remay∣neth in the light, and falleth not: but he that hateth his brother, walketh in dark∣nesse, and knoweth not whither he goeth, for the darknesse hath blinded his eyes. By this are manifested the children of God, and the children of the diuel. Who soeuer doth not iustice, and loueth not his brother is not of God: for this is it you haue hearde preached frō the beginning, that we loue one another, not as Caine, which was called wicked, and killed his brother: & for what cause did he kil him? for that his works were wicked: and his brothers were iust: Brethren maruel not if your brother hate you: in that we loue our brethrē, we know we are transferred frō death to life: who loueth not his bro∣ther, dwelleth in death: who hateth his brother, is a murtherer. And you knowe that no murtherer hath eternall life re∣mayning within him: by this we knowe his charitie, that he hath giuen his life for vs, we ought also to hazard our liues for our brethren. And this is a most cer∣taine and ample explication of the mark
of our christianitie which may serue as a touchstone to assure vs of our adoption. uer. 10. Verse. 12.Hate maketh quarels, but charity co∣uereth all grudges. This witnesse doth teach vs that the roote of dissentions and debates, is ye default of christian charity, which doth not only couer outward sins, but also ye ignorances of ye vnderstāding. Ibidem. 15. Verse. 17. & 18.The furious man moueth contention, but the pacient man appeaseth quarrell: this is a looking glasse wherein we may beholde the troublesome mindes of our time, who vpon small causes will stirre vp straunge quarels and debates. . Iohn.Welbeloued, let vs loue one another, for charitie is of God, and who loueth, is borne of God, and knoweth God, and he yt loueth not, knoweth not God, for God is charity. In this is manifested ye chari∣tie of God towards vs, yt he hath sent his only son into the world, to thend we may liue by him. In this is charity, not yt we haue loued god, but bicause he hath loued vs, & sent his son to be the appointment for our sinnes: Welbeloued, if God haue so loued vs, we ought also to loue one an
other. Neuer any mā hath séene God. If we loue one another, God dwelleth in vs, & his charitie is accomplished in vs: by this we know that we dwell in him, & he in vs, that he hath giuen vs of his ho∣ly spirit. And a litle after: If any say, yt he loueth God, & hateth his brother, he is a lyer: for if he loue not his brother whō he séeth, how can he loue God whom he séeth not? And we haue this commande∣ment of him, that he that loueth God, lo∣ueth also his brother: this text hath no néede of interpretation, but rather of proofe & examinatiō wherin let euery mā sound and proue his heart whether these wordes be with him or against him. Thou shalt not sée the oxe or shepe of thy brother straied out of the way,Leuit. 22. & hide thée from them, but thou shalt bring thē againe to thy brother. And if thy brother be not thy neighbor, & thou knowe him not, then shalt thou leade thē within thy house, & suffer them to remaine with thée vntill thy brother demaund them, & then thou shalt restore thē to him: thou shalt doe in like maner to his Asse, to his gar∣ments,
& al the lost things of thy brother, which he hath lost & thou founde, neither must thou hyde them: thou shalt not sée the Asse or oxe of thy brother falne in the way, & hide thée from them, but thou shalt helpe to lift thē vp with him. If the Lord commaund that our charity be shewed in the lifting vp of beastes, let vs consider wyth stronger reason, that his maiestie would that we haue care of the soules of our brethren and neighbors: whom if we sée strayed from the waye of truth, let vs labor to reduce them: if they be falne into the pit of error, let vs offer thē our hands rather than to pronoūce sentence of con∣demnation, & pursue thē euen vnto death. Texts of the diuine vvorde, exhorting vs to loue our enimies, and pray for such as per∣secute you. Leui. 19.THou shalt not walke as a detractor amongest the people, thou shalte not dresse thy selfe against the bloude of thy neighbor, for I am the Lord: Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy heart, correcte thy neighbor, & suffer no sinne vpon him: Thou shalt not reuenge nor kepe malice againste the children of thy people: but
thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy self: for I am the Lorde. You haue heard yt it hath ben said,Math. 5. thou shalte loue thy neighbour, & hate thy eni∣mie. But I say vnto you: loue your eni∣mies, blesse those which curse you, do good to such as hate you, & praye for those that runne vppon you to persecute you, to the end you be the childrē of your father that is in heauen: for he maketh his sun shine vpon the good and euill, and sendes raine vpon the iust and iniust: For if ye loue those that loue you, what rewarde haue you therfore? The Paganes do not they the like also? And if you imbrace onelye your brethren, what doe you more? Doe not ye pagans also the like? Be you perfect as your father is perfect that is heauē. Do not render to any euil for euill:Rom. 12. pro∣cure honest things afore al men: And if it may be, at lest as much as in in you, haue peace with all men. Do not reuenge (wel∣beloued) but giue place to anger, for it is written: To me belongeth vengeaunce, sayth the Lord, and I will giue it: if then thy enimy be hungry, giue him to eate, if
he haue thirst, giue him to drinke: for in this doing, thou shalt assemble coales of fire vpon his head. Be not ouercom with euill, but surmount the euil by the good. Rom. 13.Owe nothing to any man, if not that you loue one another: for who loueth an other, hath accomplished the law, which sayth, Thou shalt not commit adulterie: thou shalt not kill, thou shalte beare no false witnesse: thou shalt not couet, &c. And if there be any other cōmandement, it is in effect comprehended in this word, Thou shalte loue thy neighbour as thy selfe. Truly if we had this stone of foū∣dation of brotherly charitie in the buil∣dings of our life, traffickes & contractes with our neighbors, all the parts of this spirituall house which God hath giuē vs in charge, shuld be wel ordred & couched. Iohn. 13.After the Lord had washed their féet, & taken again his garmēt, and that he was set again at the table, he said vnto them: Know you what I haue done vnto you? you cal me Lord and master, and you say wel, for so I am: if then I that am Lord and master haue washed your féete, you
ought also to washe one anothers féete. For I haue giuen you example, that euē as I haue done, you may also doe. Why haue not we remembraunce of this holy ceremony when we celebrate the supper of Christ, séeing that he himselfe hathe prepared the hearts of his disciples with this admonition, afore he shewed or did institute the sacrament of their coniūcti∣on with him, giuing them to vnderstand that he is not worthye to receiue Iesus Christ, which doth not applye his heart to washe the féete of his brethren? I speake truth in Christ, I lie not,Rom 9. my cōscience bearing me witnes by the holy spirite, that I haue great sorow & conti∣nual torment in my hart: for I did desire to be separated with Christ for my bre∣thrē which be my parentes according to the flesh. When we shal féele our hearts so wel touched with the spirit of God, as S. Paule was, let vs set vpon hardly to correct ye errors & opinions of others, and so long as we are fleshly, & guided rather by stomack thā spiritual zeale, let vs em∣ploy our time to pray God for ye ignorāt.
Colos. 3.Let vs be thē (as chosen vessels of God, holy and welbeloued) clad in the intrailes of mercie, humilitie, gentlenesse, and of a minde of pacience, supporting one ano∣ther, and pardoning one another if wée haue quarrell: as Iesus Christ hath par∣doned you, euen so forgiue you others: & besides all this, be attired with charitie, the very bonde of perfection. And let the peace of God gouerne in your heartes, whervnto you are all called in one body, and be gracious. The word of God dwel fruitfully in you in al wisedome, teaching and warning one another, in Psalmes, songs, and spirituall prayses with grace, singing with your heart to ye Lord, wher∣by we shal sée how farre from these rules of charitie be they, that in place to edifie the Church of Christ, doe rather procure hir confusion with their debates and que∣stions. FINIS. IMPRINTED AT LONDON, by Francis Coldocke, and Henrie Bynneman. ANNO. 1577.
