7304 S110934 99846386 11348
A DISCOVRSE OF THE PRESER∣VATION OF THE SIGHT: of Melancholike diseases; of Rheumes, and of Old age. Composed by M. Andreas Laurentius, ordinarie Phisition to the King, and publike professor of Phisicke in the Vniuersitie of Mompelier. Translated out of French into English, according to the last Edition, by RICHARD SVRPHLET, Practitioner in Phisicke. AT LONDON Imprinted by FELIX KINGSTON, for RALPH IACSON, dwelling in Paules Church yard at the signe of the Swan. 1599.
TO THE RIGHT HO∣NORABLE SIR THOMAS WEST KNIGHT, LORD LA WARE, and the right vertuous Ladie Anne his wife. IT hath been vsuall and accustomed (Right Noble and worthie Sir) in all ages, and a∣mongst all sorts of people (though otherwise neuer so rude and barbarous) to adorne and eternize the manners, liues, conuersation, gests, birth and sayings of their famous and renowmed, with monuments either openlie and in liuely sort contayning and specifying the same: or more closely and secretly insinuating as much, that so the praise and fame thereof might remaine and liue throughout all ages. The course was good and commendable; for so the excellent and re∣nowmed deceased had but his due: the excellent and renowmed liuing, a glorious and beautifull spectacle, to stirre them vp vnto couragious and vndaunted perseuerance in still making vsurie of their excellencie: and the base, vile, and abiect persons (the spots and blemishes, yea the puddle and mudpit) of actiue, pregnant, and nimble nature, might rouse themselues from the lolling bed of their continuall snorting and dead sleepe. I meane not to bla∣zon and decipher particularly, and from point to point the origi∣nall & antiquite of your Nobilitie: The vprightnes, innocencie, mildnes, humanitie, bountifulnes and loue, in matters concerning your owne priuate affayres and businesses, wherewith your Ho∣norable condition is richly set and garnished. (The vehement sus∣pition of vndermining flatterie, the discontenting of your affec∣tions leaning to the contrarie, and the stirring vp of aduersarie e∣mulation and repining enuie vtterly disswading me). Neither yet doe I meane to proclaime and lay abroad your faithfulnes in the actions of Iustice, your wisedome in the discerning of things
necessarie, and swaying of matters most conueniently for the weale publique, or your prowes and valorousnes in warlike feates and Martiall affayres; howsoeuer the cause of God, your Prince and Countrie: your birth, Dignitie and leisure, hath (I doubt not) put both you and many other godly and religious Noble men within this Realme in minde thereof, and stirred you vp amongst other your godly cares and studies, to striue to become able and worthie, if her sacred Maiestie should at any time call you or them vnto the same. But leauing all these and whatsoeuer other praises, that might iustly be giuen to the manifold vertues, shining both in your selfe, as also in your Honorable Ladie, holding out the markes of a good profession in the loue of the trueth, with sobrie∣tie, modestie, and a good conuersation (notwithstanding the seas of sinne roring round about, and ouerflowing almost all estates and persons) and that so cleerely in the eyes and mindes of all such as doe not willingly winke, and couer the bright light of inward touch, with the vaile of wilfull sencelesnes: my onely indeuour and drift is to intreate your Honors to receiue with fauourable ac∣ceptation and good liking these first fruites of my publique la∣bours, as vndertaken for the good of all: so especially dedicated and deuoted vnto your particular seruice and vse, not so much in respect of any your present necessities, through any infirmities that I am priuie vnto, as to make way for the shutting out of such, as hereafter might creepe vpon you to your vntimely annoyance, assuring my selfe that in the reading thereof you shal finde a well stored treasurie of rich and rare Iewels, and in the practising of it, the comfort of health and contentation in satietie of daies. Which the Ancient of daies, with all increase of Ho∣nor, wealth, and pietie graunt and giue vnto you, and all your succeeding posteritie. Your Honors most vnfeignedly affected: RICHARD SVRPHLET.
To the Reader. COnsidering (gentle Reader) the lamen∣table times and miserable daies, that are come vpon vs in this last and weakest age of the world, partly by reason of the com∣monnes and multitude of infirmities, partly by reason of the strangenes and re∣belliousnes of diseases breaking out more tediously then heretofore: and conside∣ring herewithall how apt and prone the multitude and common people are to affect, nay (which is more) to dote vpon and runne after the painted crew of seeming Phisitions and pratling practisers both men and women, gathering their skill, honestie and most precious secrets, from the rich mines of brasen-faced impudencie and bold blindnes: I could not but admonish thee, as thou tenderest thy health and wealth, to auoide such noisome ver∣mine and deepe deceiuers. And on the contrarie, I can but exhort and stirre thee vp to buy and reade this and other such like treatises, that so thou maist be the better prepared, (though not to take vpon thee the cure of thine owne or others their sicke estate) to discerne betwixt the ignorant and the learned, and the skilfull in word on∣ly, and those which are skilfull in deede. As also that thou maist bee the better able to manifest and make knowne by word or writing the state and true condition of thy disease, vnto the profound and long studied in that profession, who for the keeping of a good conscience and thy welfare, haue not spared their bodies or goods, or refused any good meanes, whereby they might become fit to furnish thee with wholesome counsaile and due reliefe in the daies of thy distresse. Here shalt thou finde by serious suruay, great dimensions within small and narrow bounds. This volume shalt thou finde stuffed
full of Phisicke, as teaching by the lesser, what is to bee conceiued of the greater: and by a few, what is to bee followed in many. Full of Philosophie, as not resting in the things of the bodie, but deeply and diuinely laying open the nature of the soule. Herein is contained not onely great plentie of precepts, but also many controuersies of great moment and difficultie, sharply and pithily decided: and that with such varietie of authoritie, as is not almost in any other to bee found. This treatise shalt thou finde full of pleasantnes, as both the store of histories, and meanes of dispelling the mournfull fantasies of melancholike moodes, doe giue thee to conceiue: full of delight as maintaining the sight, the conductor and conueier of delights vnto the minde: full of healthfulnes, as teaching the way to auoide the rheume, that pregnant mother of so many maladies. And finally full of instruction and reliefe for the mitigating of the annoyances and inconueniences of drouping old age, as shewing the maner how to square out and piteh downe the firme and durable props of the con∣tinuing and long inioying of strong and lustie yeares. Which if thou striue and seeke accordingly to attaine, then shalt thou be the better able to discharge the duties of thy calling whilest thou liuest, and purchase to thy selfe a million of good witnesses, to reioyce and glad thy hart with∣all in the day of thy death and dissolution. Farewell.
TO THE NOBLE LADIE, MA∣DAME, DVTCHESSE OF VZEZ, AND COVNTESSE OF TONNERA. MAdame, since the houre that I had the hap to become knowne vnto you, you haue done me the honour as to com∣mit your health altogether into my hands, and to vouchsafe me as great cre∣dit, as if I had been a second Aescula∣pius. This affection and goodwill, which I acknowledge to proceede more of your kindnes and naturall inclination, then of any deserts of mine, haue so preuailed with me, that nei∣ther the loue of my country, nor the number of my friends, which was not small, nor the honourable place of publique Lecturer, which I discharged with sufficient commendation in one of the most famous Vniuersities of Europe, could stay or hinder me; but that passing ouer all difficulties, and breaking all these bonds, I haue intirely and wholly deuoted my selfe vnto you, and haue fol∣lowed you, wheresoeuer it hath pleased you to commaund me. I haue wherein I may exceedingly praise my selfe, and as hitherto to rest contented with my fortune, which hath been so fauourable vnto me, as to make all my seruice profitable and well liked of, I am verely perswaded Madame, that it was Gods will to vse me as the meanes for the lengthening of your yeares, and making of your old age more blessed and happie. You haue had sufficient triall thereof within these two yeares: for being very forcibly as∣sailed with three of the most violent and extraordinarie diseases that euer man hath seene, and which were strong enough to haue shaken the best complexion in the world, and to haue spilt the prosperous estate of a more flourishing age then yours, yet you haue not felt any eclipse of your vigour and lustines. This is of
God alone, (which hath opened my vnderstanding to finde out fit remedies, and himselfe to giue good successe thereunto) to whom I am bound to render all glorie. There now remaineth in you onely your three ordinarie diseases, which I labour to vanquish day by day, by obseruation of good Diet, and such gentle medi∣cines as are no way able any thing to alter and hurt the good dis∣position of your naturall constitution. In your right eye, you haue some small beginnings of a Cataract, but the other is perfectly sound. You feele at certaine times some touches of the windie melancholie, but so sleight, as that they vanish away like the smoke. The thing that is most tedious and troublesome vnto you, is those pettie distillations and fluxes of humours which fall down vpon your eyes, teeth, armes and legges. Your spirit, which is able to conceiue of any thing in the world, be it neuer so rare & strange, hath been very inquisitiue to vnderstand the causes, and to know from whence all these accidents should proceede, which I haue oftentimes spoken largely of, and that both in vulgar and com∣mon speeches, as also in the artificiall and plaine tearmes of Phi∣sicke. In the end my reasons became so well liked of by you, that (when you had withdrawne your selfe to the Abbey of Marmon∣ster, to sport your selfe with the beautie of the place and goodnes of the ayre) you commaunded me to set downe the same in wri∣ting, and to cause them to come to light, vnder the shield of your authoritie. I cannot with honestie denie it vnto you, howsoeuer yet it were meete, that so waightie a matter according to the de∣sert, should bee garnished with infinite varietie of authorities and proofes from the learned, which my memorie could not affoord, through my want of bookes. I haue therefore fitted vp and made readie three discourses for you, touching your three diseases: the first is, Of the excellencie of the sight, and the meanes to preserue it: the second is, Of windie melancholie, and other melancholike dis∣eases: the third is, Of Rheumes, and the meanes for to heale them. And vnto these in the ende I haue ioyned a little treatise of Olde age, which may bee for your vse against the time to come. For there is no shadow of reason why I should as yet call you old, see∣ing you are not incombred with any of the infirmities of old age. For is not this one of the miracles of our age, to heare your com∣munication
so wise and graue, to see your vnderstanding and iudgement so sound and vncorrupt, your memorie so fresh and plentifull, and your sences so absolute, as that on your sound eye you vse to reade a farre off the smallest letter that any man can bring vnto you, without spectacles? Your hearing also conti∣nueth very easie and quicke, and your taste also as exquisite and daintie as euer it was: your heart so couragious and lustie, as that notwithstanding all the assaults that euer your windie melancho∣lie could giue vnto it, yet it hath not been able at any time so to shake it, as that it could make it alter his course: your liuer so li∣berall, as that it ministreth store of blood more then is needfull: in so much as that we are cōstrained to cause you to tame it once a yeare. I will say nothing of the goodnes of your stomack, you your selfe know it well enough; hauing an appetite at euery houre, and disgesting whatsoeuer you bestow vpon it. Seeing then the faculties of the soule doe euery one of them so well execute and performe their functions and offices, can a man call the instru∣ment thereof ouerworne or old? I am perswaded (Madame) that no man can call you old in any respect, if it were not that you are past fiftie, and that custome in accounts hath designed the first degree of old age to this number. You haue great occasions to praise God: for this long and happie life is a certaine testimonie of his loue, because the most excellent reward which he promi∣seth vnto them whom he loueth in this world, is, that they shall liue long vpon the earth. Cheere vp your selfe then Madame, you are but yet on the first step of your old age, which is ouergrowne with flourishing greene, and affoording an vndaunted courage; you haue other two behinde and remaining. God who hath gi∣uen this strength vnto your bodie, and which hath honoured you with so gracious and good a soule, vouchsafe to make them as happie, as your Ladiship can wish or desire them. Your most humble and obedient seruant: ANDREAS LAVRENTIVS. B
The Author to the Reader. I Doubt not but that these treatises are in danger to be euill spoken of, and bitterlie inueighed against by an infinite number of persons, which are borne for nothing else but to carpe and finde fault, before they be well knowne. Some Phisitions will finde themselues grieued, for that I haue made vulgar the secrets of our Art, and they will be able to alleadge that the E∣gyptians (which were the first inuentors of Phisicke) to the end they might not make so diuine and sacred a gift of God profane and com∣mon, did write their medicines in enigmaticall and vnknowne let∣ters: but I will answere them with Aristotle, that a good thing by how much it is the more common, by so much it is the better, and that the Phisitions of Greece came once euery yeare into the beau∣tifull Temple of Aesculapius, which was erected in Epidaure, to write in the sight of all the people, whatsoeuer rare and strange thing they had obserued in their patients. The naturall Philosophers, will be offended for that I now and then grapple with that great inter∣preter of nature, Aristotle: but they shall haue no other replie of me, thē that of Aristotle himself. Plato (saith he) is my friend, & Socra∣tes also but yet the truth is more friendly vnto me. I shall haue more to doe to satisfie them, which busie themselues with nothing else but faire speeches and proper tearmes: for without doubt they shall finde an infinite number of rude words, which may offend their too dain∣tie and delicate eares: but if they will not consider how that I make it not my profession to write in French, yet I would haue them to hold me excused, because I am of opinion, as all other wise men are, that such curious sifting and hunting of words is vnworthie of a Philoso∣pher, and that therefore I am contented (auoyding barbarisme, whereof I know they shall neuer be able altogether to condemne me)
so to speake, as that I may cause to bee vnderstood the thing whereof I intreate. And as concerning all those enuious and malicious per∣sons which will not cease to barke at me though they know not how to bite me, I doe one  wish that they themselues would enter the lists and doe something themselues, that so I might see if they were as good in correcting as in carping. I am certainly perswaded that this my small worke will be accepted of all them Honorable: and it is to them that I frame and fashion my selfe, then boldly may I proceede vnder the shadow and couert of their wings.
DECASTICON IN ANGLICAM versionem scripti Laurentiani. QVae de Oculis nuper Medicorum scripsit Ocellus De Senio, & Succis, Senibus, cunctaeque molestis Aetati, mira doctus Lauraentius arte; Surphlettus (tanto ne Gallia solapotiri The sauropossit) donauit veste Britanna. Gallia ne inuideas, nec enim tibi nascitur vni Laurus tam florens; nostri hanc coluêre Britanni. Tit turpes oculi maculas Surphlette suetus Artisici remouere manu; (non vltima laus haec) Nunc grato hoc multo melius noscêre labore. F. Hering Med. Candidatus. Idem de eadem Idiomate Anglico. FAmous Fernelius, worthie heire Laurentius, To whom that Galen of our age did dying leaue His diuine Phisicke Muse 'mongst other learned works, This treatise fraught with skill, did write in vulgar tongue Of th'Eyes, Melancholie, Old-age, and troublous Rheume, Which Surphlet famous for his art-taught cunning hand, In cleering th'Eyes of spots, and noysome Catarrhacts, (Least France the happie nurse and mother of great wits, Should sole enioy this pearle) hath clad with English weede A worke of worth for Councellers and men of great estate, For Ladies, Students, such as  loue. Hence base Quack-saluers, boasting Thrasoes loathsome brood, Impostors, Parachymists, Latrons, Homicids, Who blindly and boldly rush into that sacred Art, Which none but Phoebus sonnes and Darlings of Minerue Could euer rightly exercise: Hence, hence apace, Pollute not with your filthie fists and pur-blind eyes These golden Theorems, these skilfull Medicins: For you poore sots (I wisse) the paines were neuer meant.
IN D. ANDREAE LAVRENTII D. MED. TRA∣ctat. De conseruando visu: De Melancholia: Catarrhis: & Senio; in linguam Calydoniam, per D. Rich. Surphlettum traduct. Carmen . HVmanum mala quanta premunt, quot monstra fatigant Sedibiss infernis eiaculata, genus? Vertigo, Febris, Tussis, cum Peste Catarrhus, Tabes, Syntexis, Stupor & Asthma, Bilis. Haec fera tartareis not vexant monstra flagellis, Nostraque funereo carcere corda premunt. Haec multos tetricas mittunt Acherontis ad vndas, Quos fouet in cunis torua Megaerasuis. Ergo Deus nobis languentibus obtulit artem, Morborum tolli qua genus omne potest. Artibus, huic nomen Medicina, celebrior vllis, Sola leuat morhos, corpora sana facit. Hac sine nullasalus, properantis munera vitae Prorogat, & longos dat Medicīna dies. Tu Surphlette pijs studijs addicte, peritus Arte Machaoniâ, quam, Deusipse dedit. Perge salutiferà morbos depellere dextrâ, Regnaque Plutonis fac populosa minus. Sic te fama feret candentibus aurea pennis, Sicque tui celebris fama laboris erit, Inter honoratos Medicos numeraberis olim, Te dicent Coo, Phylliridaeque parem. GABRIEL. POVVEL. Ineruditissmum D. Andr. Laurentij Tractatum Anglicè versum, . DAs Surphlette tuis longaeuae munera vitae, Quid melius nobis viuere vita dabit? Obstas ne stygij per lurida transtra Charontis Ferali Parcâ corpora raptamigrent. Cumque dolent homine, illis das rite valer Attollens morbos. Pharmaca sana doce Extremis obstare malis, vitaeque labantis Arte grauescentes multiplicare dies. Omnia quid referam? neque enim bona nouimus illa: Deficit ars artes sat celebrate tuas. Hac mortale genus, licet, immortale videtur: Si quid in hac vita, vincere fata valet. EPHRAIM PAGIT.
In commendation of M. Andreas Laurentius, Doctor of Phisicke, his Treatise of Sight, Melancholie, Rheumes, and Old-age: Englished by M. Rich. Surphlet. IF thou desire preseruatiues for Sight; If Melancholike sicknes thee onnoy; If noysome Rheumes thou wouldst auoyd outright; If thy old age thou wouldst in health enioy: Sith fading Sight, Rheumes, Melancholie, Age Are vitall spirits harme, and lifes engage. Loe here a souereigne salue for sickly Eyes, A good restraint for Melancholies rage, A drier vp of Rheumes that doe arise, And a conseruer of declining Age, For Darknes, Dumps, Catarrhes and forces faild, Light, Mirth, Mercurie fixt, and Strength vnquaild. Right worthy then thy praise O Surphlet flies Through whirling ayre, as famous for thy art, In curing of blind catarrhacted eyes, And for this worke performed on thy part; So that vnto thy labour and practise, A two-fold praise most iustly doth arise. Iohn Nut-hall Gent. Roger Foxe Gent. to the Reader. INgenious Surphlet finding in this worke Such store of treasure in abstruse to lurke, Thought he should doe his Country-men great wrong, Had he it shrowded left in forren tong. Wherefore in loue vnto his natiue soyle, He tooke vpon him this laborious toyle. Yet toyle no toyle, he doth the same account, So kind acceptance to his hope amount. Thank's all he craues, then cun him thank t'is small, If he haue thankes he thinks it all in all: The profit's yours, t'was his industrious taske To pluck you off that strange disguising maske. FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS CON∣tained in this Discourse. The first Discourse, wherein is handled the excellencie of the sight, and the meanes to preserue it. That the braine is the principall seate of the soule, and that in consideration hereof all the instruments of the sences are placed round about it, Chap. 1. How that the outward sences being the trustie messengers of the minde, are only fie, and all of them placed without the braine. Chap. 2 That the sight is the most excellent of all the sences. Chap. 3 Of the excellencie of the eye the proper instrument of sight. Chap. 4 Of the composition of the eye in generall. Chap. 5 A particular description of all the parts of the eye, and first of the sixe muscles thereof. Chap. 6 Of the sixe coates of the eye. Chap. 7 Of the three humours of the eye, of the beautie and excellencie of the christalline. Chap. 8 Of the sinewes, veines, arteries, and other parts of the eye. Chap. 9 How we see, as whether it be by receiuing in or sending forth something. Chap. 10 How many waies the sight may be hurt. Chap. 11 A briefe rehearsall of all the diseases of the eye. Chap. 12 A generall and most exquisite order of Diet for the preseruation of the sight, in which is shewed very particularly all that may hurt or doe good vnto the eyes. Chap. 13 Choise remedies for the preseruation of the sight, and the order to be obserued in applying of them. Chap. 14 The second Discourse, wherein is intreated of Melancholie diseases, and of the meanes to cure them. That man is a diuine and politique creature, hauing three speciall principall po∣wers: Imagination, Reason, and Memorie. Chap. 1. That this creature full of excellencie is now and then so abased and altered, by an infinit number of diseases, as that he becommeth like a beast. Chap. 2 Who those should be that are called melancholike, and how we ought to put dif∣ference betwixt melancholike men that are sicke, and those that are sound. Chap. 3 The definition of melancholie, and all his differences. Chap. 4 Of melancholie which is seated in the braine, and of all the accidents that follow it, and whence ariseth feare, sadnes, watchings, terrible dreames, and other acci∣dents. Chap. 5 Whereof it commeth that melancholike persons haue particular obiects quite differing, whereupon they dote. Chap. 6 Histories of certaine melancholike persons, which haue had strange imagina∣tions. Chap. 7 An order of diet for melancholike men, that haue their braine sicke. Chap. 8 How to cure such melancholike men, as haue the disease setled in their braine. Chap. 9 Of another sort of melancholie, which riseth of outragious loue. Chap. 10
Chap. 11 The meanes to cure those which are follish and melancholie by reason of loue. Chap. 12 Of the third sort of melancholie called windie melancholie, and the differences thereof. Chap. 13 Of the signes of windie melancholie, and from whence the accidents which fol∣low it, arise. Chap. 14 Histories worthie the obseruation, of two parties troubled with the windie me∣lancholie. Chap. 15 Of the curing of the windie melancholie. The third Discourse, wherein is intreated of the generation of Rheumes, and how they are to be cured. Chap. 1. That the braine is the seate of cold and moysture, and by consequent the wel∣spring of Rheumes. Chap. 2 What this word rheume doth signifie, what disease it is, and wherein his nature consisteth. Chap. 3 The differences of Rheume. Chap. 4 The causes of Rheume. Chap. 5 A generall order of diet to be obserued in Rheumes. Chap. 6 A generall methode to cure Rheumes. Chap. 7 The meanes to preserue the teeth. The fourth Discourse, wherein is intreated of Old-age, and how we must succour it. Chap. 1. That man cannot continue in one state, and that of necessitie he must waxe old. Chap. 2 A very notable description of old age. Chap. 3 An order of Diet to preserue the life long. Chap. 4 What ayre is to be chosen for the lengthening of life, and which is most fit for old folke. Chap. 5 Generall rules to be obserued in eating and drinking, therby to lengthen the life. Chap. 6 How we must in particular nourish old folkes, and with what victuals. Chap. 7 What drinke is most fit for old folke. Chap. 8 Of the exercises of old folke. Chap. 9 What rules are to be kept in sleeping. Chap. 10 How we must cheere vp and make merrie old men, putting them out of all vio∣lent passions of the minde. Chap. 11 What medicines are fittest for old folke, and by what skilfull meanes we may helpe to amend the infirmities of old age.
THE FIRST DISCOVRSE, WHEREIN IS INTREATED OF THE excellencie of the sight, and the meanes to perserue it. That the braine is the true seate of the Soule, and that for this oc∣casion all the instruments of the sences are lodged round about it. CHAP. 1. THe Soule of man (that most noble and per∣fect forme, that is vnder the face of heauen, bearing for a signe and token of his excellen∣cie, the liuely and true image of the Creator) although it bee in all poynts like vnto it selfe, not consisting of matter, or subiect to any diuision, and by consequent whole in all the bodie, and wholie in euery part of the same: yet the case so stan∣deth, that in respect of the diuersitie of his actions, of the diffe∣rence of his instruments wherewith it serueth it selfe, and of the varietie of obiects set before it: that it may seeme and appeare to the common people (after a certaine maner) to consist of diuers parts. The Philosophers themselues seeing the noblest powers thereof to shine more in one place then in another, haue gone a∣bout to lodge, and (as it were) to bound the limits thereof within the compasse of one onely member: in like maner as the Diuines (carried away by the wonderfull things which more cleerely ma∣nifest themselues in the heauens, then in any other part of the world) doe say that the heauens are the throne of God, although his essence bee infinite, incomprehensible, and stretching it selfe
through euery thing that is).Diuers opiniōs of the seate of the soule. For Herophilus beleeued that the Soule was lodged onely in the lowed part of the braine: and Ze∣nocrates (on the contrary) in the vppermost part therof: Erasistra∣tus, in the two membranes couering the braine, called of the Ara∣bians, Mothers: Strato, betwixt the browes: Empedocles, subor∣ned by the Epicures and Egyptians, in the breast: Moschion, in the whole bodie: Diogenes, in the arteries: Heraclitus, onely in the circumference of the bodie: Herodotus, in the eares: Blemor an Arabian, and Syreneus a Phisition of Cypers, in the eyes, be∣cause that men in them as in a glasse, doe behold all the passions of the soule: but all these in my iudgement are nothing els but fantasies and meere fooleries.Aristotle his opinion. There is a great deale more likeli∣hood in the opinion of Aristotle, that great expounder of nature, who thought that the soule had his proper seate in the heart, be∣cause that naturall heate, the principall instrument of the soule, is found in the heart, and this (saith he) liueth first and dyeth last, the onely storehouse of spirit, the originall of veines, arteries and si∣newes, the principal author of respiration, the fountaine and wel∣spring of all heate, containing within the ventricles thereof a sub∣tile and refined blood, which serueth as a burning cole to kindle and set on fire all the other inferiour and smaller sorts of heate, and to bee briefe, the onely Sunne of this little world. And euen in like sort,The heauens and the heart finely compa∣red together. as the heauens are the principals, whereon depend and rest all other elemental generations and alterations: so the hart is the first and principall originall of all the actions and motions of the bodie. The heauens bring forth their, wonderfull effects, by their motions, heate and influence: the heart by his continuall mouing (which ought no lesse to rauish vs, then the flowing and ebbing of Euripus) and influence of his spirits, doth put life into all the other parts, endoweth them with this beautiful and vermil∣lionlike colour, and maintaineth their naturall heate. The mo∣uing and light which are in the superiour bodies, are the instru∣ments of the intelligences and of the heauens: of the intelligen∣ces as being the first cause of mouing in others, being themselues immoueable: of the heauens, as first mouing the other, and being themselues moued. The mouing of the heart and vitall spirit, which distributeth it selfe like vnto light, throughout, and that as
it were in the twinkling of an eye, are the instruments of the mind and heart: of the minde, which is a chiefe and principall mouer, and yet not moued: of the heart, as of a chiefe and principall mo∣uer which is moued of the minde. It is therefore the heart, accor∣ding to the doctrine of the Peripatetikes, which is ye true mansion of the soule, the onely prince and gouernour, in this so excellent and admirable disposing of all things in the gouernment of the bodie. Chrysippus and all the Stoikes haue followed the same o∣pinion, and doe beleeue that all that region which containeth the parts which wee call vitall, is named of the Grecians and Latines Thorax, because it keepeth within it, as it were vnder lock, this heauenly vnderstanding (so called of Anaxagoras): this bur∣ning heate, (so called of Zeno) replenished with a million of sci∣ences: this admirable fire, which Prometheus stole out of heauen to put soule and life into mankinde: this altering spirit, whereof Theocritus made so great account. Behold how these Philoso∣phers haue diuersly spoken of the seate of the soule. It is not my minde to bestow any time in the particuler examination of all these opinions, either is it mine intent in this place to enter into any dispute, intending to content my selfe with the simple deli∣uerie of the trueth.That the brain is the principall seate of the soule. For I assure my selfe that it shall be strong e∣nough to ouerthrow all these false foundations. I say then that the principall seate of the soule is in the braine, because the good∣liest powers thereof doe lodge and lye there, and the most wor∣thie actions of the same doe there most plainly appeare. All the instruments of motion, sence, imagination, discourse and memo∣rie are found within the braine, or immediatly depending there∣vpon. Anatomie manifesteth vnto our eyes,The reasons to proue the same. The first. how that there issue out from the lower part of the braine seuen great paire of sinewes, which serue at a trice to conuey the animall spirit vnto the instru∣ment of the sences, and doe not any of them passe out of the head except the sixt paire, which stretch out themselues to the mouth of the stomacke. We see also that from the hindermost part of the braine (where the great and little braine doe meete together) doth proceede the admirable taile, the beautifull and white spinall ma∣row, which the Wiseman in his booke of the Preacher calleth the siluer threed, how it is carefully preserued within a sacred chanell,
as Lactantius calleth it. From the same, men see that there rise a million of little sinewes, which conuey the powers of mouing and feeling, vnto all such members as are capable of the same. Men doe also perceiue the outward sences placed round about the braine,The second. which are as the light horsemen and messengers of the vnderstanding, the principall part of the soule. Philo saith, that when men come within the view of a princes guard, they thinke himselfe not to bee farre off: we see all the guard and seruants of reason, as the eyes, the eares, the nose, the tongue, to bee situated in the head: whereupon by consequent we ought to iudge that this princesse is not farre off. Experience also giueth vs to vnderstand, that if the braine haue his temperature altered:The third. as for example, if it be too hot, as it falleth out in such as are franticke: or ouer cold, as it falleth out in melancholick men; it corrupteth presently the imaginatiue facultie, troubleth the iudgement, weakeneth the memorie: which is not incident in the diseases of the heart, as namely, either in a hectick feuer, or when a man is poysoned. The soule (saith that diuine Philosopher Plato) doth not please and content it selfe with that braine which is too soft,The fourth. too close and compact, or too hard: it requireth a good temperature. If the proportion of the head be but a little out of square, so that it be either too great or too little, or too coppeld, as that which men reade of Thersites in Homer: or altogether round and not flat on the sides, as naturally it ought to be: men may perceiue all the actions of the soule to be depraued, and thereupon doe call such heads, foolish, without iudgement, without wisedome: all which ought to make vs as well to beleeue that the braine is as much the organe and instrument of all these actions: as the eye is the in∣strument of sight. Furthermore, this kind of round shape which is peculiar vnto mankinde,The fift. this head thus lifted vp to heauen, this great quantitie of braine (which is almost incredible) doth shew very well that man hath something in his head, more then other liuing crea∣tures. The wise Sages of Egypt haue very well acknowledged the same: for they did not sweare by any other thing but by their head, they ratified all their couenants by the head, and forbad the eating of the braines of liuing creatures: for the honour and reue∣rence
sake which they bare to this part. I thinke also that the falling sicknes was not for any other reason called sacred of the ancients, but because it did assaile the soueraigne and sacred part of the body. Let vs then acknowledge the braine to be the princi∣pall seate of the soule, the originall of mouing and feeling, and of all the other most noble functions of the same. I know well that some curious spirits will aske me, how it can bee the author of so many goodly actions, seeing it is cold, and that the soule can doe nothing without heate. But I answere,The cause why the braine fee∣leth not. that the braine hath not a∣ny particuler feeling, for that it being the seate of common sence, must iudge of all such obiects, as about which sence is occupied. But a good iudge ought to bee free from all passions, and euery organe (sayth Aristotle) must bee without qualitie, according whereunto agreeth that, that the christalline humour hath no co∣lour, the care hath no particuler sound, nor the tongue any taste. But and if it come to passe, that any organicall part decline from his nature, as if the christalline become yellow, all whatsoeuer presenteth it selfe to the sight of that eye, will seeme to bee of the same colour. As then the braine neither seeth nor heareth, nor smelleth nor tasteth any thing, and yet notwithstanding iudgeth very rightly of colours, sounds, smels and tasts: so neither was it any reason, that it should haue any particuler sence of feeling, which should cause it to feele the excesse of those qualities, which are tearmed the obiects of feeling and handling; it is sufficient for it to haue the knowledge and discerning thereof. As touching the other poynt, I affirme that the braine is in very deede hot, and that it cannot be called cold, but as it is compared with the heart. It behoued it of necessitie to bee of this temperature, that so it might temper the spirits which were of a fierie nature,The causes why the braine is of such tem∣perature. thereby the better to continue the kindes of liuing creatures, and to preserue them long aliue. For and if the braine were as hot as the heart, there would day by day arise trouble and sedition amidst the no∣blest powers of the soule: all the sences would be straying and wandring, all the motions would bee out of square, all our dis∣courses mixed with rash headines, and our memories very flote and fugitiue, euen as betideth vnto franticke ones. Let nothing then hinder vs from acknowledging the braine to bee the most
noble part of the whole body. This is that magnificent and state∣ly turret of the soule, this is that goodly royall palace, the conse∣crated house of Pallas, this is the impregnable sort, enuironed with bones, as with strong walles, wherein is lodged the soueraigne power of the soule, (I meane reason) which comprehendeth and compasseth as with imbracing armes, the whole vniuersall world in a moment, without touching of the same, which flieth through the ayre, soundeth the depths of the sea, and surmounteth at the same instant, the pauements of the heauens, and which walking vpon their stages, measuring their distances, and communicating with the Angels, pearceth in euen vnto the throne of God, and at such time as the body is asleepe, suffereth it self by a holy flight, or delectable and sweete rauishment, to be carried euen to the be∣holding of God, according to whose image it was first framed. To be short, it is all in all (as sayth Aristotle) for that by the po∣wer it hath, it possesseth all, as being the place wherein (I say) this great princesse would rest her self as within her castle, from thence to commaund the two inferiour regiments, to hold in subiection the two lower forces, (I meane the Irascible and concupiscible) which would euery day be ready to fall away and reuolt. And yet I dare be bold to adde further, and (in stead of hauing named it a∣mong the chiefe and principall) to say that there is not any other part of the body besides the braine, which can truly be called noble and soueraigne, and that because all the other parts are made for the braine, and pay tribute thereunto as to their king. Behold here the strength of my argument,Most cleere and euident proofe of the excellencie of the braine. which in my iudgement is as cleere as the Sunne in his brightest shine. Mankinde differeth not from beasts in any thing but reason: and the seate of reason is in the braine: It is requisite the more commendably to reason and dis∣course, that the imaginatiue part of the minde should set before the vnderstanding part of the same the obiects whereabout they be occupied altogether simple without mixture, without matter, and freed from all corporall qualities. The Imaginatiue part can not conceiue them of it selfe, if the outward sences (which are his trustie spyes and faithfull reportsmen) make not certificate of the same. Hence then rise the necessitie of framing the instruments of the sences, the eyes, the eares, the nose, tongue and membranes
as well inward as outward. The sences the better to take acknow∣ledgement of their obiects, haue need of a local motion. For man, if he should not stirre from one place, but abide immoueable like an image, should not be able to conuey any store of varietie vnto the imagination. It is necessary then for the benefit and perfecting of the sences, to haue certaine instruments of motion: these in∣struments are two, the sinewes and the muscles: the sinewes by reason of their continued coniunction and adherence vnto their originall, (being like vnto that of the Sunne beames with the Sun) doe conuey from the braine that mouing power, seated in a most subtile bodie, namely, the animall spirit: the muscles after the maner of good subiects obey vnto their commandement, and incontinently moue the member either by stretching it forth or bowing it in, as the appetite or imagination shall wish and desire. The braine then (as is manifest) commandeth: the sinewes carrie the embassage, and the muscles obeying thereunto, expresse the intent of the minde. And euen in like sort as the skilfull horserider manageth the horse with the bridle, causing him to turne on the right hand or on the left, as best pleaseth him: euen so the braine by the sinewes boweth or stretcheth the muscles. These two in∣struments of voluntarie motion; should not know either how to be, or vndergoe these their offices, if they were not fixed vnto some solide and immoueable body. Therefore it was behouefull to raise vp pillers, such as are the bones and cartilages, from whence the muscles doe rise, and into which they do insert themselues againe: and for that the bones could not bee ioyned or fastned together without ligaments, it must needes follow that they should haue their membranouse coates to couer them withall. And all these parts for their preseruation, stoode in neede of naturall heate and nourishment: this heate and nourishment being deriued from elsewhere, must needes haue their passages prepared by certaine pipes, and those are the veines and arteries: the arteries draw their spirits from the hart, the fountaine of the same: the veines receiue their blood from the common storehouse of the same which is the liuer. And thus returning by the same steps, by which wee came hither, wee shall well perceiue,The conclu∣sion. that the heart and liuer were not made for any other thing, but to nourish the heate of all the parts:
the bones and cartilages, for rests and props vnto the muscles and sinewes, the instruments of voluntary motion: the muscles and nerues for the perfecting of the sences: the sences, to set before the imaginatiue power of the minde their outward obiects: the ima∣gination to carrie along the formes of things voide of substance, to be more deeply weighed of reason, which thereupon commen∣deth them to the custodie of memorie her treasuresse. Thus euery thing yeelding obedience vnto reason, and the braine being the principall seate of reason, we must needs affirme, that all the parts of the body were made for the braine, and must therfore acknow∣ledge it as their chiefe and Soueraigne. I will yet adde one other plaine and euident argument (which in my iudgement is not common) to testifie the excellence of this part: which is, that it giueth shape and perfection vnto all the rest. For it is most certaine, that of the shape and quantitie of the braine, dependeth the grosnes, greatnes, smalnes: and in a word, e∣uery maner of proportion hapning to the head, forasmuch as eue∣ry containing thing doth conforme it selfe continually vnto the contained, as the thing for which it was created and made. Ioyntly after the head, followeth the backe bone, which is framed of foure and twentie vertebres, besides the bone called Sacrum, and ma∣keth that which men call the truncke of the body. If that hole in the head through which the marrow of the backe falleth be great, then must also the vertebres bee large. Vpon this backe bone doe all the rest of the bones stay and rest themselues, as the vpper tim∣bers doe vpon the keele of a ship. As by name vpon high the shoul∣der bones, (whereunto are fastned the armes aswell on the one side, as on the other) and the twelue ribs: and below the bones of the small guts and hips, into whose hollow cauities the heads of the bones of the thighes are inserted: so that if all their propor∣tions be duly obserued, it will appeare that the greatnes and gros∣nes thereof is answerable to that of the head, and by consequence to that of the braine, as the chiefe and principall. Vnto the bones are fastned the muscles, the ligaments, and the most of the other parts of the body doe rest themselues thereupon, and within their circuite and compasse are shut and made sure the most noble parts and the bowels. In few words: the bones impart vnto the
whole bodie the shape which themselues haue receiued from the braine. This is the same which diuine Hippocrates hath very well obserued in the second booke of his Epidemiques, saying, that of the greatnes and grosnes of the head, a Phisition might iudge of the greatnes of all the other bones and parts also, as veines, arte∣ries, and sinewes. Let vs therefore conclude with the trueth, that the braine hauing such aduantage against the other parts, ought to be esteemed the chiefe and principall seate of the soule. CHAP. II. How the outward sences, the proper messengers of the soule, are only fiue, and all placed without the braine. SEeing it is most euident that the soule is shut vp within the bodie, as it were in a darke dungeon, and that it cannot discourse, neither yet comprehend a∣nything without the helpe of the sences, which are as the obedient seruants and faithfull messengers of the same: it was needfull to place the instruments of the sences very neere vnto the seate of reason, and round about her royal pal∣lace. Now the sences which we call externall are onely fiue;Why there are but fiue sences. the fight, the hearing, the smelling, the taste and handling, of which altogether dependeth our knowledge, and nothing (as saith the Philosopher) can enter into the vnderstanding part of our minde, except it passe through one of these fiue doores. Some men stri∣uing to shew reason for this number,The first rea∣son. say that there are but fiue sences, because that whatsoeuer is in the whole world, is com∣pounded and made of onely fiue simple bodies, as the foure ele∣ments and the firmament, which they call the fift simple nature, being much of the nature of the ayre, free from all impurities, and abounding with shining lights. The sight (say the Platonists) which hath for his instrument these two twinne-borne starres, all full of bright straines and heauenly fire, which giueth light and burneth not, representeth the skie, and hath the light for his obiect. The hearing, which is occupied about nothing but sounds, hath for his obiect the beaten ayre, and his principall instrument (if we
beleeue Aristotle) is a certaine ayre shut vp within a little laby∣rinth. The smelling participateth the nature of fire: for smels haue their being only in a drie qualitie caused through heate, and we receiue it for a principle, that all sweete smelling things are hot. The taste hath moysture for his obiect. And handling the earth for his. The second.Othersome say that there be but fiue sences, because that there are but fiue proper sorts of obiects, and that all the accidents which are to be found in any natural body, may be referred, either to colours, or sounds, or smels, or tasts, or to those qualities wher∣about touching is occupied, whether they be those which are prin∣cipall, or those that spring of them. The third,Some there be which gather the number of the sences to bee such, from the consideration of their vses, which are their finall ends. The sences are made for the benefit of man: man is com∣pounded of two parts, the body and the soule: the sight and hea∣ring serue more for the vse of the soule then of the body: the taste and touching more for the body then the soule: the smelling for both the twaine indifferently, refreshing and purging the spirits, which are the principall instruments of the soule. But of the fiue sences I say that there are two altogether necessary and required, to cause the being and life simply: and that the three other serue onely for a happie being and life. Those without which one can not be, are taste and touching. Touching (if we will giue credit to natural Philosophers) is as the foundation of liuelihood (I will vse this word, because it expresseth the thing very excellently). The taste serueth for the preseruation of the life. The sight, hea∣ring and smelling serue but for to liue well and pleasantly. For the creature may be and continue without them. The two first (for that they were altogether necessarie) haue their meane in∣ward, and so ioyned to the member, as that it is (as a man would say) inseparable. For in tasting and touching, the Phisitions doe make the meane and the member all one. The other three haue their meane outward, and separated from the instrument, as the sight hath the ayre, the water, and euery such body as is through cleere, for his meane. Aristotle in the beginning of his third booke of the soule, hath plaid the Philosopher in more serious sort then
any of all these, but yet so darkly, as that almost all his interpre∣ters haue found themselues much busied to find out his meaning, in such maner, as that he may seeme to haue gone about to hide the secrets of nature and mysteries of his Philosophie, not with the vaile of fained fables, as doe the Poets; neither yet with any su∣perstitious conceit of numbers, as Pithagoras his sect were wont to doe; but by an obscure breuitie: resembling the cuttle fish, which to the end that she may not fall into the hand of the fisher, casteth vp a blackish water and so hideth her selfe.The fourth. The sences (sayth Aristotle) are but fiue, because the meanes by which they worke, cannot be altered any moe then fiue wayes.Aristotle his proofe for the number of the sences. The meanes by which we haue the vse of our sences, are onely two, the one is outward, the other is inward: the outward is the ayre or the water: the inward is the flesh or the membranes. The ayre and water do receiue the obiects that are outward, either as they are transparent, and then they serue the sight; or as they are moueable and thin bodies, and then they serue the hearing; or as moist ones doe receiue and embrace that which is drie, and then they be the subiects of smelling. The flesh or membranes may be considered of two maner of wayes; either according to the temperature of the foure elementall qualities, and then they bee the subiects of feeling; or els according to the mixture of the qualities drie and moyst, and then they are the subiects of relishes for the taste. But howsoeuer the case standeth for the reason of this number, we see there are but fiue externall sences, which are all placed without the braine. These are the proper posts and messengers of the soule; these are the windowes by which wee see cleerely round a∣bout vs. These are the watch or doore keepers which make vs way into their most priuie closet: if they performe their faithfull ser∣uice vnto reason, then do they set before her a million of delight∣some obiects, whereof she frameth marueilous discourses. But (alas and woe is me) how oft doe they betray her? Oh how many dangers do they inwrap her in, and how subiect are they vnto cor∣ruption? The sences be∣come the cut∣throtes of rea∣son.It is not without cause that this thrice renowmed Mercurie doth call the sences tyrants, and the cutthrotes of reason: for of∣tentimes doe they make captiue the same vnto the two inferiour
powers; they make her of a mistresse a seruant; and of a free wo∣man, a drudge and thrall to all slauerie. She may well commaund, but she shall be obeyed all one, as lawes and Magistrates are in an estate troubled with ciuill dissentions. Yea tell me, how many soules haue lost their libertie through the sight of the eyes?How that the sences steale a∣way and rob reason of her libertie. Doe not men say that that little wanton, that blind archer doth enter into our hearts by this doore, and that loue is shaped by the glitte∣ring glimces which issue out of the eyes, or rather by certaine sub∣tile and thin spirits, which passe from the heart to the eye through a straite and narrow way very secretly, and hauing deceiued this porter, doe place loue within, which by little and little doth make it selfe Lord of the house, and casteth reason out of the doores? How oft is reason bewitched by the eare? If thou giue thine eare to hearken vnto these craftie tongues and cogging speeches, vnto these cunning discourses full of honie, and a thousand other baits, doubt not, but that thy reason wil be surprised: for the scout watch being fallen asleepe, the enemie stealeth vpon them softly, and be∣commeth master of the fort. The wise Vlisses, did not he stop the eares of his companions, fearing least they should bee bewitched and besotted with the melodious tunes and sweete songs of the Syrens? The licorishnes of the taste, surfetting and drunkennes, haue they not spoyled many great personages? And the sence of feeling, (which nature hath giuen to liuing creatures, for the pre∣seruation of their kinde) being the grossest and most earthly of all the rest, and so by consequent the most delicate of al the rest, doth it not oftentimes cause vs to become beasts? Reason then is ne∣uer ouertaken, but through the false and treacherous dealing of these doore keepers: no man can at any time come within her pallace, but by the priuitie of these watchmen, for that (as I haue sayd in the beginning of this chapter) the soule being fast shut vp within the bodie, cannot doe any thing hut by the aide and assistance of the sences. CHAP. III. That the sight is the noblest of all the rest of the sences. AMongst all the sences, that of the sight, in the common iudge∣ment of all the Philosophers, hath been accounted the most
noble, perfect and admirable.Foure things prouing the excellencie of the sight. The excellencie thereof is to be per∣ceiued in an infinite sort of things: but most principally in foure: as first, in respect of the varietie of the obiects which it represen∣teth vnto the soule: secondly, in respect of the meanes of his ope∣ration, which is (as it were) altogether spirituall: thirdly, in respect of his particular obiect, which is the light, which is the most noble and perfect qualitie that euer God created: and lastly, in respect of the certaintie of his action. First therefore it is out of all doubt,The first. that the sight causeth vs to know greater varietie and more diffe∣rences of things, then any of the rest of the sences. For all naturall bodies are visible and may bee seene, but all of them cannot bee felt, neither doe they all affoord smels, tasts or sounds: the heauen, the worlds ornament, and most noble substance amongst all the rest, will not suffer vs to touch the same; neither can we heare the sweete harmonie which proceedeth of the concords and agree∣ments of so many diuerse motions. There is nothing but the sight which acquainteth vs therewithall: soft bodies make no sound; neither is there any taste in the earth or fire, and yet euery one of these may bee seene. The sight, besides his owne proper obiect, which is colour, hath an infinit sort of others, as greatnes, number, proportion, motion, rest, situation and distances. And this is the cause why the Philosopher in his Metaphysiques calleth it the sence of inuention, as for that by the meanes thereof, all the good∣liest Sciences and Arts haue been inuented and found out. By the meanes of this noble sence, it came first to passe that man should begin to play the Philosopher: for Philosophie was not begot, but by admiring of things; and admiratiō sprung not from elswhere, then from the sight of pleasant and beautifull things. Whereupon the minde raising it selfe on hie toward heauen, and rauished with the consideration of so many marueilous things, was desirous to know the cause of them, and thereupon began to play the Philo∣sopher. And yet I will say further, that the sight is the sence of our blessednes. For the chiefe felicitie of man consisteth in the know∣ledge of God. But there is none of the other sences that giueth vs better directions for the same, then the sight. The inuisible things of God (saith the Apostle) are manifested and made knowne vn∣to vs by the visible. This first and principall cause, which is infi∣nite
and incomprehensible, cannot be knowne but by his effects. Moses neuer knew how to see God, otherwise then vpon the backe and hinder parts; for from his countenance proceeded such a shining brightnes, as that it did altogether dase his sight. A thing wor∣thie to be con∣sidered of A∣theists.Come hither then thou Atheist whosoeuer thou art; set on worke this noble sence thoroughly to view, this excellent and per∣fect workemanship of God, this huge masse which containeth all things. Lift vp thy sight vp on high from whence thou hast taken thy beginning. Behold the throne of his Maiestie, which is heauen, the most complet and fully furnished of all his corporall and sen∣sible workes: looke vpon ths infinite number of burning fires in the same, and among the rest, those two great flames which shew vs light, the one by day, and the other by night. Marke the glori∣ousnes of the Sunne when it ariseth, how it stretcheth forth his beames in a moment, from the one end of the world vnto the o∣ther, and how at night it sinketh his chariot in the Ocean Sea. Con∣sider the variable disposition of the Moone in changing her face and shape, the diuerse motions of the Planets, which moue conti∣nuallie with an incredible swiftnes and equalnes, and that in such sort as that they neuer strike one vpon another. If thou be asha∣med to looke vp to Heauen, for feare of being constrained to con∣fesse a Deitie, then cast downe thine eyes vpon the waters or earth: see and marke in the Sea a great wonder, how continually it threat∣neth the earth, and yet neuer ouerfloweth it: how it swalloweth vp all the riuers of the world, and swelleth neuer a whit the more, neither hath it been seene thereby to passe his limits. Weigh with thy selfe how the earth hangeth in the ayre, and so beareth vp it selfe, notwithstanding the huge massines of the same. Call to minde the differences of liuing creatures, which are all most per∣fect in their kindes; the beautie of stones; the infinite number of plants, the which are not lesse variable, then admirable for their properties. If all this cannot stir thee vp to the acknowledgement of this first and principall cause; if thy delight draw thee away, and steale from thee that time which thou oughtest to spend in the due consideration of such a manifold varietie, then come hither, I will shew thee in lesse then nothing, the summe and briefe of the great world; the head and chiefe of all that euer God wrought;
the pourtraiture of the vniuersall world: that then being rauished with so merueilous and cunning a peece of worke, thou mayst be constrained to crie out with the great Magician Zoroaster, O man, thou wonder and vttermost endeuour of nature. I will not at this time set before thine eyes any more then the head, in as much as the cleere signes and markes of the diuine nature doe shine therein most euidently. View well this royall palace within, without, and throughout; behold the cunning workemanship of the braine, the three pillars which beare vp the roofe of this magnificent buil∣dings, as an Atlas supporting the Heauens with his shoulders: be∣holde also his foure closets or cels, wherein the principall powers of the minde (if we will beleeue the Arabians) are lodged, as for example, the imagination in the two formost, the reason in the middlemost, and the memorie in that which is hindermost: ob∣serue moreouer his christallike cleere looking glasse, his admi∣rable net, which like to an intricate labyrinth is wouen of a million of small arteries, interlaced and wrought one within another, in which the spirits are prepared and refined; the originall of sinews, the siluer thred, and his incredible fecunditie in the bringing forth of sinewes; the chanels and water pipes, through which the excre∣ments of the braine are purged. But and if thou will not be kept vp within this royall pallace, come forth and thou shalt see in the forepart of the head these two bright shining Starres, the two loo∣king glasses of the Soule, as those that shadow out vnto vs all the passions of the same: thou wilt admire their beautifull christalline humor, which is more cleere and pure, then any orientall pearles; the pollished and exquisite garnish of the coats, the marueilous nimblenes of the muscles, but especially of the amorous pulley. On the sides thou shalt see the eares, which will no lesse astonish thee: for is it not a wittie exploite of nature to close vp in so small a hole, a drumme hard laced, hauing on the hinder part two small strings, and three little bones, resembling a forge, a hammer and a stirrop, three small muscles, and a labyrinth contayning the in∣ward ayre; two windowes, round, after the fashion of an egge, one nerue, and one gristlie vessell, which stretching it selfe to the roofe of the mouth, causeth that goodly sympathie or mutuall suffering, which is betwixt the instruments of hearing and speaking? And
what wilt thou say to that little peece of flesh which moueth it selfe a hundred thousand waies, like vnto an Eele, I meane the tongue, which is the reuealer of all our conceits, the principall messenger of the minde, which singeth (as saith the Apostle) praise vnto his Creatour, and oftentimes curseth men, which rauisheth, bendeth, thundreth, encourageth the generous minde to fight, which hath power to destroy and ouerturne most florishing Em∣pyres, and to set them againe in their former state. To be short, O thou Atheist consider at once, and all together (if thou be not disposed to take the paines with euery part by it selfe) the beautie and maiestie shining in such sort in the face, as that it causeth all other liuing things to tremble thereat: shalt thou not finde there∣in some sparkles, or rather I know not what bright beames of the Deitie? Shalt thou not therein also finde the markes and engrauen forme of the Creator? And hauing viewed the whole proportion or the same, shalt thou not, whether thou wilt or no, be constray∣ned to crie with the kingly Prophet: Thy hands O Lord haue fa∣shioned me, I will magnifie thee as long as I liue. How surpassing excellent then is the sight, seeing that in acquainting vs with so many wonderfull things, and such diuersitie of obiects, it leadeth vs as it were by the hand vnto the knowledge of God? The second proofe of the excellencie of the sight.The second poynt, declaring vnto vs the excellencie of the sight, is the meanes of his operation, which is altogether liuely: for the sight performeth his office at an instant, and that in places farre re∣moued and distant, without mouing it selfe from place to place. I intend (to the end that euery one may know the perfection of this sence) to compare the same, and make it like vnto the vnderstan∣ding. Euen as the vnderstanding part of the minde receiueth from. the imaginatiue the formes of things naked and voide of sub∣stance:A comparing of the sight and vnderstan∣ding together. euen so the sight is the subiect of formes without bodie, which the Philosophers call intentionals. The vnderstanding comprehendeth the vniuersall world, no place or roome in the vn∣derstanding taken vp, or any whit more pestered thereby, it con∣taineth Heauen and earth, without any maner of incumbrance from the one to the other so contained therein: the sight compre∣hendeth also the Heauen, without admitting of any place there∣to; the hugest mountaines in the world doe enter all at once, and
that vndiminished through the apple of the eye, without any ma∣ner of offence through straitnes of entrance. The vnderstanding iudgeth at one and the very same time of two contraries, as of right and wrong, placeth them indifferently in it selfe, attaineth to the knowledge of the one by the other, and bandeth them vnder one and the same science. The eye at one instant receiueth and is occupied about blacke and white, and distinguisheth them per∣fectly, the knowledge of the one being no maner of impeachment to the knowledge of the other, being yt which the other sences are not capable of. For if a mā haue tasted any bitter thing, his know∣ledge to iudge aright at ye very same instant of that which is sweet will faile, & deceiue him. The vnderstanding in a moment whir∣leth round about the world: the sight likewise receiueth at one instance of time the whole widenes of heauen. All the other sen∣ces doe moue by intercourse of time. And this is the reason why men see the lightning, before they heare the thunder, although that neither of them bee made before or after other. The vnder∣standing is free of it own nature, and hath a will either to discourse or not to discourse: The sight in his function hath as it were a cer∣taine kinde of libertie, which nature hath denied vnto the other sences. The eares are alwaies open; so as the nose is also, the skinne is alwaies subiect vnto cold and heate and other the iniuries of the ayre: but the eyes haue eyelids which open and shut when wee will, for the furtherance or staying of our sight, as best shall please our selues. The third thing which I haue to testifie the excellencie of the sight, is the certaintie of the function. For it is out of all doubt that this is the most infallible sence, and that which least deceiueth: according to that which mē are wont to say, when they wil assu∣redly auouch any thing, namely, that they see it with their owne eyes. And the prouerbe vsed amongst men of olde time, is most true, that it is better to haue a witnes which hath seene the thing, then ten which speake but by heare say. Thales the Milesian Phi∣losopher said, that there was as much difference betwixt sight and hearing; as betwixt true and false. The Prophets themselues to confirme the trueth of their prophesies, called them by the name of visions, as being most true and certaine things. Finally, the ex∣cellencie
of the sight appeareth in his particular obiect,The third proofe of the excellencie of the sight. which is the most noble, common and best knowne of all others: I call it the most noble, because it is endowed with the goodliest qualitie that is in the whole world (that is to say) the light, which is of an heauenly ofspring, and which the Poets call the eldest daughter of God. I call it the commonest, because in differently it commu∣nicateth it selfe vnto all. And I call it the best knowne of vs, in as much as all other naturall bodies do more or lesse consist of mixt colour: and for that there cannot be any part therof in the world, but that it will be attained and gotten by sight. Let vs then say with Theophrastus, that the sight is as it were the forme and per∣fection of man: with the Stoikes, that the sight maketh vs to draw neere vnto the diuine nature: and with the Philosopher Anaxa∣goras, that it seemeth that we were borne onely to see. CHAP. IIII. Of the excellencie of the eye, the proper instru∣ment of sight. IF the sence of sight be wonderfull, the mem∣ber or instrument seruing for the same can not but goe beyond all wonder: for it is fra∣med so cunningly, and of such beautifull parts, as that there cannot be the man, which is not rauished with the consideration of the same: and for my selfe, I know not whether with Plotine and Sinesius I should call nature some magicall in∣chauntresse or iuglar, for hauing inclosed in so small a starre so manifold gracious influences, and made a worke so farre surpas∣sing all other her common and ordinary ones. The Egyptians haue worshipped the Sunne, and called it the visible Sonne of the inui∣sible God: and wherefore shall not we admire the eye, which (as the ancient Poet Orpheus affirmeth) is the Sun of this little world, more notable without comparison, then that of the great world? The great Sunne by the stretching forth of his beames doth en∣lighten the whole world,A comparing of the Sun and the eye toge∣ther. but it reapeth neither profit nor plea∣sure
by this his ministerie, neither doth it selfe see any thing of all that, which it causeth vs to see: The eye, that pettie Sunne, in re∣presenting vnto vs whatsoeuer coloured bodies that there are, doth therewithall see and acknowledge them all it selfe, yea it pleasantly delighteth it selfe therein together with the minde, and also perceiueth the fashion, greatnes, and distances of the things about which it is occupied, which no other of the instruments of sence can doe. Plato for the honour he bare vnto this diuine part, called it celestiall and heauenly, he beleeueth that the eye is all full of such straines and fire as the starres haue, which shineth and bur∣neth not. Orpheus called the eyes, the looking glasses of nature:The eyes are the looking glasses of the minde. Hesichius, the doores for the Sunne to enter in by: Alexander the Peripatecian, the windowes of the mind, because that by the eyes we doe cleerely see what is in the same, we pearce into the deepe thoughts thereof, and enter into the priuities of his secret cham∣ber. And as the face doth shadow out vnto vs the liuely and true image of the minde, so the eyes doe lay open vnto vs all the per∣turbations of the same: the eyes doe admire, loue, and are full of lust. In the eyes, thou maist spie out loue and hatred, sorrow and mirth, resolution and timorousnes, compassion and mercilesnes, hope and despayre, health and sicknes, life and death. Marke I pray thee, how in the feates of loue the eyes can craftely flatter thee, how they become courteous, kinde, full of fauour, craftie, al∣luring,All the pas∣sions of the minde are to be espied and seene in the eye. rowling, and strangely enchaunting thee: in hatred how they looke fierce and sterne; in bold attempts, loftie and conti∣nually glistering; in feare cast downe, and as it were set fast in the head; in ioy, pleasant and cleere; in pensiuenes, all heauie, mournfull and darke. To be short, they be wholly giuen to follow the motions of the minde, they doe change themselues in a mo∣ment, they doe alter and conforme themselues vnto it in such ma∣ner, as that Blemor the Arabian, and Syreneus the Phisition of Cy∣pres, thought it no absurditie to affirme that the soule dwelt in the eyes: and the common people thereabout, think so vntil this day, for in kissing the eyes they thinke they kisse the soule. Momus con∣demned.See here thy selfe condemned, O shameles find fault, and vtter∣terly ouerthrowne in thine action, and delay not but come and make condigne satisfaction, by honorably recompencing of na∣ture,
whom thou hast so maliciously and falsely accused of follie, in the framing of mans bodie, for that she did not set two win∣dowes, next neighbours to the heart, through them to spie all the passions of the same. Canst thou wish more goodly windowes then these of the eyes? Doest thou not see therein as in a glasse, the most hidden things of the mind? The poore man, at the barre doth he not reade written in the eyes of his iudge his sentence ei∣ther of condemnation or absolution? There is (saith Theocritus) a broad trodden way betwixt the eye and the heart: a man can not so dissemble the matter, but that such will be the passion of the eye, as is the passion of the heart. It grieueth me that euer I should finde so vaine a discourse, as should containe the eger de∣sire of any man to haue the bread framed of christalline cleerenes, to the end he might see what is within the heart, seeing we are al∣readie possessed of this round christalline humour within our eyes, which casteth forth most liuely light, much like the glitte∣ring beames comming from a shining glasse moued in the Sun. But if it may be granted me to mixe one dram of Phisick amongst the large masse of these Philosophicall and Poeticall sentences, I dare auouch that in the eyes wee perceiue and discerne, the whole estate of the health of the bodie.That the eyes doe shew the whole estate of mans health. Hippocrates that sacred Oracle of Greece (which all the world as yet euen to this day hath in sin∣gular reuerence and rare admiration) hath obserued the same ve∣ry well in his Epidemickes, and in his treatise of Prognostications he commandeth the Phisition, when he goeth to see the sicke par∣tie, to behold and looke well vpon the face, but chiefly vpon the eyes, because that in thē as in a glasse, is easily espied the strength or weaknes of the animal powers: if the eye be cleere and bright, it maketh vs well to hope: but and if it bee darke, withered, and clowdie, it presageth death. Galen calleth the eye a diuine mēber, & that part of euery liuing thing which most resembleth the Sun, and therewithall doth so highlye steeme of it, as tha the verely be∣leeueth that the braine was made onely for the eyes. The Lawyers doe hold it as a Maxime, that a blind man cannot plead or handle a case well, because he cannot see the maiestie of the Iudge. Ari∣slotle that light of nature, in his second booke of the generation of liuing things, sayth, that from the eyes men take infallible signes
of fruitfulnes, as, if in dropping some bitter water into a womans eye, she by and by feele the taste thereof vpon her tongue, it is a signe of her aptnes to conceiue. The eyes (sayth the same Philoso∣pher) are full of spirit and seede: and this is the reason, why in new married persons, they bee so much the lesser and as it were languishing. But what neede I to alleadge so many proofes con∣cerning the excellencie of these two Sunnes, seeing that nature her selfe doth sufficiently demonstrate the same vnto vs? Let vs reade in the booke of nature,Natures care for the preser∣uation of the eyes. and see how carefull she hath been to pre∣serue the eyes, as her most de are and trustie messengers: let vs ad∣mire the arte and skill she hath vsed in working their safetie and defence, wee shall finde her not to haue forgotten or left out any thing, but so to haue bestirred her selfe, as those men which haue a purpose to fortifie a place, and make it impregnable.The fortifica∣tions seruing for the safetie of the eye. First she hath lodged them, as in a bottome or little valley, that so they might not be subiect to the assaults of manifold dangers and hurts: and to the end that nothing might commaund this little valley, she hath raised vp foure notable bulwarkes all fortified with bones, as hard as any stone, which in such sort doe swell and bunch out, as though they were little hillockes made to receiue the blowes, and beare off the violence of euery enemy that might assaile them. Aboue them is the brow bone, vnderneath them the cheek bone: on the right and left hand the two corners, the one of them some∣what greater then the other, and is that which is next the nose; the lesser one being that which is set right ouer against it. And for as much as the forepart of this place lay wide open without any co∣uer, (for feare that the prince commanding the same (which is the eye) should be ouertaken or offended with too much winde, cold or smoke) nature hath made as it were a draw-bridge, to be pul∣led vp and let downe as the gouernour shall commaund, and this is the eye lid, which openeth and shutteth as best pleaseth vs. The chaines by which this bridge is drawne & let fall, are the muscles, the instruments of voluntary motion. It appeareth then plainly e∣nough, by this great care which nature hath for the preseruation and defence of the eyes, how excellent they are, and therewithall we haue our lesson taught vs, how carefull we ought to bee for the preseruation thereof.
CHAP. V. Of the composition of the eye: in generall. SEeing it is now time to lay open the skilfull workmanship of these bright starres appea∣ring and rising together, I purpose to describe them in such liuely sort and perfect maner, as that the most curious, and such as are borne onely to carpe (it may be) will content and hold themselues satisfied therwithall, letting passe all those notable obiections and questions, which might bee made about the parts of the eye, for that I haue at large handled them in the sourth booke of my Anatomicall workes. And euen as Cosmographers and those which trauailing applie themselues cu∣riously to obserue and marke things, do first inquire of the names of the prouinces, view and consider the situation, beauty, largenes, strength and entrances of cities, together with whatsoeuerels may be seene without, before they enter into them: so will I describe the forme, situation, fortresses, largenes, vse, and number of the eyes, with whatsoeuer els may bee marked in generall, before I enter into any particular search of the particular and pettie parts of the same. The names of the eye.The Grecians call the eyes , because they make vs see, and the Poets affirme that they are the children of the Nymph Thea. The Hebrewes haue called them by the name of High, to put vs in minde from whence we sprung, as also to teach vs, that our eyes must serue vs to behold the things which are high. The Latines call them Oculi, because they are as it were hidden and inclosed within a hollow valley. The forme of the eye.The shape and figure of the eye is round, but not euery way: for it is somewhat long and steeple fashioned, hauing his founda∣tion outward, and his top inward towards the sinew of sight. This figure was most agreeable vnto it,The cause of the roundnes of the eye. to the end it might containe much, moue nimbly, and free it selfe of offered iniuries. The Ma∣thematicians doe maintaine, that the sphericall figure is of all o∣ther
most apt to containe much: and Ophthalmists do confident∣ly affirme, that if the eye had not been round, it could neuer haue comprehended the hugenes of great bodies, neither yet could euer haue seene at one time many obiects, because that no man can see but by a direct line. On what side soeuer then that the eye turneth it selfe, many lines doe offer themselues at once to the apple of the eye which is round: but this could not by any meanes come to passe if it were flat or fouresquare. This circular shape doth also serue the eye, that it may moue the more nimbly and easily, whe∣ther it bee vpward or downward, to the right hand, or to the left, or circularly: for sphericall bodies doe moue as it were of them∣selues, being stayed and resting onely vpon a narrow poynt. And I conceiue this roundnes not to bee vnprofitable for the defence of the eye: for amongst all the sorts of figures the sphericall or round figure is the strongest, and withstandeth the assaults of out∣ward hurts and harmes, because it is all alike, and hath no vneue∣nes in it: therein a man shall neither finde corner nor poynt, which may worke the ruine and dissolution of the same. The eyes are seated vpon high in the body, in the forepart thereof,The situation of the eye. and as it were in a valley. Vpon high, to discouer from a farre, and to keepe that nothing may assaile vs at vnwares: they serue the creature for spies and watches, and are oftentimes called Phares in the holie Scripture.The cause why they be situa∣ted on high. But watchmen are vsually wont to bee placed in such plots as doe ouerlooke all the rest: and no man assigneth any o∣ther place to the lanterne, but the top of the tower and highest place of the ship. They are set in the forepart of euery creature ra∣ther then behinde,And the cause why before. because that euery liuing thing moueth for∣ward: by which meanes it hath the oportunitie to spie out what∣soeuer might offend it: and indeede it is not at any time permit∣ted the watch, to stand with their backs or blind sides toward the enemie. Such as write of Anatomie, say, that it was necessary to place the eyes forward: for that the sight had great need of a verie soft and marrowish sinew, that by it vpon the sudden there might great store of spirits bee brought vnto the eyes: and that such si∣newes cannot possibly bee found to put forth backward, seeing that way there is none that spread themselues, but such as are too hard and drie. I my selfe haue elsewhere approued this reason,
but hauing afterward obserued, that all the nerues doe rise from the hinder part of the braine, and hauing seene the optickes to rise also from thence as well as the rest, I was enforced to chaunge mine opinion.The cause why they be set in a hollow place. Finally, the eyes are fastned within a little hollow pit (which the common people call a collet) for their better safe∣tic, and to preuent the prodigall expence of spirits. This little val∣ley is fortified and entrenched on euery side, either with the brow bone, or with the bone of the nose, or the cheeke-bone, all which are raised round about the same in maner of little hillockes: and and for that the forepart was without any thing to couer it, nature hath shut it in with a lid, which openeth and shutteth at our plea∣sure, for feare that the eye should bee corrupted and turned from his nature, either by the offence of too much light; or leaft that it being alwais open, his spirits should spend and quite vanish a∣way; or least in sleeping, it might bee hurt by outward causes. To which causes I will yet adde one other of mine owne, which is, that if the eye should neuer shut, and thereby the spirits vnces∣santly be gazing vpon the light, it would come to passe that they would bee vnable to withdraw themselues so speedily into their center, and our sleepe would neuer be so peaceable :for the Phi∣losophers are of opinion, that sleepe is caused by the retraction of the spirits into their secret and inner roomes. The substance of the eye.The nature of the eye, which men call in anatomic all tearmes the substance of the eye, is altogether soft, bright and shining cleere, thicke and waterish: soft that so it may readily admit and receiue the formes of things: shining and through cleere, that so the light may pearce it through, as also that thereby the instru∣ment may haue some correspondencie with his obiect: thicke, to the end that his obiects may haue, wherin the better to rest them∣selues. Now it is the water alone, that can haue all these proper∣ties: whereupon it commeth to passe that the eye is of a waterish substance, and not of a fierie substance, as Plato sayd: which thing I shall handle more largely in the 10. chapter. The vse of the eye is double:The vse. the one is to serue as a guide and watch to discouer whatsoeuer might annoy, and this is common to all liuing creatures: the other is proper to man alone, being to teach him the knowledge of God by the things that are visible,
to perfect his vnderstanding, and thirdly to consummate his hap∣pines: for by the sight man is made partaker of the beautie of the heauen, by which meanes his vnderstanding part is much beauti∣fied and inriched, and he himselfe made as it were like vnto his Creator. The number.The eyes are two, and that because of the excellencie and ne∣cessitie of this sence, that thereby the one might serue, if that the other were either diseased or vtterly lost. They be also two in re∣spect of the better perfecting of the sight, for by that meanes a man may see many things at once: for if that man had but one eye, and that placed in the middest of the forehead, as the Poets faine of the Cyclops, wee should onely see the things right afore vs, and not those which should be on either side. These two eyes, although they bee farre enough separated the one from the other,That they can not moue the one without the other. haue such a fellow-feeling, and doe so well agree the one with the other in their actions, as that the one of them cannot moue with∣out, or otherwise then the other: for it is not in our abilitie, to looke vp with the one and downe with the other, or els to stir the one and hold the other still.Aristotle his error. Aristotle imputeth this to the con∣iunction of the sinewes of sight, and is perswaded that the eyes doe moue together, because they haue the originall and principal cause of their motion, which is found to be in the coniunction of the sinew of sight: common. But this worthie man deceiueth himself in this, as he is ouertaken almost in al other things, where∣in he hath to doe concerning Anatomie. The nerue optick med∣leth not at all with the motion of the eye, it onely bringeth the spirit of sight: for being stopped in the disease called Gutta Sere∣na, the sight is quite lost, and yet the motion thereof abideth stil. It behoueth vs therefore to attribute the cause thereof, to the end and perfection of this sence. The eyes must moue together, that so the obiects thereof may not seeme double. For if wee could looke vp with the one and downe with the other, at one and the same time, this sence which is the worthiest of all the rest, should euermore delude it selfe and become most imperfect, in as much as euery single thing that it shuld behold, would appeare double: the proofe whereof may easily be had, if with thy finger thou force the one of thine eyes either higher or lower then the other.
Their tempe∣nature.The temperature of the eye is cold and moist. It feeleth most ex∣quisitely, and hath a merueilous fellow-suffering with the braine. Their feeling.Man alone hath his eyes of sundry colours: and this varietie commeth either of the humors,The colours of the eyes. or of the grape coloured coate, or of the spirits. The variation by humors, is because they alter three waies, as either in their situation and placing in the eye, which is sometime more deepe and inward, and sometimes more superfi∣ciall and outward; or else in their substance, as that which may be grosse or subtile, cleere or dim: or lastly in their quantitie. If the christalline humor be very bright, cleere and subtile, if also it be large, and placed forward in the eye, the eye will seeme fierie and sparkeling; if contrariwise it be duskish, grosse, and set very much inwardly, the eye will shew blacke or browne: the grape-like tu∣nicle, being oftentimes of diuerse colours, is also a cause of this varietie, and the spirits doe not a little further and serue to pro∣cure the same. CHAP. VI. A very particular description of all the parts of the Eye, and chiefely of the sixe muscles of the same. IS it not one of the wonders of the world, that this little member (which seemeth as though it were nothing) shall be made of more then twentie se∣uer all parts, all differing one from another, and yet so decently ioyned, and incorporated one with another, as that all the wit of man is not able to blame the same, either of want or surplussage? I purpose to describe one after another, and that in such order, as is to be obser∣ued, if one should goe about to dissect or anatomise the same. The eye then is framed of sixe fleshie strings,A briese re∣hearsall of the parts of the eye. which men call muscles, and these cause it to moue vpward, downeward, to the right side, to the left, and circularlie, of sixe coates or tunicles, which inwrap all the parts together, nourishing and contayning the humors euery one of them, within their owne precincts and bounds; of three humors, all cleere and thorough-shining, which
doe receiue, alter and keepe all the obiects of sight; of two si∣newes which conuey the animall spirit, the one seruing the sight, and is therefore called the nerue opticke, the other seruing for the motion of the eye, of many small veynes which serue for victua∣lers; and of as many arteries to prolong the life thereof; of much fat, by his slipperines to make it nimble, and of two little glan∣dules or kernels, which keepe it moist and fresh, least by his con∣tinuall motion it might be ouer heat, and so ouer drie. The descripti∣on of the mus∣cles.The muscles were of necessitie prouided and giuen to the eye, that so it might moue on euery side: for if the eye stoode fast, and immoueable, we should be constrained to turne our head and necke (being all of one peece) for to see: but by these muscles it now moueth it selfe with such swiftnes and nimblenes, without stirring of the head, as is almost incredible, and this is the cause why they are tearmed of the Poet rolling.The foure streight mus∣cles. The muscles of the eye are onely sixe, foure direct or streight, and two oblique or crooked ones; the direct serue for direct motion, as the first of them draw∣eth the eye vp, the second downe, the third towards the nose, and the fourth from the nose. The olde writers being groslie conceited in matters of Anatomie,The error of the olde wri∣ters. haue thought that these foure muscles sprung from within, from the membrane called Dura mater, but they were foulie deceiued, for so they ought not, and much lesse could they. They ought not, because the said membrane is a ve∣ry sensible part, and couereth the sinewes of sight, in such maner, as that the muscles performing their offices, and mouing backe∣ward toward their roote and originall, should presse the sinew, hinder the passage that should be at libertie, for the spirit to passe through, and for the exquisite sensiblenes that is in Dura mater, their motion should be alwaies ioyned with much paine. They cannot rise from thence, because their foundation and stay would not be firme and fast enough, their piller would haue been to weake, for it is a poynt of necessitie, that the drawing part should euer be stronger then that which is drawn. We must therefore be∣leeue and hold, that these foure muscles doe take their begininng from within the collet, from some part of the bone, called Sphe∣noides, and holding diuerse courses, doe fasten themselues vnro
the white coate: the two other muscles called oblique,The two ob∣lique muscles. doe stirre the eye in his oblique, and as it were circular motion, the one a∣boue, and the other below, alwaies outwardly, and neuer inward∣ly, because the eye hath nothing within to beholde or looke vpon. The first of the obliques springeth from the place of the foure di∣rect ones,The amorous pulley. and as it commeth neere vnto the great corner, it ma∣keth a round and white string, which passing through a little pipe or cartilagenous ring informe of a pulley, maketh a semicircular motion, and inserteth it selfe in oblique maner into the mem∣brane coniunctiue, or white coate before spoken of. This skilfull peece of worke hath laine secret vntill this age, wherein an ingeni∣ous Anatomist, named Fallopius, hath detected the same. The o∣ther ther springeth from the great corner,Pleasant deui∣sed names for euery one of the sixe mus∣cles. and fastneth it selfe in the little, drawing the eye in oblique maner towards the eare. We will giue for sport sake, vnto euery muscle his proper name, and so that which draweth the eye vpward, shall be called proude and haughtie: and that which moueth it downeward, humble and lowly: that which moueth it toward the nose, reader, or drinker, because in reading or drinking, we turne our eyes toward our nose: the fourth which moueth the eye toward the lesse corner, disdainefull or angrie, for that it maketh vs looke awrie: the two oblique or circular ones shall be called rowling and amarous, be∣cause they make the eye to moue priuilie, and to cast out wanton glaunces.The error of the old writers, about a se∣menth muscle. All Anatomists doe adde a seuenth muscle, which should couer the nerue opticke, keepe it firme, and stay the eye that it goe not out of his place: but they are deceiued, for there is no such found, but in fourefooted beasts, which haue their eyes so much hanging downe toward the earth; but man ordinarilie ca∣rying his face lifted vp to Heauen, had not neede of any such, Some there be which thinke this muscle to be as necessarie for men as beasts, to the making of a setled and direct motion, and such as should resemble the musicall rest, as also to keepe the eye staied and stedfast, when we doe earnestlie behold any thing: but I assure you, that such direct and bent motion is made, when all the sixe muscles together indifferently doe stretch their fibres, as in like sort, when they slacke themselues, the eye standeth not still
but moueth incessantly. If these assertions doe not satisfie them, then let them shew me this seuenth muscle, that I may beholde it with mine eye, and I will beleeue them. CHAP. VII. Of the sixe coates of the eye. THe eye being christallike cleere, and of a waterish substance within, required necessarilie, some staying holde by bodies more stable and stedfast, for other∣wise the humours would tumble as storme-beaten ships, neuer being at rest.The necessitie of the coats of the eye. Therefore nature to preuent this mischiefe, hath framed certaine little filmes or skins (which are called of some tunicles or coates) which vnite and fasten to∣gether the whole eye, cause the seuerall humors to abide within their proper bounds, and therewith all, conuey their nourishment vnto them. The certaine number of these tunicles is not through∣ly concluded of: for some make moe, and some fewer. Hippocra∣tes doth acknowledge but foure, Galen hath obserued fiue,That there are but fiue tuni∣cles or coats. and the Anatomists of our time make vp the number of nine. As for my selfe, hauing with all carefulnes perused the leaues of this booke of nature, I cannot finde any more then sixe, which are, the white, the hornie, the grape-like, cobweb-like net-like and glassie coate. For whereas some doe count of one that should be like vnto the eye-bries; it is nothing else but an appendant part of the vitreous: as that which they call the hard coate, is a parcell of the hornie. As concerning the ninth, which is made of the endes of the muscles, there is no shew of reason, why it should be called a tunicle proper to the eye. For if this were graunted, it would al∣so follow, that the common membrane which couereth the muscles of the eye, should be graced with the same priuiledge. The first therefore and largest of all the rest,That the white tunicle is the first. is called the white coate, or the white of the eye, or otherwise the coniunctiue mem∣brane: I say nothing in this place of the greeke and latine names, for that a man may see them in mine Anatomie. This tunicle is ve∣ry strong, and riseth from the edges of Pericranium: it compasseth
not the eye round about, or euery where: for it endeth at the cir∣cle called Iris, by reason of the varietie of the colours thereof. I confesse that there are three vses of this coate.The threefold vse of the same The first whereof is, that it letteth all annoyance which might happen to the eye, by the hardnes of the bones about it. The second, to hold the eye firme, least that either by some maner of excesse, or els some ouer violent motion, it should fall out of his place. The third and last, is to stand fast vnto al the sixe muscles, as whereupon they should not faile to finde sure footing. The hornie membrane.The second membrane is called Cornea, or hornie, because it is cleere & polished, as the hornes of lanternes be: or because it may be diuided into many little skins or thinne membranes: it is also called hard, because of his hardnes, and for that it commeth from the thicke membrane compassing the braine, called Dura mater. The substance thereof is thicke, for the better withstanding of outward miuries: it is also transparent or through cleere, that thereby the light may quickly passe through it: it is smooth, po∣lished and without all colour, because that seruing as a glasse or spectacle vnto the christialline humour, it would haue made euery thing which wee should haue looked vpon, to haue been of the same colour with it selfe, if it had been of any colour at all: this is also the cause, why there are not any veines or arteries to bee seene in it. But if it happen that this skinne grow white, as sometimes it doth through vlcers in the same, or by hauing been scorched by some hot thing, (in such sort as the Turkes vse them which will see Mahomet his sepulcher) the sight is lost, the glasse being darkned. This tunicle serueth for three purposes.The threefold vse of this coat. For first it serueth to de∣fend the humours: secondly, to compasse and keepe them in: and thirdly, to bee in stead of a spectacle vnto the christalline hu∣mour. The grapelike coate.The third tunicle is called Vuea, being like vnto the skinne of a blacke grape: it is also called Choroides, because it containeth all the vessels which serue for the nourishing of the other coates: or because it commeth from the thin and tender skin compassing the braine called Pia mater, which is of Galen oftentimes called Choroides. This skinne compasseth the eye round about, except before
onely, where being bored through, it maketh a little round hole, which is called the apple, and is the principall window of the eye, which being shut in by chataracts, causeth vs to line in continuall darknes: and this is the onely coate that is partie-coloured. On the fore side it is as it were blacke, thereby to hold together the forme of obiects: on the innermost or hinder side it is blew, greene, and of many other colours, thereby to refresh the christalline hu∣mour when it is wearied. This skinne doth notable good seruice to the christalline humour, and other parts of the eye.The offices of Vuea. For first it is the meanes to hinder that the hardnes of the hornie membrane should not hurt the christall: then it refresheth the same with the varietie of his colours: thirdly, it keepeth together and hemmeth in the spirits, which otherwise would spend and disperse them∣selues abroad: and lastly, doth store with nourishment, the hornie and netlike membranes, as also the humours: and this is the cause why nature hath made it soft and full of vessels. The fourth membrane is called Aranoides, because it is very fine, and resembleth the ciper web,The cobweb∣like coate. or threeds which the Spider draweth out with her feete: it couereth and lyeth close vnto the christalline humour, and serueth to vnite and retain the formes of things, as the lead doth in looking glasses. The netlike coate.The fift is the netlike tunicle, ouercast with a million of little threeds, after the fashion of a net. It groweth from the softest part of the sinew of sight, which naturally is giuen to dilate and widen it selfe: and this is the cause why when it is cast into water, one shall perceiue it to be all white, soft, and as it were marrowlike. The vse thereof is to conuey the inward light,The vse there∣of. which is the animall spirit, vnto the christalline humour, and to carrie backe againe whatsoeuer receiued formes first vnto the nerue optick, and from thence to the braine to iudge thereof. The glassie tunicle.The last is called the vitreous or glassie tunicle, because it co∣uereth and containeth the glassie humour. The learned of ancient time haue not knowne it. There is to be seene in the midst there∣of a round circle like vnto the eyebrie: I suppose it to be a num∣ber of small veines, which conuey blood vnto the said vitreous hu∣mour, that there being laboured, it may be made white and fit for the christalline humour.
CHAP. VIII. Generally of the three humours of the eyes: but more specially of the becautie and excellencie of the christalline humour. The excellency of the christal∣line humour.LOe thus all vailes, shadowes and couert being taken away, it is now time to make a plaine and open shew of the most precious iewell of the eye, that rich diamond, that beautifull christall, which is of more worth then all the pearles of the East. This is that icelike humour, which is the principall instrument of the sight, the soule of the eye, the inward spectacle: this is that humour which alone is altered by colours, & receiueth whatsoeuer formes of the things that are to be seene. This is that christalline humour, which in more hardie wise then Hercules, dares to encounter two at one,That all the parts of the eye are seruants to the christalline. namely, the outward and inward light. This is that onely christalline humour, which all the other parts of the eye acknow∣ledge their soueraigne, and themselues the vassals thereof: for the hornie tunicle doth the office of a glasse vnto it: the apple, the of∣fice of a window: the grapelike coate is as a fayre flowring gar∣den, to cheare and reioyce the same after wearisome labour: the cobweblike coate serueth as lead to retaine such formes as are of∣fered: the waterish humour as a warlike foreward, to intercept and breake off the first charge of the obiects thereof, assaying all vpon the sudden, and with headlong violence to make breach and entrance: The vitreous humour is his cooke, dressing and setting forth in most fit sort his daily repast: The nerue opticke, one of his ordinary messengers, carrying from the braine thereto, comman∣dement and power to see, and conueying backe againe with all speede whatsoeuer hath been seene: The muscles are his loftie steedes and couragious coursers, whereupon being mounted it aduanceth it selfe aloft, casteth it selfe alow, turneth it selfe on the right and left hand: and finally in euery such sort, as seemeth best vnto it selfe. In briefe, this is the principall part of the eye, which I intend to describe, when I shall haue shewed you that which is before it, I meane the waterish humour. All the Anatomists agree
that there are three humours in the eyes: the waterish,The descriptiō of the waterish humour. the chri∣stalline, and the glassie. The waterish, called also the white hu∣mour, hath this name, because it is of the consistence of water, and is (as it were) like vnto the white of an egge.Why the wa∣trie humour is set before the christalline. Nature hath placed it before the christalline to be in stead of a rampier, to the end it might not be hurt by the hardnes of the membranes, and that the first and fierce assaults of obiects, might bee somewhat rebated: and in such maner, as that it may seeme to be an inward meane to conuey the formes of obiects vnto the christalline humour. And looke how the lungs vndertaketh the first encounter of the ayre, and maketh it true fauourite vnto the heart: euen so the waterish humour altereth the light which commeth from without, and re∣concileth it to that which is within. This humour serueth also to water the christalline and to keepe it moyst: for being drie it can not admit the formes of things. It manageth also the spirits, which otherwise of their owne nature would alwaies be mounting aloft and wandring abroade, and will not suffer them in such sort to spend themselues, being set before them as a barre to keepe them in. It also keepeth asunder the grapelike coate and the christalline humour, and stretcheth foorth and filleth continually the hornie membrane, that so by the withering and shrinking thereof the sight may not bee lost. This humour hauing all these goodly ver∣tues:That the wa∣trie humour is a part of the eye. it is not very like that it should bee an excrement of the chri∣stalline humour, as Auicen the prince of Arabia for Phisicke hath seemed to affirme. And I am so farre from being of his minde, as that I take it for a spermaticke part, not yeelding any thing in title of eldership vnto the christalline, as hauing ouer and besides his limited proportion or permanent quantitie, his constant abiding place, and his double partition-wall of two membranes, keeping it and the christalline asunder: whereunto may bee added, that (contrary to the nature of an excrement) if it be once lost or spilt, it can neuer be recouered againe, but causeth vs to lose our sight. The next in sequence is the christalline humour,The description of the christal∣line. which is bright and icelike, as is the christall which is pure and well pol∣lished. This is the steele-glasse of the minde, by which it looketh vpon the formes and faces of things, and combineth the lights which before were seuerall and asunder. Some men are of iudge∣ment,
that the inuention and vse of spectacles was taken from the christalline humour, because that if it be laid vpon a written pa∣per, it causeth the letters to shew twice so great as they are. The substance thereof is waterish,The substance thereof. but it runneth not abroad as the o∣thers doe; it is faster and more solide, to the end that the formes of obiects, may settle themselues therein; it is also through-cleere, and full of light, to the end it may haue some correspondencie with his obiect, which is lightsome; it is of no colour, that so it may receiue all maner of colours the more indifferently: for if the christalline humour should be tainted either with greene, or red, or yellow, all the obiects thereof would appeare and seeme to be of the same colour.Why the chri∣stalline humor is not nourish∣ed with blood. Here we cannot but wonder at the pro∣uidentnes of nature, which would not haue this christalline to be nourished with blood, as all the other parts of the bodie are, for feare that the blood should make it red, but for the better assu∣rance hath dedicated vnto it the vitreous humour, to turne his nu∣triment into a white colour, and play the part of a cooke, accor∣ding as the neede thereof should require.His shape. The shape is round, and yet not altogether and exactly sphericall, but some what flat on the two sides as is a fetch, or the end of a pestell: and this is the reason why the Grecians haue called it . I con∣ceiue that it was thus shaped, that so it might abide more firme, and not to be thrust out of his place vpon euery violent motion of the eye. For such things as be exquisitelyround, doe moue (as it were) of themselues, and haue no stay, resting themselues but vpon a poynt.His situation. It is placed in the middest of the eye, as in his cen∣ter, to the end it may equally and indifferently intertaine and ad∣mit of both the lights. On the hinder part it is vnderlaid with the vitreous humour, and feemoth (as it were) to swimme vpon the top of the same: on the forepart it hath the waterish humour, and round about it is wrapped in his proper coate called Ara∣noides. The glassie humour.The third and last humour is called glassie, because it resem∣bleth in colour and consistence the moulten glasse. The chiefe vse thereof is to prepare nourishment for the christalline humour, not that the christalline humour should feede vpon it owne sub∣stance, as Auicen hath thought. For one part is neuer nourished
or fed of the substance of another: but this doth blanch or turne white the blood, and serue for cooke to the christalline. It presser∣ueth also the christalline from all annoyance that might happen by the hardnes of the membranes, and keepeth in the spirits. The quantitie thereof is in greater abundance then any of the rest: it is clothed with his owne coate, which is more then the an∣cient learned in this profession did euer attaine vnto to know. CHAP. IX. Of the sinewes, veines, arteries, and other parts of the eye. The sinew of sight.THere are as yet remaining vntouched, though neces∣sarie sarie helpes to the sight, two paire of nerues, and cer∣taine other small arteries. The first paire is called op∣ticke,From whence it springeth. and it bringeth the animall spirit and inward light vnto the christalline humour. This paire sprin∣geth not from the first ventricle of the braine, as the Arabians would haue it, neither yet from out of the midst of the lowest part of the braine, as the Grecians haue perswaded themselues, and as all Anatomists of our time doe as yet beleeue; but from the hin∣der part of the braine, where the great and little braine doe ioyne together. This obseruation is new, but most true, and I receiue it, because I haue often seene it.Why the si∣newes of sight doe grow into one. The opticke therefore comming from the hinder part, and hauing finished more then halfe his course, in corporateth it selfe the one with the other, and so becom∣meth one, not growing one vnto another only, as the cōmon sort doth thinke, much lesse onely touching one another, as the mullet doth the milstone, but (as hath been sayd before) they doe in such sort incorporate themselues the one with the other, as that no man is able by any cunning skill to separate them.The first rea∣son. This incorporation was needfull for that they being very soft, and hauing such a large peece of ground to trauerse, might haue bended and becomming crooked, could neuer haue carried directly forward their spirit, if they had not by this their combination, one strengthened the o∣ther. It was meete and conuenient that these two nerues shouldThe second.
applie themselues wholly to the seruice of the christalline, and that they should bee drawne along as in the same leuell or direct∣line with the eyes, otherwise the sight would haue bin continual∣ly false, for euery simple obiect would haue appeared double. But in very deede it had not been possible for them to haue continued their leuell, being so long and so tender, if they had not been thus vnited in the middest.The third. I will yet adde vnto these fomer a third be∣nefit by this vnion, and it is to shew that by this meanes the per∣fection of the sight is greatly furthered and aduanced: for by this meanes euen in a moment the spirit may passe from one eye to the other, and then the one eye being stopt, the other will become fuller of spirit, and so more strong and able to see a farre off: for so are wee accustomed to doe, namely, to shut the one of our eyes, if westriue to behold anything a farre off.The insertion of the sinewes of sight. The opticke nerues after this their vnion, doe againe diuide themselues, and march on for∣ward, either of them grafting himselfe into his proper eye: the in∣ward part of the sinew being marrowish, doth in large it selfe and maketh the netlike tunicle: the outward part doth make the mē∣branes called Cornea and Vuea. Herophilus, Galen, and almost al other Anathomists, haue supposed this sinew to bee hollow, but it is only spungie: for it is not possible for any man to finde any ca∣uitie in the same.The sinewes of the eye, seruing for motion. The other couple of sinewes march on vnto the muscles of the eyes, and serue to help their motion: their diuiding of themselues is pretie, full of kindnes, for they send to euery muscle as it were a little fine thred. The veines and arteries.There are in the eye many pretiesmall veines and arteries, which bring life and nourishment to the same: they all spring from the branches of the veines and arteries called Iugulares and Caro∣tides. The fat.The fat that lieth about the eye doth keepe it moyst, thereby keeping it from withering: it keepeth it also from the iniurie of the cold, preseruing his naturall heate: which is the cause that the eye is neuer tainted with a shiuering or quaking cold. The glandules.There are belonging to the eye certaine glandules or kerneis which water the eye, as also drinke vp like a spunge, the moysture falling vpon them from the braine.
CHAP. X. How we see, as namely whether it be by the sending foorth of spirits, or by taking in of the formes of things. I Thinke my selfe by this time to haue deciphered exactly enough the whole workemanship of the eye, and of all his parts, let vs now looke about and see how it dischargeth his function, which is sight, and how it is accomplished.The things necessarie to make vs see. All Philosophers haue well agreed in this one poynt, that there are three things ne∣cessary for to make the sight perfect: that is to say; the instrument which is the eye; the obiect, which is the colour; and the meanes inlightned, which is the aire, or the water, or some other thorough-cleare and christal-like thing: but when it should come to passe that they should ioyne these three together, and shew the maner of this action, (which is the liueliest and briefest of all the other sences) they iarre among themselues and cannot agree. Some of them would haue that there should issue out of the eye bright beames or a certaine light which should reach vnto the obiect, and thereby cause vs to see it: other some would haue it, that the obiect commeth vnto the eye, and that nothing goeth out of the eye: the first doe hold that we see by emission or hauing some∣thing going forth of the eye, the latter by reception or receiuing of the obiect into the eye. The former sect doe ordinarily alleage Plato as their prince and chiefe pillar:Plato his opi∣nion, how that we see sending forth of some thing. one of his princip all foun∣dations standeth vpon this, that the eye is all full of light, and of the nature of fire, not such as vseth to burne and giue light toge∣ther, neither yet that which burneth but giueth no light, but such as giueth light and burneth not, like vnto the celestiall fire. This foundation seemeth to rest vpon some shew of trueth,The found ti∣on of this opi∣nion. for the eye being rubbed, (yea though it be when it is most darke) doth cast forth some bright streames: and commonly wee see the eyes of such as are angrie, all fierce and fierie.Reasons to proue the eye to be of the na∣ture of fire. Plinie hath obserued that Tyberius Casar did make afraid many souldiers with his onely looke, it was so quicke and full of light. Aristotle reporteth that
one Antipho, a yong man, did alwaies see his owne image by the reflexe of the bright straines which came forth of his eyes. Galen telleth of a souldier, who becomming blinde by little and little, perceiued euery day as it were a light to come forth of his eyes, and returned not againe. And doe we not in the night perceiue the Cat, the Woolfe, and many other liuing creatures to haue shi∣ning eyes. Moreouer, the more then credible readines and nimble∣nes of the eye, the performance of his actions in a moment, and without local motion, his steeple-like shape, doe all euidently te∣stifie, that it is of a subtile nature, and full of fire: the eye also is ne∣uer seene to quake through colde, although it be in the colde, be∣cause it selfe is all on a flame. Finally, it cannot bee denied but that the instrument must bee sutable to his obiect, the obiect of sight is colour, and auncient writers haue defined colour to bee a flame going out of bodies: it is of necessitie therefore, that the in∣strument should be of the same nature. If this be true (I meane that the eye is full of fire and sparkling streames) we shalbe forced to beleeue, that the eye seeth by emission. This is also the most common receiued opinion, and that which hath drawen manie great learned Clerkes after it, as Pithagoras, Empedocles, Hippar∣cus, Democritus, Leucippus, Epicurus, Chrysippus, Plato, and in a maner all others which haue written of the eyes. And now take a viewe of their principal reasons. Reasons to proue that we see, by sending foorth some∣thing.The Basiliske by his sight poy soneth all them which looke vp∣on him; women hauing their natural courses, infect the looking-glasses vpon which they cast their eyes. Some report, that if a Woolfe doe first see a man, that then such a man will become hoarse.The first. Men of olde time haue thought, that with the looke one might be bewitched and inchanted, according to the complaint of the Poet: I know not what eye hath bewitched my tender lambes.The second. If a man come neere to one that hath enflamed eyes, and behold him earnestly which hath red eyes, without all perad∣uenture he shall bee troubled with the same disease: all which sheweth that there commeth something out of the eye. Where∣upon is it that a great whitenes doth hurt the sight, but onely for that it wasteth the spirits which come forth of the eye? Where∣fore should the eye grow weake with looking,The third. but because there
commeth out of it too much light, and that all the spirits vanish and fade away?The fourth. Whence commeth it that such as would see a very little thing a far off, do claspe their eyes, & halfe close their eyelids? It is not that so they may vnite the beames, and ioyne together the spirits,The fift. to the end that afterward they may cast them out more for∣cibly cibly and directly? Go not the Cats on hunting in the night? and then do they cast out some glittering streames.The sixt. Furthermore, if we should not see by sending something foorth of the eye, it should seeme vnnecessary that the eye should turne it selfe vnto his ob∣iect, the forme thereof should offer it selfe sufficiently to vs, yea, we should see in not seeing.The seuenth. If we should see onely by taking and receiuing something into our eyes, then great eyes should see bet∣ter then small ones, because they are the more capable: and so al∣so such eyes as haue large apples should see better then those which haue small ones, which is quite contrary to trueth: a small thing should be assoone seene as a great,The eight. and it would be as easie to see a farre off as neere, if the formes be al in the aire. Looke wel (say they which write of the eyes) vpon a small needle which hath his point standing vp, yet at the first cast thou shalt not disceme the point: but afterward hauing turned thine eye on the one side and the other, thou shalt see it, because that by such turning, some one bright straine or other, will haue met with it: of the same rea∣son and nature is that which happeneth in smal things that are on the earth,The ninth. a man cannot tell how to behaue himselfe to see them at the first dash. Finally, if we see by taking something into the eye, the eye should containe at one and the same instant two con∣trarie things, which is against the lawes of nature, neither could it being so smal containe the greatnes, no nor yet the shape of great mountaines: whereupon we must needes conclude, that we see by sending forth something. Behold here all the faire and goodly forces on this side, which I am now about to pitch and plant in the plaine field: and now let vs goe to view the squadrons on the contrary side. The contrary opinions of such as hold that we see by taking in something.Chiefe captaine and generall of the same is Aristotle, whose followers be the whole band of the Peripatetikes, as also Auer∣rhoes, Alexander, Themistius, and an infinite number of others. All these hold that wee see by receiuing something into the eye,
and that there doth nothing goe out of the eye which may helpe vs to see, but that either the obiect or the forme there of doth come vnto the eye. The foundation and maine reason is cleane contrary vnto that of the Platonists: for Plato was verilie perswaded, that the eye was all full of fire, and Aristotle maintaineth that the eye is all full of water, and this he demonstrateth most excellently, and therefore accordingly I will doe my endeuour to set it out most plainely.A cleere and plaine proofe, that the eye is all of water. The instrument of the sight must be thorough cleere, and transparent, that is to say cleere as christal, to the end there may be some likenes betwixt the obiect and the instrument, and that there maybe some equality betwixt the thing doing, and the thing suffe∣ring. This principle is cleerely agreed vpon in naturall Philosophie. But of the things which are christal-like cleere, some are of subtile and thin bodies, and othersome are more compact and thicke. The eye was not to be made christal-like cleere and thin, because yt so it could not haue retained his formes, they would haue speedely past away, not finding any resting place, as doe the bodies which are in the ayre: and the glasse it selfe which is in looking glasses, would neuer make shew of any picture or resemblance, if it were not steeled or leaded on the backeside? Whereupon it followeth that the eye must be christallike cleere and thicke. Now of all the elements there is no one that is so cleare and thicke besides the water, for the ayre and fire are in deede cleere, but therewithall thin: it followeth therefore, that the eye is of the nature of the wa∣ter. This firme and demonstratiue argument is vnderpropped by another which cannot be gainesayd.Another plains and strong proofe. The chiefe part of the eye is the christallike humor, which is nothing else, but a congealed wa∣ter, which hath before it the waterish humor, and behinde it the vitreous which doth feede and nourish it: if you pearce the eye, you shall not perceiue any other thing to come forth but water, so that we must rather beleeue that the eye is of the nature of water, then of fire.Reasons pro∣uing that we see by taking in something. This foundation thus laid, it will be easie to make sure the rest of the building, and to maintaine that we see by receiuing of some thing into the eye; and the rather, because it is the pro∣pertie of moist things to receiue and take in. Loe here the chiefest reasons of this sect as they follow. The action of euery sence is a suffering, and to doe the office of any of the sences, is nothing else
but to suffer:The first. euery action therefore of the sences is accomplished by receiuing, and not by sending forth of anything, which is an action; as for example the eare heareth by receiuing of sounds; smelling, by receiuing of odours; taste, by receiuing of tastes; and feeling,The second. by receiuing of such qualities as may be felt: and then why should the eye be debarred of this receite? Aristotle saith, that they which haue their eyes very moyst, doe seeme to see things bigger then in deede they bee, which argueth that the formes of things are receiued into, and as it were, grauen in the christalline humor: for bodies seeme alwaies to exceede themselues in great∣nes, being within the water. Euery obiect exceeding in his quali∣tie,The third. doth destroy his sence, as an exceeding great whitenes doth dimme and dasle the sight: then it must follow, that it is violently receiued. Aristotle in his Problemes moueth a question,The fourth. which may be of some force in this place: as, wherefore the right hand is ordinarilie more nimble and strong then the left, and not one care giuen to heare more readilie then the other? Whose answer is, that the facultie which causeth the hands to moue, setteth it selfe on worke, and that that which causeth sight and hearing is set on worke: in such sort as that the eyes and cares may equally receiue and suffer. Olde men commonly doe see things a farre off,The fift. better then those which are at hand, and this cannot happen of any fierie streames or light, going out of the eye, because that those in them are of small quantitie, and greatly delayed with darkenes; the cause must needes be referred to the forme, which comming from a thing farre remoued, becommeth more fine and subtile, and lesse participating of materiall substance, and by consequent no more fit to be receiued.The sixt. In winter if the weather be calme and faire, the Starres are often seene at midday; which neuer hapneth in summer; which is, because in winter the ayre being more grosse and thicke, the formes thereof doe consist and abide more perma∣nently, as also in greater number in the ayre: but in summer by reason of the thinnes and subtilenes of the ayre, their saide formes, haue no staide abode or meanes to multiplie: and this sheweth, that we see by receiuing in, and not sending forth of any thing. Finally, the eye is like vnto the looking glasse,The seuenth. and this receiueth all such shapes as are brought vnto it, without sending any thing of
it owne vnto the obiect. They differ onely in this, that the looking glasse hath no power to recommend his formes and shapes vnto their iudge, as the eye doth vnto the common sence by the nerue opticke. Loe here the two battels orderly in array, and right ouer one against the other, I could wish my selfe able to agree them, being the same that Galen hath attempted, but in deede there is lit∣tle likeliehoode. For the trueth cannot vphold and defend two things,The Author his opinion. contrary one to the other. I will therefore set in foote with the stronger side, and maintaine with Aristotle, that wee see by receiuing only and that there goeth nothing out of the eye, which may serue for the making of vs to see. I will vse for my first in∣counter this reason, which as it seemeth me is sharpe enough. If there goe any thing out of the eye, it is either some fine and sub∣tile bodie,Arguments plainly con∣uincing the Platonists. as the animall spirit, or els some streame onely. If it be a bodie, how can it bee carried forthwith and in a moment as high as heauen, seeing that euery bodily substance requireth time to moue in, but the sight is finished at one instant? This bodily sub∣stance shal it not be beaten, scattered and deceiued by the winds, before it come to the obiect? This bodie thus going forth of the eye, shal it pearce the ayre? or shal the ayre giue place to it? pearce it cannot, because that nature can no more abide the pearcing of bodies, then she can abide that there should bee a place wherein should bee no bodie: if the ayre make way for it, then there will neuer be any sight: for so the coherence and continuitie of straines would bee interrupted, because the ayre would follow it hard at the heeles, and thrust it selfe betwixt the two. If to auoyde the push of these pikes,That it cannot bee any bright beame which goeth out of the eye. which yet are sharpe enough, thou wouldest say, that that which goeth out of the eye is a bright beame or light, which pearceth the ayre, and communicateth it selfe in a moment with all that which is the meane, as doth the shine of the Sunne, which inlighteneth the whole ayre without any motion; I will vrge thee more neerely, and will cause thee to see that there is not light enough in the eye to reach vp to heauen. Marke well and consider, that a flame of fire casteth not his streames any further then the proportion of the bignes there of will beare it out: one candle cannot giue light enough to one whole parlour, and how canst thou imagine that this little member should bee able in a
moment to reach heauen with his bright beames? It is no diffi∣cultie for the Sunne, because it is as great as the whole earth, to cast forth his beames, and to spread them ouer the whole world, but it cannot bee so sayd of the eye. Therefore there can nothing goe forth of the eye, that can reach to the things to be seene. Fur∣thermore, if the streames going foorth of the eye should bee the cause of sight, then they should returne vnto the eye againe, or els stay by the way: if they come not backe againe, neither can they make returne of such bodies as they touch; if they do come back againe, yet there is nothing but bright glittering bodies, which can bee seene, because no other then these giue any reflexion, and so it should follow, that huge and great hils should not bee seene. Let vs say more, that if these streames serue to cause vs to see, that then of necessitie, they must either returne emptie or laden with their backes full of bodies: if they come emptie, there will be no∣thing to see: if they bring formes or semblances of things with them, then haue wee our desire, that is, that wee see by receiuing something into the eye.The ground-proofes of the Platonists. As concerning the foundations of the Platonists, it is easie to ouerthrow them all. I confesse that the eye hath great quantitie of brightnes in it, but it proceedeth not from fire, it commeth of the christalline humour, and of the shining of the tunicles: for all polished substances, being after the maner of the hornie membrane, doe shine in the darke. The action of the eye performed on the sudden, and the great quicknes of the same, cannot compell me to thinke that it is full of fire. For, the action is sudden, because the eye receiueth but the bare shapes or like∣nesses of things without matter and bodie. For the nimblenes and dexteritie thereof, we may conceiue that it is no great peece of worke for sixe muscles readily to moue so small a member. The eyes doe not at any time quiuer with colde, because (as Aristotle sayth in his Problemes) they bee full of fat, which accidentarilie doth keepe them warme, as our garments doe vs: or because they be in continual motion. There is no fire then within the eyes, there is nothing to be found but water, christall and glasse.Answere to the reasons of the Platonists. And as for ye reasons which they alleage, they be very light: for the Basilisk and the inflamed eye do not infect vs by the bright beames which come from them, but by a naturall substance, which is very sub∣tile,
that is to say by a vapour insensiblie breathing out of the whole bodie, which infecting the ayre, is by it transported to vs. That which is alleaged of the wolfe,The second. is no better worth then to bee derided. And as for any inchantment proceeding from the eye, we hold, that naturally there can no such thing bee. Exceeding much whitenes doth ouerthrow the sight, because it draweth out all the spirits, which ought to keepe within the eye, to enable it the more vnto the performance of his office.The third. The eye groweth weake and wearie with looking, as euery other part will doe, which is, for that the naturall heate and spirits (which labour and take paines in the motion of the eye, as also in the holding of the same still) doe spend and waste themselues.The fourth. Wee doe halfe shut our eyes, when we would see a farre off, not to the end to vnite the shining straines of the eye but rather that the outward light should not suddenly rush in and scatter the inward.The fift. The eye must needes turne it selfe towards his obiect, because sight doth neuer act but by a direct line.The sixt. Great eyes, and those apples of eyes which are broad, see not so well as the contrary, because the inward spirits are thereby lost, being very necessary in the receiuing of those formes which are to enter into the eye.The seuenth. As concerning the needle, I answere▪ that at the first wee see not the poynt▪ because it is not proportionable. The receiuing of two contraries and of the most huge mountains,The eight. is no absurditie, seeing the eye in all cases medleth with nothing but the formes of the things, which are without all matter and substance. Wherfore let nothing let vs to conclude, that the sight is effected by the receiuing in of some thing.A plainer de∣claring of the maner of re∣ceiuing in something. But the maner of this receiuing is a very difficult thing, and vnderstood of a very few. To make plaine therefore the same, I will doe my indeuour to search out, what it is that the eye receiueth; in what part it recei∣ueth the same; when it receiueth in any thing and how. Concer∣ning the first poynt,What it is that the sight recei∣ueth or taketh in. I finde great oddes in opinions. Democritus and Leucippus doe firmely hold, that wee receiue in bodies more small then that they will suffer any diuision. Epicurus thinketh that we receiue in the only beames of the obiect. Alexander the Peripatetick, the image of the obiect, and that not as in his proper subiect, but as it were in a looking-glasse. Aristotle maintaineth, that we receiue in nothing but the forme which is produced of the
obiect, and multiplied or continued in an vnseparable continui∣tie in and by the ayre, as the bodie maketh and produceth the sha∣dow, and the Sunne the light. And this is the soundest iudgement of all the rest, but such as needeth a plainer declaration:That the eye receiueth no∣thing but the formes of things. for euery man is not able at the first blush, to vnderstand what is meant by the forme of the obiect. We affirme then that this forme hath not his seate and place in the vnderstanding, as also that it is not the same which schoolemen call Ens rationis,What this forme is. but that it is a certaine reall thing seated in the ayre and eye. Now whatsoeuer hath a reall being, is either a substance or an accident. This forme cannot be a substance, because that thereby it should be more noble and perfect then his obiect which is colour. Then it is an accident. But what kinde a one? Shall we call it a quantitie? No, for then it would haue the allowance either of height, bredth or depth: and we dare not call it a relation, because relation hath not the force to doe any thing, but this forme causeth vs to see. And least of all may wee reduce and bring it vnto the predicament of Action: It must then needes bee a qualitie, without matter or bodie, and vn∣capable of all maner of diuision: such a forme is called of the Phi∣losophers intentionall, which hath respect vnto the obiect, and is immediatly produced and made shew of, as the shadow of the bodie. This forme doth multiplie it selfe throughout the ayre: for the ayre being subtile & moyst, is apt to receiue all the formes: and receiuing one part of the obiect, representeth the whole ob∣iect. This forme is not seene, but maketh vs to see, for there is no∣thing but the obiect which can be seene. Some man may demaund; how this forme altereth the sight in vniting or dispersing of the spirits, it selfe being voyd of al matter? for whitenes disperseth the spirits, and blacknes keepeth them to∣gether. I answere, that this alteration commeth not of the forme, but of the light which commeth of the colours. And it is most cer∣taine that a great light wasteth the sight, because our spirits which are very subtile and light, come foorth to ioyne themselues vnto this outward light: on the contrary, they beholding darknes and a blacke colour, withdraw themselues, shunning their enemie. There is nothing then but a forme without matter which is recei∣ued,
and hence it is that we see a thing in a moment, and not by in∣termission of time, as al the other sences haue their operations and actions.In what part of the eye this receipt is made. Now let vs see in what place, that is, whereabout or in what part of the eye this forme is receiued. Some there are which thinke it to be receiued in the braine, because it is the seate of com∣mon sence, and for that there is none of the sences which hath not his originall from the braine. Auicen did verely thinke, that this receipt was where the nerues optickes doe ioyne together, and that the obiect doth not appeare double, because the formes are v∣nited in this coniunction of the sinewes. Others are of minde, that this receipt is accomplished in the cobweb-like tunicle, which is more cleere and bright then any looking-glasse. But we hold with Aristotle, Galen, and the trueth also, that this receipt is effected in the christalline humour, because this is the most noble part of the eye, hauing such a substance as none other hath, and the same seated in the middest of the instrument, as in his center, where the two lights doe meete each other; the outward, which entreth at the apple of the eye, as at a window; and the inward, which is brought thither by the nerue optick. Notwithstanding, if thou bee disposed to reconcile all these seuerall opinions,The true and proper meanes by which we haue sight. thou maist say that the receipt is made in the christalline humour, the rebating of their violence in the tunicles, the perfect consumma∣tion in the coniunction of the nerues optickes, the knowledge, triall, or discerning of the same in the substance of the braine. Of all this long discourse these are the fruites which we shall reape; that the sight is effected onely by receiuing of some thing into the eye, and not by sending any thing out of it; that the christalline humour (being the chiefe instrument of sight) receiueth nothing but formes, which are as the shadowes of things that may bee seene; that these formes being produced and multiplied along throughout the ayre, are by a direct line and not else receiued, and that at an instant. I am constrained to adde this disputation in this small treatise of the eye, as hauing been vrgently pressed, or rather expressely commanded to doe the same.
CHAP. XI. How many waies the sight may be endama∣ged and hurt. THe whole discourse, which I haue gone about to make concerning the excellencie of the sight, the cun∣ning workemanship of the eye, and of all his partes, (besides the delight which it will bring to such as are curious) will not (in my iudgement) be vnprofitable vnto them, which shall earnestly desire to know the diseases of the eyes, and would vndertake to heale and cure the same. For we holde it for a principle in phisicke, that no man can know that which happeneth contrarie to nature in any part, if he doe not first know that which is naturall vnto the same part. The direct (saith Aristotle in his first booke of the soule) or straight line, is a rule both to iudge it selfe and the crooked by. It behooueth then that the Phisition should know the naturall state of the eye, and what∣soeuer is needefull for the execution of his office, if so be he be de∣sirous to know how many waies it may be hurt. Euery action (as Galen obserueth in many places) may be hurt three waies,How many waies a functi∣on may be hurt. for ei∣ther it is wholie lost, or else greatly impayred, or else corrupted and depraued. These three faults may happen to the sight, the impeach∣ment or weakenes thereof is ordinarie with olde folkes; the sight is then depraued, when the obiect sheweth other then it is, the vt∣ter losse thereof is called blindenes. The sight groweth weake,How the sight is weakened. either through default of his faculties, or through the euill dispo∣sition of the instrument. The facultie which is that power of the soule, which maketh vs see, hath his seate in the braine: if then the brain be altered in his temperature, (as whē it falleth out to be too hote, cold, moyst or drie; or when it is not fashioned well & com∣mendablie) then all the sences will bewray a great impeachment in their actions, but aboue all the rest the sight, because the eye be∣ing next neighbour vnto the braine, and of a merueilous simpathy with the same, will suffer first of all. The euill disposition of the eye, weakeneth the sight very oft, although that the facultie be in∣tire
and strong. Such disposition is found sometimes in the whole eye, as when it is too fat and great, or too small and leane, some∣times in some speciall parts thereof, as in the tunicle, humors, muscles, spirits, sinewes, veines and arteries, vnto euery of which doe happen their particular diseases, which I will runne through in the chapter following. The sight de∣praued and falsified.The corrupting or falsifying of the sight falleth out; when the obiect sheweth it selfe to be of another colour, forme, quantitie or situation then it is; as for example, if a white thing should shew yellow or red, because the instrument of sight is tainted with some colour: this it is which maketh them that haue the yellow Iaundise, to see euery thing yellow: when the thing which stan∣deth fast, seemeth to moue, as it falleth out in them which haue the disease, called Vertigo, through the disordered and extraordinarie mouing of the spirits; and when one single thing seemeth two, and this falleth out, either through default of the instrument, or through the euill situation of the obiect, or of the eyebeames. If both the eyes be not in one and the same leuell, but that the one be high, and the other low, out of doubt euery thing which they behold will shew double: the causes hereof are oftentimes a pal∣sie in the one, and a conuulsion in the other. The nerue opticke al∣so being relaxed and mollified on the one side, causeth all things that are looked vpen to seeme double, as it happeneth to such as are drunke. If you presse and beare downe the one eye with your finger, not touching the other, you shall see euery thing double▪ of which missight the situation of the instrument is the principall cause: and the situation of the obiect is the next. As if you whirle a staffe round about, you would thinke that it were a circle, and if long wise, you would iudge it to be nothing but a long stretched line; which happeneth by the swift mouing of the obiect out of his place, for so, before the first figure be worne out, a second com∣meth into his place. The last cause consisteth in the diuerse situati∣on of the eye beames; as if you looke yourselfe in a crackt loo∣king glasse, your face will seeme two faces vnto you. The losse of the sight.The vtter losse and depriuation of the sight, which we call blind∣nes, commeth either of the drinesse of the humors, or of the hin∣dring of the two lights, that they cannot meete and ioyne toge∣ther
in the christalline humour. The inward which is the animall spirit, is hindred by the obstruction of the nerue opticke, and this disease is called gutta serena; the outward is hindred by the ca∣taract, which shutteth the apple of the eye, the window of the christalline humour. Therefore the sight cannot be hurt, but by one of these three waies. CHAP. XII. A briefe rehearsall of all the diseases of the eye. I Doe not intend here to trouble my mind in draw∣ing forth an exquisite description of all the disea∣ses of the eye, the attempt would be too great, and I could not make so few as twentie chapters of the same, seeing there are so many particular dis∣eases of the eye. I will content my selfe to lay out the way and best ordered course thereunto, for the benefite of young Phisitions and Chirurgeons, for whose sake I haue made choice of this chapter. The diuision of the diseases of the eye.Now then as concerning the diseases of the eye, some of them are common to the whole member, some others are proper vnto some particular part of the same. Those which concerne the whole eye, are either similar or instrumentall, or common. The similar ones, are the moyst, the drie, the hote, the colde distempe∣rature,The diseases to be referred to the whole eye. as also the simple, the compound, the distemperature with∣out matter, and that which is accompanied with matter. The in∣strumentall doe shew themselues in the euill shape of the eye, as when it is ouer great or ouer little, or not so situate as were requi∣site for comelines and vse. The diseases comming of the bignes of it, are when the eye is either too great or too little;The greatnes of the eye. the great eye is called the oxe eye, it hindereth the action of the eye, for the sight is not so quicke, by reason of the excessiue expence of spirits, nei∣ther is it so readie in motion. The cause of this greatnes is either the error of the first forme and shape committed by nature, or else some accident whether flegmatike humor, or inflammation, or
else some great fluxe of humours falling down vpon the same. The disease contrarie to this,The smalnes of the eye. is the smalnes of the eye, which either is the worke of nature, and is called the Pigges eye, or else happeneth by some other meanes, as by wasting of the naturall heate, by suf∣fering of intollerable paines, much watchings, sharpe rhewmes, and continuall agues; in such cases the whole eye being weake∣ned, it attracteth not his naturall nourishment, or though it doe, yet it cannot concoct it, and this disease is called the pining away, or leanenes of the eye. The eye bolted out▪The diseases of situation is when the eye is out of his place, as when it commeth out, and when it falleth quite downe; if it come forth, it is called a falling out of the eye, in greeke . Aui∣cen obserueth, that it happeneth either of an outward cause, as of a blowe, a fall, or straine in coughing, vomiting, blowing, or of an inward cause, as of some suddaine falling down of humors, which looseth all the muscles and whole bodie of the eye, or of a great in∣flammation or other humor. Solution of continuitie.The common disease is called the solution of continuitie, which happeneth when the eye is burst, or when all the humours thereof are mingled and iumbled together. Loe these be the diseases which may be referred to the whole bodie of the eye: for the diseases called Nictalopia, Myopiasis, and Amblyopia, are Symptomes, touching onely the spirits or hu∣mors, and not the whole eye. The particular diseases of the eye.The particular diseases differ according to the parts of the eye. Now we haue alreadie obserued for parts of the eye, the humors, coates, sinews, and muscles of the same: so then there are diseases proper vnto euery one of these parts. I will begin to describe those which happen to the humours, as being the noblest parts of the eye, as also because Galen in his booke of the causes of accidents hath taken the same course. The disease of the christalline humour. Glaucoma.The christalline humour is subiect to all maner of disease, but the most vsuall is a drie distemperature, and his going out of his place. His drie distemperature is the cause of an accident, which the Grecians call , which is a shrinking together, and drie∣nes of the christalline humour, thereby becomming as it were white. Hippocrates in his third booke of Aphorismes obserueth
that this disease doth seldome happen but to olde folke, and wee iudge it incurable. The christalline may shift out of his place ma∣ny waies: for either it may shift to either side, or rise higher, or fall lower, or it may shrinke further into the eye, or come forward to∣ward the forepart of the eye. Howsoeuer it remoue and shift,The accidents that fall out when the chri∣stalline humor is remoued out of his place. it hurteth the sight very much: if it bee sunke farre backe into the eye, it causeth that wee cannot behold things which are neere at hand: if it be set too forward, it letteth from seeing a farre off: if it be more to the one side or to the other, we see a squint: and when it is too high or too low, euery thing seemeth two, because they are not leuell. The diseases of the watrie hu∣mour.The waterish humour being also a part as well as the others, hath his particular diseases. If it be too much dried, as it falleth out very oft in cataracts, it taketh the sight cleane away. If his store be greatly diminished, the christalline humour drieth, the grape-like coate withereth, the hornie membrane shrinketh, and the outward light is not rebated. As concerning the glassie humour, writers haue not noted any diseases properly belonging thereto: but, in my iudgement, it is subiect to the same affects that the waterish, both in his temperature, substance, and quantitie. The diseases of the coates.The tunicles of the eye are sixe, but there are not any moe then three, which haue been noted to haue particular diseases, that is to say, the coniunctiue, the hornie, and the grape-like: for no man hath designed any vnto the cobweb-like, net-like or glassie one. The diseases of the white coate. Inflammation.The diseases proper vnto the coniunctiue are three; inflam∣mation, the naile called in Latine Pterigium, and mortification. The inflammation of this membrane is sometime so sleight, as that it healeth of it self, and then it is called of the Grecians . The cause thereof is for the most part outward, as smoke, winde, the Sunne, dust, open ayre, the smell of onyons: if this inflamma∣tion be greater, it is absolutely called Ophthalmia: if it bee very great, in so much as that it causeth the white to be very much puf∣fed vp, and thereby the apple of the eye to seeme to stand in a hol∣low, the Greekes doe call it . There are inflammations pro∣ceeding of blood, others proceeding of choler, others of fleagme,The differences of the inflam∣mation of the the eye. and some of melancholie: Galen speaketh both of moyst & drie ones; Hippocrates of symptomatical and criticall ones; Trallian
of such as are accompanied with a consumption, and such as are not of maligne ones, such as are vsuall in the plague time, & such as are not maligne, of continuall ones, and such as keepe ordinary returnes.The naile. The second kind of disease is called Pterigium. This is a sinewy flesh, which beginneth to grow most commonly at the great corner of the eye, and from thence spreadeth it selfe like a wing vnto the apple of the eye: it is also sometime like vnto a naile, it followeth very often the inflammations that are not or∣derly cured, it is accompanied with some itching, as also with a little rednes and with some teares.The seuerall sorts of it. There are many kindes of it, which are all distinguished either by their colour, or manner of fastning of themselues, or by their substance, or greatnes. As for the difference of colour, there are white, red, and yellowish ones. They differ in respect of their fastning, because some sticke fast and close to, whereas others doe suffer themselues to bee easily separated. They differ in substance, because some are thicke, and some thin, some soft, some hard, some membranous like skinnes, some fatty and like vnto grease, and some varicous, which are like vnto a net, knit and made of many small veines and arteries. The bignes maketh the last difference: for some are so small that they passe not the white: othersome so great, as that they reach vnto the apple of the eye, and doe greatly hinder the sight. The third and last disease proper to the white tunicle,Mortification. is called  blacknes, or the mortification of the eye. Paulus Ae∣gineta and Aetius, had defined it a bursting of the veines of the eye, which causeth the blood to settle it selfe all vnder the white tunicle, and the hornie also, making all things seeme red vnto the eye. The cause hereof is ordinarily outward; as some blow or fall: sometimes it is inward, as the fulnes of the veines and the thinnesse of the blood. There are some other diseases of the white tunicle; as pustules and white spots in maner of a skarre, but they are common with this vnto the hornie membrane. The diseases of the hornie membrane. Pustules.The diseases of the hornie membrane are, pustules; common, maligne, and cankerous vlcers; the retention of purulent matter called : the skarre and the rupture. The pustules are called  of the Grecians, and Bothor of the Arabians. These are like vnto little bladders, proceeding of a thin and waterish humour,
which gathereth amongst the small skinnes of the hornie mem∣brane, and setteth them vpon the stretch.The diuers sorts of pu∣stules. Their differences are knowne by their colour: for some are blacke, and therefore grow∣ing betwixt the first and second leafe: and some are white, and do grow betwixt the third and fourth leafe. They differ in situation, because some are more superficiall, and others more deepe. They differ in respect of matter, because some doe rise of a cholericke humour, others of a cleere and thinne water.Vlcers com∣monly happe∣ning in the hornie mem∣brane. If the purulent mat∣ter continue long after that the pustules bee broken, it maketh an vlcer in the hornie membrane. The Phisitions both Greeke and Arabian make seuen sorts of vlcers, three inward, and foure out∣ward: the first of the inward is called ,Three vlcers within the hornie mem∣brane. of Paulus Aegineta and Auicen annulus, of others Fossula: that is to say, a small, streite, hollow vlcer, hauing no matter in it: the second is wider and not so deepe, Paulus calleth it , Auicen, lilimie: the third is very filthie and croustie, the Grecians call it , the Arabians Al∣ficume. The outward vlcers are foure:The foure vl∣cers in the vt∣ter part of the horny mem∣brane. the first is like vnto a grosse smoke, and maketh the apple of the eye blacke, they call it : the second is more white and deepe, and is called : the third is round, and appeareth in the circle of the eye; this is Paulus his : the fourth and last is very filthie, of the colour of ashes, much like to a locke of wooll, which is the cause that Auicen calleth it the woollie vlcer. Galen was the first that obserued all these diffe∣rences, in a little treatise of the eyes, but hee gaue not particular names to euery of them:The correcting▪ of a peece of text in Galen. and throughout this whole treatise there is one notorious fault to be found, which is, that this word inward is alwaies put for the word outward, and contrariwise. Manar∣dus hath gone about to carpe at Auicen, for notes of difference which hee hath set downe about these vlcers, but hee hath no iust reason so to doe. There grow other vlcers in the hornie mem∣brane which are maligne, and are tearmed ,Maligne vlcers. and these fret and spread vnto the muscles and eyelids. There are also in the horny membrane cankerous vlcers accompanied with pricking paines;Cankerous vlcers. these are bred of a sharpe and melancholike humour, being of the nature of a canker. The skar is a disease of the horny membrane:A skarre in the hornie mem∣brane. Hypopion, for it taketh from it his colour and cleerenes, making it altogether white, it is called , or Albuge. Hipopion commeth very neere
vnto it, for it is a collection of purulent water, possessing the blacke of the eye.Rupture in the hornie mem∣brane. Lastly, the hornie membrane is sometimes bursten, and then it causeth a disease, which is proper vnto the grape-like coate, which we will describe hereafter. The diseases of the grape-like coate.In the grape-like tunicle we are to consider a bodie and a hole, which is the apple of the eye: the body or substance of it hath a particular disease, which is the falling downe of the same: the ap∣ple of the eye is subiect vnto three notable diseases, which are the excessiue widenes and narrownes of the same, and the cataract. The falling down of Ʋnea is called of the Greekes ,The falling downe of Vnea. which cannot happen without the bursting or fretting asunder of the hornie membrane which is made to serue in stead of a barre vnto it: the rupture of Cornea is almost alwaies of an outward cause, but the fretting a sunder of the same is of an inward.Foure kinds of the foresaid disease. There are ordinarily made foure kindes of this falling downe of Vnea, which differ only in greatnes: for if it doe fall downe but a very little, it is called  the head of a flie, but of Auicen, Formicalis, if yet it fall downe more, and as it were to the greatnes of the skin of a grape, it is called  if yet is fal down further and hang as it were a little apple, it is called : if vnto all this it grow hard and been me brawnie, it shalbe called , Clauns. The diseases of the apple of the eie.The apple of the eye hath three diseases, for either it becommeth too broade or too narrow, or else altogether shut vp. The ouer much broadnes called of the Greeks ,The disease Mydiasis. is a disease of the in∣strument, because that the hollownes thereof is greater then it ought. Galen maketh two kinde of this dilatation, the one natu∣rall, the other accidental, both of them doe hurt and hinder the sight very greatly, because the inward light doth spend it selfe too fast, and as Auicen sayth the formes of things are not receiued so quickely and sharpely as they should:The causes of such dilatation This dilatation commeth of too much narrownes of the grape like tunicle, and it is made narrower, either by being swelled vp by too much moysture, or drawne together by extreame drinesse: moisture if it bee with∣out mixture paraliseth the membrane, but if it bee ioyned with matter, as it is in the tumours, abscesses, and other fluxes falling vpon the eye, then it trusseth it vp (as it were) into a narrower roome. Drynesse doth pull in the edges of Vnea making larger
the hole, as we see parchment that is very drie. The disease con∣trary to this is called of the Greekes ,The diminuti∣on of the ap∣ple of the eye. the consumption or straitnes of ye apple of the eye, that which is according to nature, is very auaileable tor the sight, but that which is accidentary, doth no good, but hurteth alwaies: the cause hereof is the falling to∣gether of the edges of the grape-like coate: it shrinketh together through great store of moisture, which is no where else, but on the side of the hole; or else by reason of the wasting of the waterish humor, which filled all this space.The Cataract. The last disease of the apple of the eye, is called of the Grecians , of the Arabians a drop or water, of the common people a Cataract or a pinne and a web. We define it to be an obstruction of the apple of the eye, caused of an vnnaturall humour, which hauing fallen downe thither, grow∣eth thicker by little and little, betwixt the hornie membrane, and the christalline humour.The cause of the Cataract. The next cause thereof (called the conti∣nent cause) is an vnnaturall humour, and herein it differeth from Glaucoma, which happeneth through the congelation of the na∣turall humors of the eye; this humour at the first floweth like wa∣ter, but in the end it thickneth and resembleth more an earthie substance. This is the cause why Paulus in his third booke defi∣neth a Cataract or suffusion by this word effusion, and in his sixt booke by this word concretion, or congelation, in the first place, speaking of that which was the beginning of the disease, and in the second, of that whereunto it was growne. This humour,The place where the hu∣mour causing the Cataract is setled. if we will beleeue Halyabbas, Haly, and Azarauius, is gathered be∣twixt the grape-like coate, and the christalline humour; but if we had rather beleeue Auicen, Mesue, and Albucasis, wee must thinke that it gathereth betwixt the hornie and grape-like tunicle. As for my selfe, I thinke it may abide in all that space, which is from the inner part of the hornie coate, euen vnto the christalline humour, and that it oftentimes mixeth it selfe with the waterish humour. This web or spot doth hinder the sight many waies: for if it stop all the apple of the eye, which is the window of the eye, the sight is cleere lost: if there be but one part of the window shut, as the right or left, the vpper or nether, the eye will then see the ob∣iects that shall be set before it, but it cannot see any more then one at a time: if the obstruction be euen in the middest of the
apple of the eye, all the things which it beholdeth, will seeme to be deuided, and as it were clouen, and withall it is not possible for such persons to see the middest of the obiect: if the water be not as yet gathered close together, but that it be scatteringly disper∣sed here and there, one shall see as it were flies to flie in the ayre. The differences of Cataracts are gathered from their greatnes,The differences of Cataracts. substance, colour, fastning, situation and maner of growing. For there are some great, and some small, some thicke, and some thin, some white, some of colour like ashes or chalke, some red, some blacke,Their inward causes. and some of a citrine colour. The inward causes are the humours and vapours which grow thicke, the humours come ei∣ther from the braine, by the sinewes, veines and arteries, or else are ingendred in the member it selfe, by reason of the weakenes of the concocting and expelling facultie.The imagina∣tions going before Cata∣racts. Cataracts haue alwaies for their forerunners, certaine false visions, which men call imaginati∣ons: for men thinke they see flies, haires, or threeds of a spider web in the ayre, which yet are not there. The cause of these visions is a darke shadowie vapour, got betwixt the hornie membrane and christalline humour. This vapour sheweth not it selfe in his proper forme: for then the grape-like coate should as well be seene, but in one of those formes which are in the ayre: it is true that the christalline humour iudgeth these vapours to be without the eye, because it is so accustomed to see outward obiects, that it thinketh that which is within the eye to be without it. These va∣pours rise sometimes from below, sometimes from the humours which are in the braine, or in the eye it selfe. The diseases of the muscles of the eye. The wrested eye.The diseases of the muscles of the eye, are principally three, the wrested or wrie eye, the shaking eye, and the astonished eye. The wrested eye is called  or , and is caused either of a Palsey, affecting some of the muscles, and then the part diseased, yeeldeth vnto the sound part: as it happeneth in all other parts that haue the Palsey and opposite muscles: or else it is caused of a conuulsion, affecting some of the muscles, and then the sound part of the eye yeeldeth vnto the diseased. Whatsoeuer it is, this disease is caused either of drynes, or of superfluous moisture: now in this disease the eye is wrested and set a wrie many waies,The diuerse sorts thereof. as on high, a low, and then there is nothing seene but the white of the
eye: Hippocrates calleth it , where the eye is wrested to ei∣ther side, and maketh the squint eye. The shaking eye,The shaking eye. called  is a fault in the muscles of the eye, being so much weakened, that they cannot holde the eye still. All the auncient writers haue be∣leeued,The error of the ancient writers. that this shaking of the eye did proceede of a seuenth mus∣cle, which doth imbrace the nerue opticke, but they deceiued themselues: for it is not found in men as I haue shewed in the hi∣storie of the eye. I beleeue then that as the pausing motion, which naturallie holdeth the eye firme and immoueable is then accom∣plished, when all the sixe muscles draw equally: that euen so this shaking is caused, when the said muscles loose their fibers, not drawing or bending the same at all.The fixed eye. There is a disease cleane con∣trary to this, as when the eyes are let in the head, and cannot moue. Hippocrates calleth it  and , and it happeneth then when the muscles haue lost all their power of mouing, either by ob∣struction or Palsie possessing die sinew that bringeth motion. The diseases of the sinew of sight. Obstruction.The diseases of the nerue opticke, are obstruction, compression, the Palsie, the falling and bursting therof, a hard and melancholike humour, inflammation. Obstruction is suddainlie caused through a cold & grosse humour, in as much as the hollownes of the sinew is very smal: It is pressed together through some blowe:Compression. Palsey. the Palsey taketh it, by reason of some thin and waterish humour, which doth mollifie and soften it. The falling thereof is called in Greeke,The falling of it together., when the membranouse endes thereof fall together not leauing any space for the marrowie substance which should be betwixt them: the bursting thereof commeth of a blow,The breaking of it. after which the eye first starteth out, and after sinking in againe, pineth away. All these diseases of the sinew of sight, doe make one com∣mon disease, which the Greekes call , and the Arabians, Gutta Serena. This as Aetius doth very well define it,Gutta Serena. is a blinde∣nes and vtter losse of the sight, without any fault or let appearing in the eye: this blindenes commeth by hindering of the course of the inward light. The disease of the spirits. Day blindnes. Night blind∣nes.The best learned Phisitions doe number the spirits among the parts of the eye, and assigne them their diseases, as , and . In the first, one cannot see but in the darke, as in the daw∣ning of the day, and twylight, for at midday this disease will not
let a man reade. In the other it falleth out cleane contrarie, for it causeth that a man cannot see, except he be in a very cleere light; some impute this vnto the spirits: those which haue subtile and thin spirits cannot see in a great light, because such spirits  ther∣by scattered: such as haue grosse spirits haue neede of a cleere and bright light to enlighten them. Loe here in a short briefe, the principall diseases of the eye. I meddle not with those of the eye-lids, of the corners of the eye, or of the bordering parts, because I feare me I haue wandred too farre out of my way alreadie, hauing purposed with my selfe one∣ly to shew the excellencie of the sight, and how men may learne the waie to preserue the same: I will therefore returne againe into my way. CHAP. XIII. A generall and most exquisite regiment for the preseruation of the sight, in which it handled very particularlie, whatsoeuer may hurt the eyes, as also whatsoeuer is profi∣table for them. IT is now high time to mixe some profitable thing with the pleasant and delightsome: whosoeuer they bee that feele some impairing of their sight, or feare some future weakenes of the same, shall see in these two chapters whatsoeuer precious and excellent thing that is to be found in the gardens of the Greeke, Arabian, or Latine Phisitions, for the preseruation thereof, seeing I haue sometimes delighted my selfe to crop and picke out thereof, whatsoeuer I could finde or see to be faire and for profit. But for as much as one of the principall causes of the weakenes of the sight (yea I dare be bolde to say, that it is more common then any of the rest) doth proceede of a superfluous moisture of the eye, and of the impurenes of the spirits: I will ordaine an exquisite order for the same, which shall serue for a patterne and scantling the better, to aime at the curing of all the rest of the diseases of the eye. The art which teacheth to heale diseases, called by one word
of the Grecians , is ordinarily performed by three instru∣ments, as Diet, or the manner of liuing, Chirurgerie, and Medi∣cine. Good diet hath the first place in the curing of whatsoeuer diseases.The maner of liuing is alwaies set in the forefront, and hath bin iudged of the ancient learned to bee the chiefe and most noble part, because it is most fauourable and familiar to nature, not di∣sturbing her any maner of way, or molesting her in any respect, so, as medicines and manuall operations doe. This maner of liuing doth not consist onely in meate and drinke, as the common peo∣ple imagine, but in the ordering of the sixe things which the Phi∣sitions call not naturall; and these are the ayre, meate and drinke, sleepe and watching, labour and rest, emptines and fulnes, and the passions of the minde. The power of the ayre.I will begin my order of diet at the ayre, in as much as no man can want it the least minute, and for that it hath a marueilous force to alter and change our bodies on the sudden: The direct passa∣ges thereof is through the nose to the braine, and through the mouth to the hart, by the pores of the skinne and mouing of the arteries it goeth throughout the whole bodie: it prouideth matter and nourishment for our spirits. This is the cause why that famous Hippocrates did note very well, that of the constitution of the aire doth wholly depend the good and ill disposition of our humours and spirits.The qualities of the ayre. In the ayre wee must looke vnto his first and second qualities: his first are heate, colde, moysture and drines, of which the two first are called actiue, and the two latter passiue: the se∣cond qualities are when the ayre is grosse, thicke, subtile, pure, darke, light: but let vs now make our profit of all this.What ayre is good for the sight. It beho∣ueth vs for the better preseruation of our sight to chuse an ayre which is temperate in his first qualities, as being neither too hot, too cold, too moyst or drie. It is not good to abide in the heate of the Sunne, neither in the beames of the Moone, or in the open aire. The Southerne and Northerne windes are hurtfull to the eyes.The windes that are bad for the sight. Reade that which Hippocrates writeth in his third section of Apho∣rismes. The South winde (saith he) maketh a troubled sight, hard∣nes of hearing, a heauie head, dull sences, and all the body lazie and lither, because it begetteth grosse spirits. The North winde is very sharpe, and therefore (as saith the same author) it stingeth and
pricketh the eyes. The places that are low, waterish, moyst and full of marishes, are altogether contrary to the welfare of the sight. It is better a great deale to dwell in drie places, and such as are somewhat rising. If a man be forced to dwell in moyst places, his helpe is to alter and rectifie the ayre with artificiall fires,How to cor∣rect the ayre by art. made of the wood of Lawrel, Iuniper, Rosemary and Tamariske: or other∣wise to very good purpose hee may make the perfume inuented of the Arabians, and vse it in the chamber where hee keepeth most. Take of the leaues of Eyebright,A perfume. Fennell, and Margerome of eue∣ry one an ounce, of Zyloaloe finely powdred a dramme, of Fran∣kinsence three drammes: mingle them altogether, and perfume your chamber oftentimes therewith. How the ayre must be affec∣ted in his se∣cond qualities.As concerning the second qualities, a grosse, thicke, and fog∣gie ayre is contrary to the sight, wee must choose such a one as is pure and cleane, purged from all waterish, earthie, nitrous, sulphu∣rous, and other such like mettal like vapours, especially those of quicksiluer: the dust, fire, and smoke do wonderfull harme to the eye: and this is the reason why such as haue a weake sight should neuer intermeddle with Alchimy, for so at once they should con∣sume both their sight and their purse: the vapours arising out of standing waters and from dead bodies are very noysome. Neither yet must the ayre bee too lightsome:What light is bad for the sight. for an excessiue light doth scatter the spirits, and causeth the sight oftentimes to be lost. Wee reade that Zenophanes his souldiers hauing passed the snow, be∣came all of them as it were blind: and Dionisius the tyrant of Si∣cile, did after the same maner put out the eyes of all his prisoners: for hauing shut them vp in a very darke hole, caused them to bee led forth on the sudden into a very bright light, so that they al ther∣by lost their sight. What colours doe comfort the sight.Vnto the light wee will adioyne colours. All colours are not profitable for the sight; the white colour scattereth the spirits, drawing them to it; the blacke maketh them too grosse: there is not any but the greene, blew and violet, which doe much com∣fort it. And this hath nature taught vs in the framing of the eye: for she hath died the grape-like coate with greene and blew, on that side which is next vnto the christalline humour. The colour of the Saphire and Emerauld is very commodious for the sight. If
you desire often to looke vpon these two colours mixed together, I wil shew you to attaine therunto very easily. Take of the flowers of Borage, & of the leaues of Burnet, and when you are disposed to drinke cast them into the glasse: and this will serue you for two purposes. The colour will comfort your eyes, and the hearbes by their propertie will represse the vaporousnes of the wine. And thus much let bee sayd of the ayre. Of meates and drinkes.The second poynt of ordering thy diet aright, consisteth in meate and drinke. It behoueth therefore to know what victuals are good, and what they be which can hurt the sight. A man must altogether refraine such victuals as are of grosse nourishment, as also slimie, vaporous, salt, windie, sweete, and sharpe meates, and such as make many excrements, there must also bee made a more spare supper then dinner. Of bread.The bread must be made of cleane wheate, well leauened and some what salted, wherein may bee put Fennell or Anise-seede: it must not bee eaten new, nor after it is aboue three daies old. Vn∣leauened bread doth hurt the sight extremely, especially if there be any darnell therein: for some are of opinion that the vse of darnell doth destroy the sight. I haue sometimes read in Plautus a plea∣sant treatise of a page, who not daring to call his companion blin∣kard or blind-beetle, mocked him with hauing eaten of darnell. Of flesh.All flesh that is easily disgested, and doth not abound with su∣perfluous moysture, is most fit to bee eaten, as Chicken, Capon, Henne, Partridge, Feasant, Pigeon, Larkes, Turtles, and other mountaine birds, which may bee stuffed with sage or mountaine hissope.. There are certaine sorts of flesh which haue a certaine speciall propertie for to strengthen and cleere the sight, as the flesh of the Pye, the Swallow, the Goose, of Vipers well prepared, of the Wolfe, of the he-gote, and other rauenous birds. The Arabian Phisitions haue obserued, that the eyes of liuing creatures, doe (I know not by what propertie or simpathie) comfort the sight. They doe often vse the flesh of Swallowes and Pyes dried in an o∣uen to pepper their meates withall. They forbid vs the vse of grosse flesh, as of Porke, Hare and Hart. Of fish.Fish (if we credit Auicen) is enemie vnto the eyes: but I thinke hee vnderstandeth it of such as liue in standing waters, which
haue a slimie substance and flesh, or such as bee salted: for such as haue a fast flesh, as Troutes, Rochets, and such like, are not a∣gainst the eyes. New and soft egges with a little sugar and Cina∣mon, doe marueilously cleere the sight: but if they be fried with butter, they hurt exceedingly. All meates made of paste, all baked, and milke meates do hurt the eyes. As concerning salt meates, spices and fauces, all of them are not forbidden: wee vse to make artificiall salts, which serue marueilouslie to cleere the sight: and therewithall must or∣dinarily meates bee salted.Of artificiall salts. The salt of treacle is most excellent, whereto may be added some Nutmeg, Mace, Cloues and Fennell seede. There is likewise made salt of Eyebright, after this maner: Take of common salt one ounce, of Eyebright two drammes, of Cinamom and Mace the waight of halfe a crowne, mixe them al∣together, and vse it as salt vnto your meate. There be some which adde vnto these salts, the powder of the flesh of a Pye dried in the ouen. Strong spices,Spices. as Ginger, Pepper, and mustard do hurt the eyes: it is meete to rest contented with Nutmegs, Cloues, Cinamom and a little Saffron. All pulse is mightily against the sight, except it bee Lupines, which strengthen and helpe them by a certaine propertie. As for hearbes that are good for the eyes,Hearbes. these are commen∣ded; Fennell, Sage, Margerome, Rosemary, Betonie, Mints, Mountaine time, Asparagus, Burnet, Succorie, and Parselie: On the contrary side these are forbidden; Lettise, Cresses, Dill, Basill, Purselane, Leekes, Coleworts, Garlike, Onions, and all bulbouse rootes, as also Waterchestnuts, and Toadstooles. The Arabians, which were more addicted to dishmeate then the Greekes, doe commend Turneps: but with all these it is very certaine that wee must mixe Fennell or Aniseede, because they be very windie. Raw fruites,Fruites. and such as abound with much moysture, doe hurt the sight: before meate presently, one may vse stewed Prunes, and presently after meate a Peare or Quince well preserued, to close the mouth of the stomacke, and to hinder vapours from ascen∣ding vp into the head. It will not be amisse after meate to take a
little Fennell or Annise seede comfits, a morsell of Cidoniatum, or of preserued Mirobalanes or Nutmegs. Figges and Raisins are not forbidden, but nuts, Chesnuts, and Oliues that are very ripe, are well forbidden. And thus much for meates. Drinke. What quanti∣tie is to be vsed. What qualitie it must be of.As for drinke, we are to obserue two things therein, the quanti∣tie and the qualitie. Archigenes the great Phisition, speaking of the quantitie saith, that in all diseases of the eyes, it is very hurtfull to drinke much. Aristotle in his Problemes speaking of the qualitie saith, that they which drinke water haue their sight more subtile: notwithstanding Auicen and Rhases doe condemne the vse of water, and I am verely perswaded that they doe not dis∣please the sect of good fellowship, which had rather loose their eyes then their wine. To graunt the same which they affirme, I holde it needfull to alay the wine well with water, and to make choise of some small wine, so that it be not sharpe or vaporouse: sweete and new wines are very fuming, thicke wines stay too long in the stomacke, and send too great a quantitie of vapours vnto the braine. We vse to make an artificiall wine of Eyebright,Artificiall wines. which is very singular for the preseruation of the sight. Arnaldus de Vil∣lanoua, a famous Phisition doth confidently affirme, that he cured an olde man almost quite blinde, by the onely vse of wine of eye∣bright. Also it will doe well to cast a bunch of Eyebright in the wine which one drinketh ordinarilie, or otherwise, as I haue alrea∣die said, some Burnet with the flowers of Borage; for besides that they comfort the sight with their colour, they will helpe to purge the spirits, and to represse vapours. The hearbes are common e∣nough, and to be come by at all seasons. Such as will not vse wine,Hydromell. shal drinke a simple honied water, or else compound one in maner as followeth. Take of cesterne or fountaine water fifteene pounds, of good honie one pound, mingle them both together in a pot, ad∣ding thereto some Fennell, Eyebright, and Mace, made vp in a little bagge, the waight of a French crowne, boyle all together, vnto the consumption of the third part, euermore looking well to the taking off of the scum of the honey. Of watching and sleeping.In watching and sleeping, it behoueth to keepe a meane: to sleepe very long hurteth the sight, and to sleepe at noones maketh ablowne paire of cheekes, troubleth the sight, and maketh all the
body lither and lazie: it is best to sleepe vpon the side, hauing the head raised high enough. Immoderate watching doe spend the spirits, coole the braine, and hurt the sight infinitely. It is good to goe to bed three or foure houres after supper, and to rise very earlie, to walke vp and downe the chamber, to hake and spet, to cleanse the eares, to emptie the bodie of his ordinarie excrements and after that to combe the head, and that alwaies a∣gainst the hayre, keeping it very cleane, and not to accustome to washe the face and eyes with colde water, as is ordinarilie accusto∣med; for colde is an enemie to the eyes and braine: it were better to vse in steede thereof, a little white wine warme, with some Fe∣nell and Eyebright water. Of the exer∣cising of the whole bodie.The moderate exercise of the whole bodie, is good in a mor∣ning, neither in deede can any man liue in health (as Hippocrates noteth) if hee labour not, to waste the superfluities of the third digestion. Particular exercises also, as the rubbing of the thighes and legs, will be of good vse, to diuert and turne away the vapours which rise vp to the eyes. The particular exercises of the eyes.The eyes haue their particular exercise: to moue them very sud∣dainely and circularlie, doth weaken them: as also to keepe them fixed a long time in one place, and as it were immoueable, doth yet wearie them more, for that in this pawsing motion, all the fi∣bres of the sixe muscles are equallie stretched, as we see in birdes which houer in the ayre, not stirring out of their place. It is better therefore to keepe them in a moderate motion, for that the mus∣cles performing their actions successiuely, doe comfort and re∣lieue one another. It is not good to reade much, especially after meate, nor yet to trouble himselfe with too small a letter, or any other curious and choise peece of worke, because that both the fa∣cultie or power, and instrument are put to great paines, being oc∣cupied about these little things. It is not good to beholde things that moue swiftlie, nor yet such as turne round. Of the passi∣ons of the minde. The bellie must be kept soluble.All passions of the minde doe much hurt the sight, but aboue the rest, melancholike dumpes and much weeping. The belly must be soluble alwaies in all the diseases of the eyes: which Hippocrates obserued by the example of them, which haue
blood-shotten eyes, as also such as are vapour-eyed. But and if it be costiue, it must be helped by all meanes that are gentle and ea∣sie, as laxatiue brothes, Prunes and Raisins laxatiue, lenitiue cli∣sters and such others. Some cause damaske Prunes to be stewed in a syrope, with Sene, Agaricke, and Sugar, whereof foure or fiue are to be taken in the morning before breakefast or dinner. CHAP. XIIII. Select and choise remedies for the preseruation of the fight, and the order that is to be kept in the applica∣tion of them. SEeing that the weakenes of sight commeth ordina∣rilie, either of the distemperature of the braine, or of the euill disposition of the eye: the rationall and methodicall Phisition ought alwaies to haue regard vnto these two poynts. The braine if it bee too moist, must be dried; and the eye if it be weake, must be streng∣thened. Plato in a dialogue of his, doth counsaile us, neuer to at∣tempt the drying or strengthening of the eye by outward reme∣dies, without hauing first purged the head.The purging of the whole bodie and of the braine. We will therefore take our beginning at the purging of the head; and for as much as it is hard to purge the same well, if the whole bodie (which doth ordinarilie send great stoare of excrements thither) be not very cleane, it will be requisite to chuse a remedie, which in pur∣ging the braine, may gentlie emptie the whole bodie also, and therewithall somewhat respect the eye. That forme which is proper to pills, is most fit for this purpose. The Arabians com∣mend the pilles, called Elephangine, the pilles of Agaricke, and pillulae lucis maiores and minores: Wee may prepare a masse of this mixture. A description of such pils as are to be vsed.Take of Aloes well washed in Fennel and Eyebright water, three drams, of good Agaricke one dram and a halfe, of Rubarbe, a dramme, of the flesh of Citrine mirobalanes, chafed in the oyle of sweete Almonds, foure scruples; of Sene of the East well pow∣dred a dramme; of Masticke, Ginger, and Cinnamome, of each
halfe a scruple, of Trocisks al and hall fiue or sixe graines to acuate it withall, infuse all these in the iuyce of Fenel, and sirope of Ste∣chados, and make vp a masse thereof take a dramme twise euery moneth, either at euening or morning. Or else, Take of the powder of Hiera two drammes, of good Agaricke foure scruples, of Anise seede, Fennel seede, and Seseli seede, of each halfe a scruple, of Maces, Cinnamome, and Mirrhe, of each fiue graines, with honie of Roses, Rosemarie flowers and the wa∣ter of Fennel; make these vp in a masse, and take thereof a dram e∣uery weeke: they which cannot swallow pils, shall vse this magi∣strall sirop. A magistrall sirope.Take of the roote of Fennel, Acorus, and Elecampane, of eue∣ry one an ounce, of the leaues of Eyebright, Betonie, Fumitorie, Mercurie, Succorie, Germander, and Veruaine, of euery one a handfull, a dozen of damaske Raisins, and as many Prunes, of A∣nise and Fennel seede two drammes, of the flowers of Sage, Ste∣cados, Rosemarie, and eyebright, of euery one a pugil: boyle them all in faire water, and when you haue strained it, adde thereto the expression of three ounces of Sene which haue bin infused a good while in the foresaid decoction warme: as also the expression of an ounce of Agaricke, with a dramme of cloues and as much Cin∣namome: boyle them all together againe with a sufficient quan∣titie of Sugar vntil it haue the consistence of a sirope that is well boyled, aromatize it with halfe a dramme of Nutmegs and as much of the powder of Diarrhodon. If in the ende and shutting vp of this sirope there be put thereto the infusion of the weight of halfe an ounce of Rubarbe strongly pressed out, it cannot chuse but be a great deale better. Hereof one shall take euerie fiue daies the quantitie of two ounces, more or lesse according to the wor∣king, and that in some broth or decoction appropriate vnto the head and eyes.Clisters. The often vse of Clisters is requisite in all the dis∣eases of the eyes, eares, and head. Decoctions prouoking sweate.If the braine should be very moist, and that the temperature of the bodie doe not withstand, the vse of the roote China, or of Zarza, Perilla, putting thereto of the leaues of Eyebright, and of the seede of Fennell, would be of very good effect. For together with the consuming of the superfluous moisture of the whole
body, it would strengthen the braine and the eye: and yet I be∣leeue that the vse of Sassafras hauing the smell of the Anise-seede, would be a great deale more fit. The bodie being purged by these vniuersall remedies, the braine may afterward with greater securitie be euacuated by the mouth and nostrels, which are the ordinarie draines that nature hath ordayned for the cleansing thereof; I should better allow of Masticatories then Irrhines, because the nose is seated very neere vnto the eyes, and communicateth greatly therewith,Masticatories. by the hole which goeth through them to the great corner of the eye, in such sort as that there being any forcible attracting of any humour through the nose, it might be the occasion of drawing the same vnto the eye, which is the part that is diseased. This is also the ap∣poyntment, of that great Phisition Hippocrates, in the second section of his sixt booke of Epidemicall diseases. It is meete and necessarie (saith he) that humours falling vpon the eyes, should be diuerted vnto the palate and mouth. It were better therefore to chawe and masticate something as damaske reasons, sprinke∣led with a drop or two of the essence of Fennell, or else to rub the palate with the said essence alone, whose vapour ascending vp to the braine and eye, will shengthen them, and not suffer them to attract any vicious humours. Rubbing of the head.Fricasies and rubbings of the head, made against the hayre with bags, perfumes, and artificiall coiles, such as we will prescribe in the chapter of rheume, will euacuate the braine by insensible transpiration. Hippocrates in the diseases of the eyes,Cupping-glas∣ses. applieth cupping glas∣ses vnto the necke, and hinder part of the head, to the shoulders and thighes. We must not forget among the particular euacuations of the head,Causticks. to speake of cauteries: it is very true in deede that Phisitions doe not accord of the place where they are to bee applied. Some there be that applie them vpon the top of the head: but I am iea∣lous of that place, for that I haue seene fearefull accidents to hap∣pen by reason of Pericranium, when the causticke hath searched too deepe: and I could like it better, that it should be applied be∣hinde: for such reuulsion would worke more effectually, and fur∣ther,
it is very certaine that the rising of all the sinewes lyeth be∣hinde. This is a worthie thing to bee noted,A worthie ob∣seruation of the originall of the sinewes. and that which but a few men haue marked, I haue oftentimes shewed the same both in my publique and priuate dissections. There is a certaine Ita∣lian Phisition, which boasteth himselfe to haue been the first foun∣der and finder of this matter: but I haue long since read the same obserued of Hippocrates in his booke of the nature of bones. This cauterie is not to be applied vpon that part of the head called Oc∣ciput, because that thence there would issue nothing,The fittest place for the application of cauteries. but ouer a∣gainst the space which is betwixt the first and second Vertebre: being the very place, where Setons also are ordinarily set. In old and inueterate diseases of the eyes, I could approue of that deri∣uation made by cauterie behinde the eares, because the branches of the veines and arteries called Carotides and Iugulares, (from which the eye hath all his outward store of veines and arteries) do passe along that way. And these are the most proper & fit meanes (in my iudgement) to euacuate as well sensibly as insensibly the whole bodie, the head and the eyes. I haue not spoken of blood-letting, because there is not any place for it here:Blood-letting. and it is so farre off from profiting them which are weake sighted, that it weake∣neth them more, taking away blood, which is the storehouse of nature, and that iuyce, whereby it is most cherished. And yet in great paines, inflammations and sudden fluxes of humours, it may doe good. After euacuation, we must thinke how to strenghthen the braine and the eye, to which vse and purpose there are opiates, lozenges and powders, which haue propertie to cleere and strengthen the sight, as Treacle and Mithridate are greatly commended and commanded, for such as haue their braine and eyes very rheuma∣tike and moyst. Medicines to strengthen and sharpen the sight.The conserues also of the flowers of Betonie, Sage Rosemary and Eyebright, there may bee framed a composition or Opiate in maner as followeth. Take of the conserues of the flowers of Eye∣bright, Betonie, and Rosemary, of each an ounce, of olde Treacle three drammes, of conserue of Roses halfe an ounce, of the pow∣der of Diarrhodon a dramme and a halfe, of Maces two scruples: make an Opiate hereof with the syrope of Citrons, and take there∣of
of oftentimes in the morning when you rise. A confection.One may also make a confection, with two ounces of rosed Su∣gar, and as much of the sugar of Borage flowers, with two drams of the powder of Diarrhodon, and halfe a dram of the powder of Eyebright, Betonie and Fennell, which may be taken in the mor∣ning. A powder to be taken at night.At night going to bed, there are certaine powders to bee vsed and taken inward, that so the vertues thereof may bee conueied, together with the vapours of the meate. Take of Eyebright three drammes, of Fennell two drammes, of Anise and of Seseli a dram, of Mace two scruples, and of Cinamome and Cloues as much, of the seede of Rew and Germander halfe a dramme, of the seede of Pionie a dram, of roses Sugar so much as needeth: make them into very fine powder, and take thereof a spoonefull at your go∣ing to bed. A powder hel∣ping concoc∣tion.After meate also one may vse digestiue powders, with Corian∣der, Fennell, red Roses, Corall, Pearle, Eyebright, Mace, and rosed Sugar: or els vse this condite. Take of Fennell and Coriander Comfits, of each halfe an ounce,A condite. of the rindes of Citrons and Mi∣robalanes condited, of each two drammes, of dried Eyebright one dram, of Mace halfe a dram, of rosed Sugar so much as needeth: make thereof a condite, whereof take a spoonefull after euery meale. The Arabians doe highly commend this powder to bee taken after meate. Take of the Trociskes of Vipers a dram, of the pow∣der of Eyebright foure scruples, of sweete Fennell two scruples, of the stones which are found in the eyes of a Pike, one scruple, of ro∣sed Sugar foure ounces: and make thereof a powder. And hitherto concerning inward medicines, which serue for the cleering and strengthening of the sight: and now wee are to lay out the outward, which are waters, colliries, and oyntments. There are an infinite number of receipts, but I will put downe three or foure of the most exquisite and best approued.Outward re∣medies. As for to wash the eyes in the morning vse these distilled waters. Take of the crops of Fennell, Rew, Eyebright, Veruaine, Tormentil, Beto∣nie,A distilled wa∣ter. wilde Roses, of male Pimpernell, Burnet, Clarie, Agrimonie, Cheruile, mountaine Hissope, and mountaine Siler, of euery one
two good handfuls: shred all these hearbes very small, and infuse them first in white wine, and afterward in the vrine of a young boy that is in perfect health, and thirdly in womans milke: and lastly in good honey: after which distill the whole, and keepe this water carefully, putting euery morning a drop therof into the eye. You may also euery morning wash your eyes with wine,Another wa∣ter. wherein hath been boyled Fennell, Eyebright, and a little of Chebule Mi∣robalanes. Some make a water of the iuyces of male Pimpernell, Germander, Clarie and Rew: putting thereto afterward of Cloues, Mace, and Nutmeg two on three drams, and haue infused them all together in white wine, to distill them with good honey. I finde the remedie which I now set downe,A very good medicine for the eyes. to be very good for the pre∣seruation and strength of the eyes. Take of the water of Eyebright and Roses well distilled, foure ounces: afterward prouide two or three small bags in which is contained a dram and a halfe of Tutia well prepared, and of good Aloes a scruple: hang these bagges in the waters aforesaid, and wash your eyes therewith euery night. An excellent water of breadThe water of bread (so called) is very excellent. You must make paste with flower grossely sifted, and the powder of Rew, Fennel and Clarie, which they call great Celondine: of this paste you must make a loafe and bake in the ouen, which so soone as it is baked must be clouen in two, and put betwixt two siluer plates, or peauter dishes, made very close in such sort as that there may nothing breath out: and so you shall thence gather a water, which must bee kept for the eyes. Some also doe much commend the extraction of Fennegreek with Honey. The water of blew flowers called Blew-bottles and growing in the corne, distilled, is excel∣lent good for the preseruation of the sight. Some also take the stalke of Fennell a little aboue the roote, and cutting it, fill it with the powder of Sugar candie: whereupon commeth forth a licour which is singular for the eyes. I cannot but highly praise this wa∣ter, which I am about to describe.A water. Take of White wine a pound and a halfe and as much of good Rosewater, of Tutia well prepa∣red an ounce, of the rinde of Nutmeg called Mace, half an ounce: put all these together in a glasse violl close stopped, and set it in the heate of the Sunne twenty daies, stirring it euery day till it become very cleere.
An oyntment for the eyes.There is a singuler oyntment for the preseruation of the eyes. Take of Hogs grease very new, two ounces: steepe it in Rosewa∣ter sixe houres: after wash it againe twelue seuerall times in the best White wine that may bee got, by the space of fiue or sixe houres more, adde afterward vnto this grease of Tutia well prepa∣red and finely powdred one ounce, of the stone Hematites well washed a scruple, of Aloes well washed and made into powder twelue graines, of powder of Pearle three graines: mixe all toge∣ther with a little of the water of Fennell, and make them vp in an oyntment, whereof ye may put a very little in both the corners of your eyes. There is great store euery where of other outward re∣medies which may serue for the eyes, as Colliries, or Eyesalues and powders, which are blowne into the eyes: but I finde them not so fit for the purpose as waters. Washing of the head.The Arabians vse washing of the head, the better to preserue the sight but it is not very good in the weakenes of the eyes to trouble the braine: but if there be any such thing vsed, it may bee done in this sort. Take the lye that is made of the Vine ashes, of the leaues of Stechados, Betonie, Eyebright, Celandine and Ca∣momill, of each a handfull, of Agarick and Chebule Mirobalanes tied in a cloute of each two drammes: boyle all together till the fourth part be consumed, and therewith wash your head. Or else take dried Eyebright, and make it into ashes: then adde thereto the water of Eyebright, and make thereof a lye. Loe these be the meanes whereby we shall be able to preserue the sight, especially if the diminution thereof come by some great moysture of the braine and eyes, as is that of my Ladies the Dut∣chesse of Ʋzez, to whom this whole discourse is particularly de∣dicated. I do not set downe the remedies, which are proper to the seuerall diseases of the eyes, for so I should spend too much time. It was my purpose onely to prepare this generall regiment, which might serue as a patterne for the curing of all the rest. Monsieur Guillemeau the kings Surgeon, hath put forth a very learned trea∣tise, wherein are to bee found, the most exquisite remedies set downe and vsed by the old and new writers. Vnto his booke I re∣ferre the reader, seeing it is extant in our common language. An end of the first discourse.
THE SECOND DISCOVRSE, WHEREIN ARE HANDLED THE diseases of melancholie, and the meanes to cure them. CHAP. I. That man is a diuine and politike creature, endued with three seuerall noble powers, as Imagination, Reason and Memorie. ABdalas the Sarrasin being importunatelie pressed, and as it were forced to speake and tell, what it was that hee found to bee most wonderfull in all the world: answered at last with great commendation, that man alone did surpasse all other wonder whatsoeuer. An answere in trueth beseeming a great Philoso∣pher, rather then a rude and vnlettered man. For man hauing the image of God engrauen in his soule,The praise of mankinde. and representing in his body the modell of the whole world, can in a moment transforme him∣selfe into euery thing like a Proteus, or receiue at an instant the stampe of a thousand colours like to the Chamelion. Phauorine acknowledged nothing to be great here on earth but onely man. The wise men of Egypt haue vouchsafed him such honour, as to call him a mortall God. Thrice renowmed Mercurie calleth him the liuing creature full of diuine parts, the messenger of the Gods, the Lord of the things below, and fellow companion with the Spirits aboue: Pithagoras, the measure of all things: Synesius, the Horizon of things hauing and not hauing bodies: Zoroaster in a certaine kinde of rauishment proclamed him, the mightie worke
and wonder of nature: Plato, the marueile of marueiles: Aristotle the politike liuing creature, furnished with reason and counsaile, which is all, as possessing all things by power, though not really and in very deede (as Empedocles would haue it to be) but by the comprehending and conceiuing of the formes and seuerall sorts of things: Plinie the ape or puppie of nature, the counterfeit of the whole world, the abridgement of the great world. Amongst the Diuines, there are some which haue called him, euery maner of creature, because he hath intercourse with euery maner of crea∣ture; he hath a being, as haue the stones; life, as haue the plants; and sence or feeling as the beasts; and vnderstanding, as haue the Angels. Othersome haue honoured him, giuing him the title of vniuersall gouernour, as hauing all things vnder his empire and iurisdiction, as being he to whom euery thing yeeldeth obediēce, and for whose sake the whole world was created. In briefe, this is the chiefe and principall of Gods worke, and the most noble of all other creatures. But this his excellencie,From whence the excellencie of man sprin∣geth. whereby he is more glo∣rious then all the rest, is not in respect of his bodie, although the shape thereof bee more exquisite, better tempered, and of more comely proportion then any other thing in the world, seruing as Polycletus his rule for the fashioning of other things, and being as a platforme, whereby the master builders may frame and con∣triue their buildings. This noblenes (I say) commeth not of the bodie, which consisteth of matter and is corruptible: no, the ex∣tract thereof, or that which is indeede excellent therein, is further fetcht: It is the soule alone whereby he is so renowmed,The excellen∣cie of man∣kinde. being a forme altogether celestiall and diuine, not taking his originall from the effectuall working of any matter, as that of plants and beasts doth. It is created of God, and commeth downe from hea∣uen to gouerne the bodie, so soone as the members thereof are made: the effects thereof doe sufficiently proue vnto vs, the wor∣thines of the same. For besides the vegetatiue and sensitiue fa∣cultie, it inioyeth three speciall powers and faculties, which extol and aduance man, aboue all other liuing creatures: and these three are the Imagination, Reason, and Memorie. Of these,The three ex∣cellent powers of the soule. reason is the principall and chiefe: the other two, because they are her ordinary handmaides, (the one to report; the other, to register
and write downe, doe enioy the priuiledges of renowmed excel∣lencie, doe lodge within her royall pallace, and that very neere her owne person, the one in her vtter, and the other in her inner chamber.The imagina∣tion. The imaginatiue facultie doth represent and set before the intellectuall, all the obiects which she hath receiued from the common sence, making report of wharsoeuer is discouered of the spies abroad: vpon which reports the intellectuall or vnder∣standing part of the minde, frameth her conclusions, which are very often false, the imagination making vntrue reports. For as the most prudent and carefull Captaines vndertake very oft the enterprises which proue foolish and fond, and that because of false aduertisement: euen so reason doth often make but foolish discourses, hauing been misse-informed by a fayned fantasie. The opinions of the Greci∣ans against the excellencie of imagination.Some Greeke Philosophers there be, which would debarre the imagination of her reputed renowne and excellencie, straining themselues to make her as base as the other actions of the sences: and I haue in place where, read two seuerall opinions to that end: the first is of such as thinke that the imagination and common sence is all one: the other is of them, which affirme that brute beasts haue an imagination as well as men; and that either of these two being true, there is not any cause why it should be in∣thronized among the worthies.The error of the Philoso∣phers. But I will cause it to appeare ma∣nifest vnto euery one, how fondly they haue suffered themselues to be abused. All such as haue applied themselues to play the Philosophers af∣ter the most commendable sort and maner, doe holde it for gran∣ted and out of all question: that the imagination is a certaine thing surpassing the common or inward sence, which iudgeth of all outward obiects, and vnto which as vnto their center, all the formes of the other sences doe betake themselues: for the com∣mon sence, receiueth at one and the same instant with the out∣ward sences the formes of things;The difference betwixt the imagination and the com∣mon sence. and that (if I may be allowed to vse schoole tearmes) with the reall power of the obiect, but the imagination receiueth and reteyneth them without any presence of the obiect. The imagination compoundeth and ioyneth to∣gether the formes of things, as of Golde and a mountaine, it ma∣keth a golden mountaine, which the common sence cannot doe:
for the inward sence cannot take holde of any thing, saue that which the outward sences perceiue, but the imagination procee∣deth further: for the sillie Sheepe hauing spied the Wolfe, getteth himselfe by and by out of his way, as from his enemie; this eni∣mitie is not knowne by the sence, for it is no obiect of the sences, but it is the meere worke of imagination to know the same. This then is a power farre differing from the common sence, which in deede is found truely to be in beasts, but the other cannot possi∣blie be found in them in that degree of excellencie that it is in men. I would that euery one should see the difference betwixt that imagination which is in men, and that which is in beasts. The imagination which is in beasts,The difference betwixt the imagination of men, and that of beasts. serueth them onely to follow the motions and passions of their appetite, and is not imployed, but onely about action, that is to say, either in following that which may doe them good, or in auoiding of that which may an∣noy them. The imagination of man serueth both for action and contemplation.The first. The imagination of beasts cannot counterfeite any thing further, then as it is present and before their eyes;The second. but man hath the libertie to imagine what he listeth, and although there be no present obiect, yet it taketh out of the treasurie, which is the memorie whatsoeuer may content it. The beasts haue their imagination occupied onely when they are exercised,The third. and not when they are out of worke and labour; but man hath the vse of imagination at all times, and at euery houre. The beast hath no sooner imagined, but he moueth himselfe by and by,The fourth. and goeth af∣ter that which his appetite stirreth him vp vnto; but man follow∣eth not alwaies the motions of his appetite, he hath reason to bri∣dle the same with all, as when it findeth out any error therein. The imagination of beasts cannot frame to it selfe any mountaines of golde, neither yet can it faine the things that are darke and subtile,The fift. or flying asses, as the imagination of man can. Finally,The sixt. the imagi∣nation of man seemeth to enter into some maner of discourse with the vnderstanding. For hauing beheld a painted Lyon, it perceiueth that it is not a thing to be feared, and at the same time, ioyning it selfe vnto reason, doth confirme and make bolde. Be∣holde now, how the imagination of man doth magnifie it selfe a∣boue that of beasts, and for what cause I haue set it in ranke a∣amongst
the excellentest and noblest powers of the minde. The Arabians haue so highly commended it,The effects of imagination. that they haue verely be∣leeued, that the minde by vertue of the imagination could worke miracles, pearce the heauens, commaunde the elements, lay plaine the huge mountaines, and make mountaines of the plaine ground: and to be short, that vnto the iurisdiction thereof were subiect, all maner of materiall formes, and they called all the three powers of the minde, most excellent and renowmed minds, and therefore that which is called imagination, is the first facultie or power of the minde. Of the vnder∣standing, the second power of the minde.The vnderstanding followeth next in order, and awaketh at the knocke of imagination, it maketh things sensible, vniuersall, discourseth, gathereth conclusions, reasoneth from the effects to the causes, and from the beginnings, euen to the middest, and so to the ends and issues of things.Of vnderstan∣ding, called passible or suf∣fering. The Philosophers distinguish this vnderstanding power, into a suffering and doing power: the suf∣fering, is that which receiueth the formes of things, pure and free from all matter, and is as it were the subiect of all maner of formes:Of actiue vn∣derstanding. the doing power is as it were a light, which maketh cleere and perfect the suffering: in such maner, as that the one doth as it were serue in stead of the matter, and the other of the forme, and both ioyned togetgher,Reason. doe perfite and make vp reason the soue∣raigne and predominant power of the minde, proper vnto man, which can doe much without the bodie, and vnto which the bodie very oft is a let and hindrance, being that alone which is without matter, being also not subiect to passions, immortall, differing from the sences,How reason differeth from the sences. and all other corporall actions, because the sen∣ces are lost by the violence of some great obiect, as the hearing, by a strong and forcible sound; the taste, by tasting some ex∣treame fauour; the sight by an excessiue whitenes; witnes hereof is the Sicilian tyrant, who by cunning practise put out the eyes of all his prisoners: but the vnderstanding, the more excellent and surpassing that the obiect is, the more it sheweth forth his owne perfection and noblenes, the contemplation of high and diuine things doth rauish it, yea herein it findeth greatest contentation, herein it placeth his chiefest felicitie. This is that onely power which groweth more and more, when the bodie declineth, which
then is in his chiefest strength, when the bodie groweth faint and feeble: which becommeth strong and lustie, when all the sences grow weake and feeble, which whirleth through the ayre, and walketh ouer the wide world, when the bodie is immoueable, which causeth vs when we are in sleepe, oftentimes to see some glaunces of his diuine nature, in foretelling things to come, and, if it bee not ouerwhelmed with the Sea of vapours, rising of exces∣siue cramming in of bellie cheere, it lifteth it selfe aboue the world, and euen aboue his owne nature, and beholdeth the glorie of the Angels and mysteries of heauen. Finally, reason hauing thus swiftlie conueyed her selfe to take the view of whatsoeuer is, and hauing discoursed and conceiued a million of goodly and pleasant formes, being vnable any longer to retaine them, com∣mitteth them to the custodie of memorie, which is her faithfull se∣cretarie, and wherein,Memorie. as in a place of greatest trustines to keepe the same, the most precious treasures of the soule are placed. This is that rich treasurie, which incloseth within one only inner roome all the sciences, and what else soeuer hath passed since the creati∣on of the world, which lodgeth euery thing in his seuerall place, not shufling them vp disorderly together, which obserueth time, circumstances and order, and which is (as Plato tearmeth it) a ce∣sterne to containe the running streames of the vnderstanding: this facultie is called remembrance, and is proper vnto man a∣lone: for beastes haue likewise a certaine kinde of memorie, but they cannot call to minde the time, order and circumstances, this cannot be accomplished without a Syllogisme. See here the mind of man attended by these three famous faculties, the imagination, reason, and memorie, all which three are lodged in one selfesame palace, and within this round towre, which we call the head:The diuerse o∣pinions con∣cerning the seates of these powers. but whether this fall out to be in all the braine equally, and alike, or that euery one of them should haue his seuerall chamber, it is not fully resolued vpon. I know very well that there is a great quarell betwixt the Greeke and Arabian Phisitions,The Grecians would haue them diffused through the substance of the whole braine. about the lodgings of these three princesses, & that no man hitherto hath bin able to reconcile them. The Greekes would lodge them in euerie part of the braine; the Arabians quarter out euery of them by it selfe. The Greekes maintaine that in all places where the reason is, that
there the imagination and memorie doe accompanie it, and that al the three are as much before as behind: finally, that they be al of them in all and euery part of the braine. They alleage for one prin∣cipall reason on their side, that euery similar action is wholie and intirely in euery part of his subiect, as for example, nourishment is equallie and alike in all the bone, and whatsoeuer part of the bone it be, there is to be found continuallie these foure faculties, that is, the attractiue, retentiue, digestiue and expulsiue. On the contrary the Arabians will haue,The contrarie opinion of the Arabians. that euery one of these faculties enioy his proper seate: and they haue very goodly reasons for that which they holde.The first rea∣son. First, it is very certaine, that there are diuerse pettie chambers in the braine, which the Anatomists call Ventricles, these chambers are not for nothing, yea and there is no man that can thinke, that they were made for any other vse, then to be lod∣gings for these three faculties: and that, as though the imaginati∣on should be lodged in the two first, Reason in the middlemost, and Memorie in the hindermost: and the appearance of the truth of this thing is very great: for the imagination receiueth all the obiects of the sences, and therefore ought to be placed very neere vnto the sences: but so the case standeth, as that all the sences are in the forepart of the head: the imagination presenteth all these obiects vnto the reason, which maketh them voide of matter and vniuersall, so that of necessitie it must follow as second. The rea∣son hauing after some time serued and satisfied it selfe of these pleasant formes, committeth them to the custodie of memorie: whereupon it followeth of necessitie, that it should be placed be∣hinde, and as it were in her inner chamber.The second. Furthermore, imagi∣nation being effected by receiuing in of formes, must haue his seat in the softest part of the braine, because the prints of pictures are most easilie set in a soft bodie: Memorie which keepeth and re∣tayneth the formes, craueth a more hard part, for else the picture would be defaced by and by after that it should be printed: Rea∣son, as the greatest of renowne ought to be placed in such a part of the braine, as is most temperate. But there is no doubt, but the forepart of the braine is the softest, and the hinder part the har∣dest, and the middlemost the most temperate: so then we must beleeue that imagination is before, and memorie behinde.
Philosophers that haue written of Phisiognomie,The third. say that such as haue the hinder part of the head hanging out much, haue a good memorie; that such as haue large and high foreheads, and there∣withall as it were bossed, are of pleasant imagination: and that such as in whom these two eminences are wanting, are blockish, without imagination, and without memorie.The fourth. If we will (saith A∣ristotle in his Problemes) enter into any serious and deepe conceit, we knit the browes and draw them vp: if we would call to mind and remember anything, wee hang downe the head, and rub the hinder part, which sheweth very well that the imagination lieth before, and the memorie behinde. Men haue very often marked,The fift. that if the hinder part of the head be hurt, the memorie is lost at the very same time.The sixt. I will adde further for the more strengthning of the side of the Arabians, that the fashion and widenes of the ventricles of the braine, doe serue to poynt out with the finger, the places of these three faculties. The fourth ventricle is somewhat sharpe poynted, to the end that formes may be the better vnited, and that the reflexe thereof may the more fully cast it selfe vpon the third, wherein reason lodgeth: the two first are the widest, for that they receiue the first obiects which are not as yet refined: that in the middest was fittest for reason, because it might receiue the images or formes of the two first, and hauing forgotten them, might seeke them out; as it were in her most close and secret place of custodie, contriued for that end behinde. Finally,The seuenth. that which hath made the Arabians to stand so stiffelie in their opinion, and to maintaine that these three faculties, haue euery one their seuerall lodging, is because they haue oftentimes obserued, that one of these three may be hurt, and not the other; the imagination is ve∣ry oft corrupted, the reason standing sound and intier: and con∣trariewise, how many franticke and melancholike men be there, which discourse very excellently, notwithstanding their foolish and vaine imaginations. Galen writeth two histories of two franticke men, the one of which had his imagination trou∣bled, and his reason sound, the other his reason troubled, and his imagination sounde. Wee see an infinite number which haue vtterly lost their memorie, and yet faile not to discourse very well. Thucidides mencioneth, that in that great plague which
dispeopled almost al Greece, there were moe thē a million, which forgot euery thing euen to their owne name, and yet notwithstan∣ding did not thereupon become fooles. Messala Coruinus in his recouerie of a certaine sicknes, did not remember his own name. Trapezontius was very wise whilest he was young, but drawing neere vnto old age he quite forgot all. Seeing therefore that one of these faculties may be hurt without the other, we must beleeue that euery of them hath his particular place.The conclusiō. If it were commit∣ted to me to giue iudgement in this controuersie, I should say that the Greekes had plaide the more subtile Philosophers, and that their opinion is the more true: but that that of the Arabians will euer be more followed of the common people, for that it hath in it a greater shew of euident cleerenes. I will not draw on this dis∣putation to any greater length: it is enough for me to make it ap∣peare that the minde hath three most excellent faculties, al which lodge within the braine, and cause man to appeare more admi∣rable, then any other creature, which inable him also to gouerne all the world, and which giue him the title of a sociable and poli∣tike liuing creature. CHAP. II. That this liuing creature full of the image of God, is now and then so farre abased, and corrupted in his nature, with an in∣finit number of diseases, that he becommeth all like vnto a beast. COmming to extoll man vnto the highest degree and step of his glorie, beholde him I pray thee the best fur∣nished and most perfect of all other liuing creatures, hauing (as I haue sayd) in his soule the image of God, and in his bodie the modell of the whole world.The miserie of mankinde. And now I in∣tend to set him out vnto thee as the most caitife and miserable creature that is in the world, spoyled of all his graces, depriued of iudgement, reason and counsaile, enemie of men and of the Sun, straying and wandring in solitarie places: to bee briefe, so altered and chaunged, as that he is no more a man, as not retaining any
thing more then the very name.The minde a∣lone corrupted the body stan∣ding sound. This alteration is seene often∣times in the soule alone, the bodie standing sound and without blemish: as when a man by his malicious will becomming an a∣postate and reuolt, defaceth the ingrauen forme of the Deitie, and commeth by the filth of sinne to defile the holy temple of God, when through an vnruly appetite, he suffereth himselfe to be car∣ried in such headlong wise after his passions, either of choler, enuie or gluttonie, as that he becommeth more outragious then a lyon, more fierce then a tyger, and more filthie and contēptible then a swine. I goe not about to redresse this deformitie, I leaue the dis∣course for the learned Diuines. Yea and if a man doe but take some paines in morall Philosophie to reade it, he shall finde right holesome precepts, for the staying and brideling of these foolish passions. The minde corrupted through a cor∣rupt bodie.I come to the other deformitie, which is violently throwne vp∣on man, and may happen vnto the most religious, being, when the bodie, which is as it were the vessell of the soule, is so greatly alte∣red and corrupted, as that all the noblest faculties of the same, are likewise corrupted, the sences seeme all of them to wander and goe astray, euery motion to be out of order, the imagination trou∣bled, the reason foolish and rash, the memorie altogether giuen to let slip and flie away whatsoeuer it should retaine. The first de∣formitie deserueth correction, as comming of a malicious minde and voluntarie action: but as for this which is constrained and violently inflicted by diseases, it deserueth to bee weighed of euery one with a tender and charitable compassion.The diseases assailing our minde. But the diseases which doe most sharply assaile our mindes, and captiuate and make them thrall vnto the two inferiour powers, are three; the frensie, madnes, and melancholie. Looke vpon the deedes of frentike and mad men, thou shalt not find therein any thing wor∣thie of a man, he biteth, he shriketh, he belloweth out a wilde and sauadge voyce, rowleth about his fierie eyes, setteth vp his haire, runneth himselfe headlong into euery thing indifferently, and ve∣ry oft murthereth himselfe. See how melancholike men do now and then so cast downe and abase themselues, as that they become companions to the brute beasts, and haue no pleasure to bee any where but in solitarie places. I am about to describe him out vn∣to
thee in most liuely manner, and then thou shalt iudge what a maner of man he is.The liuely de∣scription of a melancholike person. The melancholike man properly so called, (I meane him which hath the disease in the braine) is ordinarilie out of heart, alwaies fearefull and trembling, in such sort as that he is afraid of euery thing, yea and maketh himselfe a terrour vnto himselfe, as the beast which looketh himselfe in a glasse; he would runne away and cannot goe, he goeth alwaies sighing, troubled with the hicker, and with an vnseparable sadnes, which oftentimes turneth into dispayre; he is alwaies disquieted both in bodie and spirit, he is subiect to watchfulnes, which doth consume him on the one side, and vnto sleepe, which tormenteth him on the other side: for if he think to make truce with his passions by taking some rest, behold so soone as hee would shut his eyelids, hee is assayled with a thousand vaine visions, and hideous buggards, with fanta∣sticall inuentions, and dreadfull dreames; if he would call any to helpe him, his speech is cut off before it be halfe ended, and what he speaketh commeth out in fasling and stammering sort, he can not liue with companie. To conclude, hee is become a sauadge creature, haunting the shadowed places, suspicious, solitarie, ene∣mie to the Sunne, and one whom nothing can please, but onely discontentment, which forgeth vnto it selfe a thousand false and vaine imaginations. Then iudge and weigh if the titles which I haue heretofore gi∣uen to man, calling him a diuine and politique creature, can any way agree with the melancholike person. And yet I would not haue thee (O thou Atheist whosoeuer thou art) hereupon to con∣clude,Against A∣theists which think the soule to be mortall. that the soule of man suffereth any thing in his essence, and thereby to become subiect to corruption: it is neuer altered or changed, neither can it suffer any thing, it is his instrument that is euill affected. Thou maist vnderstand this matter if thou wilt, by a comparison drawne from the Sunne: for euen as the Sunne doth neuer feele any diminishment of brightnes, althought it seeme oftentimes to be darke and eclipsed; for this happeneth ei∣ther by the thicknes of the clowdes, or by reason of the Moone comming betwixt it and vs: and so our soule seemeth oftentimes to suffer, but indeede it is the bodie which is out of frame. There is an excellent sentence in Hippocrates, in the end of his first book
of diet, which deserueth to be written in letters of gold.A pregnant place prouing the immorta∣litie. Our soule (saith he) cannot be changed in his essence, neither by drinking nor eating, nor by any excesse, we must impute the cause of all his al∣terations, either to the spirits where with it chiefly hath to deale, or vnto the vessels, by which it diffuseth it selfe throughout the body. Now the instrument of these noble faculties is the braine, which is considered of by the Phisition, either as a similar part, whose health and welfare consisteth in a good temperature; or as an instru∣mentall part, and then the health and welfare thereof consisteth in a laudable shape both of the bodie, as also of the ventricles of the same.That a good temperature and laudable figure are re∣quisite for the actions of the soule. And both these two sorts are requisite for the well exe∣cuting of these three faculties: It is most true that Galen attribu∣teth more to a good temperature, then to a commendable shape, and in one whole booke maintaineth with strong and firme argu∣ment, that the maners of the soule doe follow the temperature of the bodie, as thou shalt see in the chapter following. And yet I for my part wil not yeeld so much either to temperature or shape,That naturall inclinations may be cor∣rected by stu∣died and la∣boured ones. A most excel∣lent historie of Zopyrus and Socrates. as that they can altogether commaund and ouer-rule the soule. For such qualities as are naturall, and as it were borne with vs, may bee amended by those qualities which the Philosophers call ac∣quisite, or purchased and gotten by other meanes. The historie of Socrates maketh this plaine enough. Zopyrus a great Philoso∣pher, taking vpon him to iudge and know at the first sight, the dis∣position of euery man, as vpon a day he had beheld Socrates rea∣ding, and being vrgently pressed of all them that sate by to speake his opinion of him: answered at last, that he well knew that hee was the most corrupt and vicious man in the world. The speech was hastily carried to Socrates by one of his disciples, who moc∣ked Zopyrus for it. Then Socrates by the way of admiration cried aloude; Oh the profound Philosopher, he hath throughly looked into my humour and disposition; I was by nature inclined to all these vices, but morall Philosophie hath drawne me away from them. And in very deede Socrates had a very long head and ill shaped, his countenance vgly, and his nose turning vp. These na∣turall inclinations then which proceede of the temperature and shape of the bodie (foreseene that these two vices bee not excee∣ding great, as in melancholike persons) may bee reclaimed and
amended, by the qualities which we get vnto ourselues by morall Philosophie, by the reading of good bookes, and by frequenting the companies of honest and vertuous men. CHAP. III. Who they bee which are called melancholike persons, and how one should put difference betwixt melancholike men that are sicke, and those that are sound and whole. ALL such as wee call melancholike men, are not in∣fected with this miserable passion which wee call melancholie: there are melancholike constitutions, which keep within the bounds and limits of health, which if we credit ancient writers, are very large and wide. We must therefore for the orderly handling of this matter, set downe all the sorts and differences of melancholike persons, to the end that the likenes of names may not trouble vs in the se∣quele of this discourse.That there are foure humors in our bodies. It is a thing most freely agreed vpon in Phisicke, that there are foure humours in our bodies, Blood, Phlegme, Choler, and Melancholie; and that all these are to bee found at all times, in euery age, and at all seasons to be mixed and mingled together within the veines, though not alike much of e∣uery one: for euen as it is not possible to finde the partie in whom the foure elements are equally mixed; and as there is not that temperament in the world, in which the foure contrary qualities are in the whole & euery part equally cōpounded, but that of ne∣cessitie there must be some one euermore which doth exceed the other: euen so it is not possible to see any perfect liuing creature, in which the foure humours are equally mixed, there is alwaies some one which doth ouer-rule the rest, and of it is the parties com∣plexion; named: if blood doe abound, we call such a complexion; sanguine; if phlegme, phlegmatike; if choler, cholerike; and if melancholie, melancholike. These foure humours, if they doe not too much abound, may very easily stand with the health of the partie: for they doe not sensibly hurt and hinder the actions of the bodie. It is most true that euery constitutions bringeth forth
his different effects, which make the actions of the soule more quicke and liuely, or more dull and dead. Phlegmatike persons are for the most part blockish and lubberlike, hauing a slow iudge∣ment,The effects of phlegme. and all the noblest powers of the minde, as it were asleepe, because the substance of their braine is too thicke, and the spirits laboured therein too grosse: these are no fit men for the vndergo∣ing of weightie affaires, neither apt to conceiue of profound my∣steries; a bed and a pot full of pottage is fitted for them.Whereunto the sanguine complexion is inclined. The san∣guine persons are borne for to be sociable and louers of compa∣nie: they are as it were alwaies in loue, they loue to laugh and bee pleasant: this is the best complexion for health and long life, be∣cause that it hath the two maine pillars of life, which are naturall heate and moysture in greatest measure, and yet such folke are not the fittest for great exployts, nor yet for high and hard attempts, because they bee impatient, and cannot belong in doing about one thing, being for the most part drawne away, either by their sences, or els by their delights, whereto they are naturally addic∣ted. Cholerike persons being hote and drie, haue a quicke vnder∣standing,The properties of a cholerike persons. abounding with many sleight inuentions: for they sel∣dome sound any deepe and hidden secrets, it fitteth not their fist to graple with such businesses as require continuance of time and paines of the bodies, they cannot be at leisure; their bodies and spirits doe let them: their spirits are soone spent by reason of their thinnesse, and their weake bodies cannot indure much watching. I will adde also that one thing which Aristotle men∣tioneth in his Ethickes, as that they loue change of things, and for this cause are not so fit for consultations of great importance. The melancholike are accounted as most fit to vndertake maters of weightie charge and high attempt.That melan∣cholike per∣sons are inge∣nious and wit∣tie. Aristotle in his Problemes sayth, that the melancholike are most wittie and ingenious: but we must looke that we vnderstand this place aright, for there are many sorts of melancholie:That there are three sorts of melancholie. there is one that is altogether grosse and earthie, cold and drie: there is another that is hot and adust, men call it atrabilis: there is yet another which is mixed with some small quantitie of blood, and yet not withstanding is more drie then moyst. The first sort which is grosse and earthie, ma∣keth men altogether grosse and slacke in all their actions both of
bodie and minde, fearefull, sluggish, and without vnderstanding: it is commonly called Asse-like melancholie: the second sort be∣ing hote and burnt, doth cause men to be outragious and vnfit to be imployed in any charge. There is none then but that which is mixed with a certaine quantitie of blood, that maketh men wit∣tie, and causeth them to excell others.Why melan∣cholike men are wittie. The reasons hereof are ve∣ry plaine, the braine of such melancholike persons is neither too soft nor too hard, and yet it is true, that drynes doth beare the sway therein. But Heraclitus oftentimes said, that a drie light did make the wifest minde: there are but small store of excre∣ments in their braine, their spirits are most pure, and are not easilie wasted, they are hardly drawne from their purpose and meaning; their conceit is very deepe, their memorie very fast, their bodie strong to endure labour, and when this humour groweth hot, by the vapours of blood, it causeth as it were, as kinde of diuine ra∣uishment, commonly called Enthousiasma, which stirreth men vp to plaie the Philosophers, Poets, and also to prophesie: in such maner, as that it may seeme to containe in it some diuine parts. See here the effects of the foure complexions, and how they may all foure be within the bounds of health. It is not then of these sound melancholike persons that we speake in this treatise: We will intreate onely of the sicke, and such as are pained with the griefe which men call melancholie, which I am now about to describe. CHAP. IIII. The definition of Melancholie, and all the differences of it. DIseases commonly take their names, either from the place which they seaze vpon, or of some irkesome accident accompanying them,Whence me∣lancholie tooke his name. or of the cause which causeth them. Melancholie marcheth in his hinder-most ranke: for this name was giuen it, because it springeth of a melancholike humour. Wee will define (as other good authors doe) a kinde of dotage without any serue, hauing
for his ordinarie companions, feare and sadnes, without any appa∣rant occasion. Dotage in this definition standeth for the Genus, the Greekes call it more properlie,  the Latines Deliri∣um.The diuerse sorts of do∣tage. There are two sorts of dotage, the one without a feuer, the o∣ther with a feuer: that which is ioyned with a feuer, is either con∣tinuall, and haunteth the sicke continually, or else it taketh him at certaine times, distinguisht by distance: that which is continuall, is properly called frensie, and it commeth either through the in∣flammation of the muscles, called Diaphragma: and this is the cause why the auncient Greeke writers do call the said muscle  that dotage which commenth by fit, happeneth commonly in burning agues, and in the stage or full strength of feuers tertains, and it is called . The other sort of dotage is without a feauer, and it is either accompanied with rage and furie, and then it is called Mania, or madnes: or else with feare and sadnes, and then it is caled melancholie. Melancholie therefore is a dotage,What dotage is. not coup∣led with an ague, but with feare and sadnes. We call that dotage, when some one of the principall faculties of the minde, as imagi∣nation or reason is corrupted. All melancholike persons haue their imagination troubled, for that they deuise with themselues a thousand fantasticall inuentions and obiects, which in deede are not at all: they haue also verie oft their reason corrupted.Why melan∣cholie is not accompanied with a feuer. Where∣fore we cannot make any doubt, whether melancholie be a do∣tage or no, but it is ordinarylie without a feuer, because the hu∣mour is drie, and hath these two qualities, coldenes, and drynes, which are altogether contrarie vnto putrefaction, so that there cannot any putrisied vapour breath out of them, (no more then there doth out of meere ashes) which might be conueyed to the heart, there to kindle the fire and procure a feauer. Feare and sadnes are vnseperable companions of this miserable griefe, for some reasons which I will set downe in the chapter following. Beholde here the description of melancholie, as it is a symptome or accident, which hath relation to some action, hurt and hinde∣red, that is to say, to the imagination and reason depraued and cor∣rupted. This accident is as it were an effect of some cause, and dependeth immediatlie vpon a disease; for as the shadow follow∣eth
the bodie, euen so the symptome followeth and accompanieth the disease.Melancholie is a similar disease. All the Phisitions both Greekes and Arabians, doe thike that the cause of this accident is a similar disease, that is to say, a cold and drie distemperature of the braine. The braine then is the part grieued and hurt,How that in it the tempera∣ture of the braine is hurt. but that not by reason of any mis∣shapednes of the same, either by any tumour against nature, nei∣ther yet by any thing oppressing or obstructing his ventricles, as it happeneth in the Apoplexie and falling sicknes, but in his proper substance and temperature; the temperature is corrupted, it is be∣come too drie and colde.How it com∣meth to passe that melan∣cholike men fall into the falling sicknes. Hippocrates hath obserued the same in his Epidemikes and Aphorismes very excellently. Such (saith he) as haue the falling sicknes, become melancholike, and such as are menlancholicke fall into the falling sicknes, according as the men∣lancholike humour doth possesse the ventricles or the substance of the braine, if this humour corrupt the temperature, which he cal∣leth the minde (because that it seemeth that the most excellent powers of the minde doe execute their functions by the helpe of this temperature) without doubt it will cause melancholie: but if it shut vp it selfe in the ventricles and cauities of the braine, it will cause the falling sicknes, because the ventricles being stuffed, and the spirit not being able to passe freely to the sinewes, the braine draweth it selfe together thereby to enlarge his ventricles, and in this retraction, doth equallie, and as much draw and pull his great tayle from whence all the sinewes doe arise, as it selfe, and thus thereupon ariseth an vniuersall conuulsion. I take it that the defi∣nition of melancholie is made cleere and plaine enough, by this little discourse: Now let vs come to the differences and diuers sorts thereof.The differen∣ces of melan∣cholie. There are three kindes of melancholie: the one com∣meth of the onely and sole fault of the braine, the other sympa∣theticallie proceedeth from the whole bodie, when as the whole temperature and constitution of the bodie is melancholike; the third ariseth from amongst the bowels, but especially from the spleene liuer and the membrance called mesenterium. The first is called simplie and absolutelie by the name of melancholie, the lat∣ter is called the windie melancholie with an addition. The first is the most tedious of all the rest, it vexeth the patient continuallie, affoording little or no breathing whiles vnto him: that which
riseth from amongst the bowels, doth handle the grieued nothing so roughlie, it hath his periods, oftentimes making truce with the diseased. The first hath many degrees of afflicting: if it haue no∣thing in it extraordinarie, it shall not alter his name, but and if it fall out to affect the partie altogether with sauage conditions, it shall be called Wolues melancholie; if with raging and violent passion of loue, Knights melancholie. The flatuous or windie melancholie hath also his degrees, for there is some sorts of it but easie and light, and there are other some that are very fierce and violent. And now intending to handle all these sorts in order, I will begin with that which hath his seate in the braine. CHAP. V. Of melancholie which hath his proper seate in the braine, of all accidents which doe accompanie the same: and the causes of feare, sadnes, watchings, fearefull dreames, and other Symptomes. THat melancholie with commeth of the drie & cold distemperature of the braine, is ordinarilie accompa∣nied with so manifold and tedious accidents, that it should stirre vp euery one to be moued with pitie and compassion; for the bodie is not onely cast into a traunce, but the minde is yet a great deale more violently set on the racke.The accidents happening to melancholike persons. For here beholde all the tirannous excecutioners and tormentors of melancholie: feare keepeth companie with it day by day, and now and then assayleth the partie, with such an asto∣nishment, as that he is made afraide, and becommeth a terror vn∣to himselfe; sadnes doth neuer forsake him, suspition doth secretly gall him, sighings, watchings, fearefull dreames, silence, solitary∣nes, bashfulnes, and the abhorring of the Sun, are as it were vnse∣parable accidents of this miserable passion. Here we haue ample occasion administred to enter into some Philosophicall discour∣ses: and for pleasure sake, I minde to recreate my selfe in search∣ing out all the causes of these accidents, beginning with that of feare. The greatest Phisitions are at controuersie, from whence
this feare in melancholike persons should come.Why melan∣cholike men are alwaies afraide. Galen his rea∣son. Galen imputeth all vnto the colour which is blacke, and thinketh that the spirits being made wilde, and the substance of the braine, as it were clou∣die and darke, all the obiects thereof appeare terrible, and that the minde is in continuall darkenes. And euen as wee see the night doth bring with it some maner of feare, not onely to chil∣dren, but sometimes also to the most confident:Auerrhoes mocketh Ga∣len. euen so melan∣cholike persons hauing in their braine a continuall night, are in vn∣cessant feare. Auerrhoes that had deeper insight in Philosophie, then same for his skill in Phisicke, and being the sworne enemie of Galen,The colour of the humour is not the cause of feare. The first rea∣son. laugheth to scorne this reason. The colour (saith he) cannot be the cause of this feare, because colours can alter no∣thing but the eyes, being onely the obiect of the sight, so that the minde can see nothing without the eyes. But there is neuer an eye in the braine; how then can it finde it selfe agrieued at the blacknes of the melancholike humour, seeing that it cannot see it?The second. I adde for the more confirmation of Auerrhoes his argument, that the blacknes of the colour is so farre from being any cause of this feare in melancholike persons, as that it is rather that colour which they most loue, as being enemies to Sun and light, and fol∣lowing darkenes altogether, seeking after shadowed places, wal∣king often in the night, and that with greater boldnes then vpon the day.The third. Furthermore, madnes is caused of an humour, as blacke as that which causeth melancholie, for the humour called blacke choler is altogether blacke and glistning like pitch, and therefore can make blacke the spirits and braine, as well as the other. But we see it falleth out, that mad men are nothing fearefull, but ra∣ther bolde and furious, not taking acknowledgement of any dan∣ger, as appeareth in their headlong casting of themselues into the deuouring fire,The fourth. and vpon the murtherous knife. Finally, if blacke∣nes should be the cause of such feare, it should follow on the con∣trarie, that whitenes should make them bolde; but how is it then, that such as abound with Phlegme are also commonly fearefull? the colour therefore cannot be the cause of this feare. But saith Auerrhoes,Auerrhoes his opinion. it must needes be, that the cause hereof is the tempera∣ture of the melancholike humour which is colde, and worketh ef∣fects contrarie vnto those of heate. Heate maketh men bolde,
quicke of motion, and headlong in all their actions: colde on the contrarie maketh them fearefull, leaden-heelde, and not resoluing of any thing. All such as are of a colde temperament, become fearefull: olde folkes ordinarilie are fearefull, and so are gelded men also: women are alwaies more timerous then men, and to be briefe, the qualities of the minde doe follow the temperament of the bodie.The authors iudgement. Loe here here the contrarie opinions of these two great and famous men: I thinke they may be reconciled, if wee would ioyne these two causes together, that is the temperature of the hu∣mour, as the chiefe and principall, and the blacke colour of the Spirits, as that which may much further and helpe forward the same. The melancholike humour being colde, doth not onely coole the braine, but also the heart, (being the feare of this coura∣gious facultie of the Soule, which men call the instinct and prone∣nes of nature vnto anger) and rebateth the flames therein; hence creepeth out feare: the same humour being blacke, causeth the a∣nimall spirits, which ought to be pure, subtile, cleere and light∣some, it maketh them I say grosse, darke, and as it were all to be smoked. But the spirits being the chiefe and principall instrument of the minde, if they be blacke and ouercooled also, doe trouble her most noble powers, and principally the imagination, presen∣ting vnto it continually blacke formes and strange visions, which may be seene with the eye, notwithstanding that they be within. This is a deepe reach, which no man hitherto (it may be) hath at∣tayned, and it serueth infinitely for the defence of Galen:That with our owne eyes, we may see some∣thing within the same. The eye doth not onely see that which is without, but it seeth also that which is within, howsoeuer it may iudge that same thing to be without. Those which haue some small beginnings of a Cataract, doe see many bodies flying, like to Ants, flyes, and long haires, the same also doe such as are readie to vomite. Hippocrates and Ga∣len place amongst the signes adn tokens of a criticall fluxe of blood, these false apparitions, as when one seeth red bodies han∣ging in the ayre, which yet notwithstanding are not there, because that then euery one should see them: this is an inward vapour which offereth it selfe vnto the christalline humour in his naturall colour, and so if it arise of blood, it appeareth red: if of choler, yellow: and wherefore then should not the vapours of the melan∣cholike
humour, and of the spirits being blacke, ordinarilie pre∣sent themselues, and appeare in their naturall colour vnto the eye, and so vnto the imagination? The melancholike partie may see that which is within his owne braine, but vnder another forme, be∣cause that the spirits and blacke vapours continually passe by the finewes, vaines and arteries, from the braine vnto the eye, which causeth it to see many shadowes and vntrue apparitions in the aire, whereupon from the eye the formes thereof are conueyed vnto the imagination, which being continuallie serued with the same dish, abideth continuallie in feare and terror. That which maketh me to ioyne the blacke colour with the temperature, is, because the braine is very oft of colde distemperature, and notwithstan∣ding we finde not the partie troubled, either with such feare, nor yet such gastlie sights. Fleagme is yet more colde then melan∣cholie, and notwithstanding it troubleth not the imagination, be∣cause his whitenes hath some resemblance of the substance of the braine,That the me∣lancholike hu∣mour is alto∣gether contra∣rie to our spi∣rits. and with the colour and cleerenes of the spirits: but the melancholike humour is altogether opposite and enemie vnto the same. Our spirits account colde and darkenes to be their enemies, feeling the colde, they drawn themselues in, and as darkenes pres∣seth on more and more, so they flie blacke into their fort and ca∣stle, forsake the vtter parts, and procure vs to sleepe: the melan∣cholike humour hath both these properties, it is colde and darke, it ought not therefore to astonish vs, if that we see it to molest the most noble and principall powers of the minde: seeing it tainteth and brandeth with blackenes the principall instrument thereof, which is the spirit, which passing from the braine to the eye, and from the eye to the braine backe againe, is able to moue these blacke sights, and to set them vncessantly before the minde. Loe heere the first accident which haunteth melancholike persons: they are alwaies full of feare, for they feare euery thing, euen that which is furthest off from feare: they are hartlesse, they honour their enemies, and abuse their friends, they conceiue of death, as a terrible thing, and notwithstanding (which is strange) they often∣times desire it, yea so eagerlie, as that they will not let to destroy themselues: but this falleth out then only when feare is turned into dispayre, it is true in deede, that this happeneth so oft vnto those
whom melancholie simply assaileth, as vnto those which are mad.Mad men doe more oft kill themselues, then melan∣cholike per∣spons. Wee haue very few examples of meere melancholike persons which haue slaine themselues, but of mad men very many are found, and those of great reputation. Empedocles Agrigentinus became mad, and cast himselfe headlong into the burning flames of the mountaine Aetna.Examples. Ariax the sonne of Telamon was out of his wits, for that he was not thought worthie of Achilles armour; but that it was adiudged vnto Vlisses. Whereupon he passed ouer some part of his furie in killing all maner of cattell he met with∣all, thinking he had slaine Vlisses and all his companions. Cleo∣menes being likewise out of his wits, slew himself with his own sword. Orestes hauing slaine his mother Clytemnestra, was so fu∣riously outraged, that if his deare friend Pylades had not carefully watched ouer him, he had destroyed himselfe a hundred times. It falleth out therefore more oft vnto mad, then to melancholike men to kill themselues. Why melan∣cholike per∣sons are sad.The second accident which almost neuer leaueth melancholike persons, is sadnes: they weepe and know not wherefore: I be∣leeue the distemperature of the humour is the cause thereof: for as ioy and cheerefulnes proceede from heate and moysture well tempered, so heauines and sadnes come from the two contrarie qualities which are found in this humour. For the most part of men of sanguine complexion are cheerefull and merrie, because they consist of a mixture of moysture and heate: cholerike per∣sons are way ward and vnpleasant, because their heate is drie, and hath as it were an edge set vpon it: melancholike persons are sad and peruerse, because they bee cold and drie. Euen so it befell the sillie Bellerophon, who (as he is very artificially set out in Ho∣mer) went wandring through the defart places continually mour∣ning and lamenting. And the Ephesian Philosopher named He∣raclitus, liued in continuall teares, because (sayth Theophrastus) that he was possessed of melancholie; and as his writings altoge∣ther confused; and darkned with obscuritie doe sufficiently wit∣nesse the same. Why they be suspicious.The accident of suspition followeth the two former hard and close at the heeles: the melancholike party is euermore suspicious, if he see three or foure talking together, he thinketh that it is of
him. The cause of such suspition riseth of the former feare, and of a corrupt kinde of reasoning: for being alwaies in feare, he think∣eth verely that one or other doeth lie in wait for him, and that some doe purpose to slay him. Melancholike men (sayth Aristotle) doe deceiue themselues commonly in matters which depend vp∣on choice, for that they oftentimes forget the generall proposi∣tions wherein honestie consisteth, and chuse rather to follow the motions of their foolish imaginations. The cause of their restlesnes.They are neuer at rest either in their bodies or in their spirits, they can make no answere to such questions as are propounded them, they oftentimes change from one kinde to another. This disquieting and distracting of themselues, ariseth of the diuersitie of matters which they propound and set before themselues, for receiuing all maner of formes, and stamping them with the print of dislike; they are constrained oftentimes to change, and to find out new things, which being no more acceptable to them then the first, doe still continue them in these restles distractions. The cause of their sighing.Melancholike folke are commonly giuen to sigh, because the minde being possessed with great varietie and store of foolish ap∣paritions, doth not remember or suffer the partie to bee at leisure to breathe according to the necessitie of nature, whereupon she is constrained at once to sup vp as much ayre, as otherwise would serue for two or three times; and this great draught of breath is called by the name of sighing, which is as it were a reduplicating of the ordinary manner of breathing. In this order it falleth out with louers, and all those which are very busily occupied in some deepe contemplation. Sillie fooles likewise which fall into a wonder at the sight of any beautifull and goodly picture, are con∣strained to giue a great sight, their will (which is the efficient cause of breathing) being altogether distracted, and wholly possessed with the sight of the image. Why they watch and can not sleepe.There is yet another accident which is very tedious, and euen consumeth these poore melancholike men, euen continuall watchings. I haue seene some that haue abode three whole mo∣neths without sleepe.The causes of sleepe. Now the causes of such watchings are easie enough to vnderstand, if wee know what it is which causeth vs to sleepe. Men are giuen to obserue in sleepe the materiall, formall,
finall and instrumentall cause. The materiall is a pleasant vapour, which is cast vp from the first and second concoction, which whē it commeth to slacken and stop all the sinewes by his moysture, it causeth all sence and motion for to cease. The finall cause is the repayre of spirits, and the rest of all the animall powers which ha∣uing been wearied by continuall labour, doe craue a little reliefe and recreation: this end cannot be obtained, if so bee the minde which setteth all the powers of the bodie on worke, be not vouch∣safed some maner of peaceable rest: in this sort the sillie Dido all ouer whelmed with musing pensiuenes, could not espie the ap∣proach of night to the shutting vp of her mournfull eyes, or easing of her oppressed heart. The formall cause of sleepe consisteth in the withdrawing of the spirits and naturall heate, from the out∣ward parts, to the inward, and from all the circumference vnto the center. The instrumentall cause is the braine, which must be of good temperature: for if it be too hot, as in frenticke folkes; or drie, as in old folkes, the sleepe will neuer be with peace and quiet∣nes. The causes of all that watchfulnes which is in melancho∣like persons.In melancholike persons the materiall is wanting, the minde is not at rest, the braine is distempered, the matter is a melancholike humour, drie as ashes, from whence cannot arise any pleasant and delightsome vapour, the braine is distempered, and greatly ouer∣dried, the minde is in continuall restlesnes: for the feare that is in them doth continually set before them tedious & grieuous things, which so gnaw and pinch them, as that they hinder them from sleeping. But if at one time or other it fall out, that they be ouer∣taken with a little slumber, it is then but a troublesome sleepe, ac∣companied with a thousand of false and fearefull apparitions, and dreames so dreadfull, as that it were better for them to be awake. The causes of all these dreames are to bee referred to the propertie of the humour:The causes of all their feare∣full dreames. for as the phlegmatike partre dreameth common∣ly of riuers of water, and the cholerike of flaming fire: so the me∣lancholike person dreameth of nothing but dead men graues, and all other such mournfull and vnpleasant things, because he exerci∣seth his imaginations with formes altogether like vnto the humour which beareth sway in him vpon which occasion the memorie beginneth to stirre and rouse vp her selfe, or else because that the
spirits being growne as it were wilde and altogether blacke, ran∣ging the braine throughout, and bending themselues to the eye, doe set before the iamgination all manner of darke and obscure things. The cause why they loue darknes.Melancholike men are also enemies to the Sunne, and shunne the light, because that their spirits and humours are altogether con∣trary to the light. The Sunne is bright and warme, the melancho∣like humour is blacke and colde. They desire solitarines, because they vsing to bee busie and earnestly following their imagination, doe feare to bee drawne away by others their presence, and there∣fore doe auoide it: but the cause of such their vncessant perseue∣rance in their imaginations, is because their spirits are grosse, and as it were immoueable. They haue their eyes fixed, and as it were set fast, by reason of the cold and drines ofthe instrument; they haue a hissing in their cares, and oftentimes are troubled with swimmering or giddinesse:Why they loue to be silent. and as Galen obserueth, they loue si∣lence out of measure, and oftentimen cannot speake, not for any defect of the tongue, but rather because of I cannot tell what ma∣ner of conceitednes: finally, they inuent continually some one or other strange imagination, and haue in a maner all of them one speciall obiect, from which they cannot be weined till time haue worne it out. CHAP. VI. Whence it commeth that melancholike persons haue all of them their particular and altogether diuers obiects: whereupon they dote. THe imagination of melancholike men bring∣eth forth such diuersitie of effects, according to the difference of the matters where about it is occupied, as that a man shall searse finde fiue of sixe among then thousand, which dote after one and the same maner. Whereupon ancient writers haue compared this humour to wine: for as wine (according to the temperature and disposi∣tion
of them that drinke it) causeth sundrie and diuerse effects,A comparing of wine with the melancho∣line humour. making some to laught, and some to weepe; making some lum∣pish and drowsie, and othersome ouer watchfull and furious: euen so this humour affect ethithe imagination after diuerse sorts and fashions.Whence it commeth that melancholike men haue so searfull ob∣iects. This difference ariseth either from the disposition of the bodie, or from the maner of liuing, or from such studies as the par∣ties doe most applie themselues vnto, or from some other secret and hidden cause. The disposition of the bodie doth propound and set downe such obiects as are all alike, or at the least or very neere resemblance, foreseene that the occasion (that is to say some outward cause) be ioyned therewithall. The first cause.Such as are of an extreme drie temperature, and haue the braine also very drie; if they happen commonly to looke vpon some pit∣cher or glasse (which are things very vsuall and common) they will iudge themselues to be pitchers or glasses. Such as are trou∣bled with wormes either in the stomacke or guts, will easily re∣ceiue, if they be melancholike disposed, that they haue some ser∣pent viper, or other liuing thing in their bellies. Such as are trou∣led with very much windines, will oftentimes imagine them∣selues flying in the ayre, and to become birds. They that abound in seede, will rune a madding after women, hauing the same for continual obiects before their eyes. All these imaginations follow the disposition of the bodie: and as wee see that in sleeping it be∣falleth vs oftentimes to dreame of a thousand straunge things, which are sutable to the temperature of the bodie and naturall humour, which doth chiefly raigne (and this is the cause why such dreames are called naturall) euen so melancholike folkeboth wa∣king and sleeping, may be haunted with a thousand vaine inuen∣tions such as are sutable to the disposition of the humour. Not∣withstanding there is difference in the maner of their impressions, for such fearefull visions as in sleepe are seene of the healthfull, doe speedily passe away, not making any abode, because such parties are but slightly affected: but in melancholike persons, the braine may seeme to haue gotten a habit, and therewithall the humour which is drie and earthie, hauing set his stampe in a bodie that is hard, suffereth not it selfe easily to be blotted out.
The second cause of the di∣ue: sitie of me∣lancholike mē their imagina∣tions.There are other imaginations in melancholike folkes, that pro∣ceede not of the disposition of the bodie, but of their maner of li∣uing, and of such studies as they bee most addcted vnto. All the conditions of men and all their properties are not like. One man feedeth himselfe with couetousnes, and another with ambi∣tion; this sillie man is led captiue of loue, and religious deuotion preuaileth with another. This humour then will imprint in me∣lancholike men the obiects most answerable to their condition of life and ordinarie actions. If an ambitious man become melan∣cholike, he straight way dreameth that he is a King, an Emperour, a Monarke. If he bee couetous, then all his foolish imaginations will runne vpon riches. If he be giuen to bee religious, he will doe nothing but mumble of his beades, and you shal neuer finde him out of the Church. If he bee addicted to Venus darlings, he will doe nothing but plot the purchase of his loue, and sometimes run after his owne shadow. As much may be sayd of them which loue to contend in law, or of them which in their health were deuout∣ly addicted vnto some one particular thing.The third cause Finally, we obserue and finde such strange imaginations in some melancholike men, as cannot be referred either to the complexion of the bodie, or to their condition of life: the cause thereof remaineth vnknowne, it seemeth to be some secret mysterie. The old writers haue thought that there is some diuine thing in this humour. Rhazis and Tral∣lianus write that they haue seene many melancholike persons, which haue oftentimes foretolde what afterward hath come to passe.A comparison betwixt me∣lancholike mē, and a good huntsmen. There is an Arabian Phisition, which compareth melan∣cholike men to good huntsmen. For euen (sayth hee) as a good huntsman before he strike or let goe the string of his bow, doth assure himselfe of the fall of the beast: euen so the melancholike person, by the forwardnes of his imagination, doth oftentimes see that which must come to passe, as though it were present be∣fore him. We reade that one Marcus, and one other called Me∣lanthius of Syracuse, became good Poets after their melancholy. Anicen noteth that melancholike persons sometimes doe such strange things, that the common people imagine them to bee possessed. How many famous men be there in this our age, which
make scruple to condemne these olde witches, thinking it to bee nothing but a melancholike humour which corrupteth their ima∣gination, and filleth them with all these vaine toyes. I will not cast my selfe any further into the depth of this question, the mat∣ter craueth a man of more leisure. Let vs conclude therefore,The conclu∣sion. that the varietie of things which the melancholike man busieth himselfe withall, commeth either of the disposition of his bodie, or of his condition of life, or of some other cause which is aboue nature. They which cannot at the first time conceiue al these rea∣sons, shall vnderstand them (in my iudgement) if they with pa∣tience will take the paines to reade this little treatise, which shall very greatly further the making plaine of this matter, and it shall not be from the purpose. It happeneth all alike to melancholike persons as to those which dreame, and as much doe wee obserue the causes of the one aas of the other: for dreames haue recourse vnto the imagination as well as melancholie. But let vs make three sorts of drames; the one sort is of nature;Three sorts of dreames. Naturall dreames. the other of the minde; and the third is aboue the other two. Those which are of nature, doe follow the nature of the humour which doth most rule: the that is cholerike, dreameth of nothing but fires, fightings and burnings: the phlegmatike thinketh himselfe al∣waies to be in water. The knowledge of these dreames is neces∣sarie for a good Phisition, thereby to know the complexion and constitution of his sicke patient. Hipocrates hath written a little treasite thereof: whereupon the famous man Iulius Caesar Scali∣ger hath commented. Galen also hath made another, wherein he teacheth that by these naturall drames, one may foretell the issues of diseases. They (sayth he) which should sweate, dreame com∣monly that they are in a bath of warme water, or in some riuer. There was one that dreamed that his thigh was become a stone, and as he awoke, the same thigh fell into a palsey. Dreames rising of the troubles of the minde.The second fort of dreames is that which commeth of the minde, as caused by some maner of disturbance happening to the same. Some define this kinde of dreame to bee nothing else but that which hath passed the day before either through the sences, or through the vnderstanding. This kinde of dreame happeneth oftest: for if wee haue seene, or thought vpon, or talked of any
thing very earnestly in the day, the night following the same thing will offer it selfe vnto vs. The fisherman (sayth Theocritus) dreameth commonly of fishes, riuers and nets: the souldier of a∣latums, taking of nothing in the night, but of their loues obiect. Supernaturall dreames.The last kinde of dreames exceede the course of nature, the po∣wer of the sences, and the reach of mans vnderstanding: these dreames are either immediatly from God, or from the Diuell: those which come from God,Diuine dreames. doe oftentimes put vs in minde of that which must happen vnto vs, and maketh vs partakers of re∣uelations, containing in them great mysteries. Such haue been in the old Testament of the drames of Abraham. Iacob, Ioseph, Salo∣mon, Nabuchadnezzar, Pharoah, Daniel, Mardoche: and in the New Testament, of holy Ioseph, the three kings of the East, and Saint Paul. Dreames stir∣red vp the diuell.The dreames called Diabolicall, happen very oft of the subtiltie of Satan, who goeth walking round about vs euery day, and see∣keth to intrap vs waking or sleeping. Wherefore he setteth before vs oftentimes strange things, and discouereth vnto vs hid and vn∣knowne secrecies in our sleepe, euen such as nature her selfe may seeme to haue concealed, he troubleth our imaginations with an infinit number of vaine illusions. Loe, here bee all the causes of dreames. The imagina∣tion of melan∣cholike men is troubled three wares.We may say as much of melancholike persons. Their imagina∣tion is troubled onely three waies: by nature, that is to say, by the constitution of the bodie: by the minde, that is to say, by some violent passion, whereunto they had giuen themselues: and by the intercourse or medling of euill angels, which cause them often∣times to foretell & forge very strange things in their imaginatiōs. CHAP. VII. Histories of certaine melancholike persons, which haue had strange imaginations. I Haue largely enough described all the accidents which haunt those which are properly to be tearmed melancholike persons,
and haue searched out the causes of al these varities: it behoueth me now in this chapter, (to the end I may somewhat delight the reader) to set down some exāples of such as haue had the most fantasticall and foolish imaginations of all others.Strange histo∣ries. I will pick some out of the Greeke, Arabian, and Latine writers, and I will adde some such as I haue seene with mine owne eyes. Galen in his third booke of diseased parts, maketh mention of three or foure, very well worth the marking. The first.There was a melancholike man which tooke himselfe to bee a pitcher, and prayed all that came to see him, not to come neere vnto him, least they should dash him in peeces. The second.Another imagined himsefe to be a cocke, and did crow when her heard other cockes crow, and bet his armes, as the cockes doe clap their wings. The third.Another melancholike man was greatly perplexed in himselfe, fearing that Atlas in the end would be wearie of bearing vp hea∣uen, and so might let it fall downe vpon him. The fourth.Aetius writeth of one, which thought himselfe to haue no head, and did speake it openly euery where, that there was one which had cut it off for his tyrannous dealings. This man was cu∣red very cunningly, by the skil of a Phisition named Philotimus. For he caused a skull of yron waying very heauie to bee put vpon his head: and he thereupon crying that his head did grieue him, was by and by confirmed by all them that stood by, which also cried: then you haue a head; which hee acknowledged by this meanes, and so was freed from his false imagination. The fift.Trallianus writeth, that he saw a woman which thought that she had swallowed a Serpent, he healed her causing her to vomit, and casting now and then a Serpent (which hee had and held all readie in his hand) into the basen. The sixt.I haue read that a young scholler being in his studie, was taken with a strange imaginaton: for he imagined that his nose was so great and so long, as that he durst not stirre out of his place, least he should dash it against something: and the more he was dealt with and disswaded, so much the more did he confirme himselfe in his opinion. In the end a Phisition hauing taken a great peece of flesh, and holding it in his hand secretly, assured him that hee
would heale him by and by, and that he must needes take away this great nose: and so vpon the suddaine pinching his nose a little, and cutting the peece of flesh which he had, he made him beleeue that his great nose was cut away. The seuenth.Arthemidorus the Grammarian, hauing seene a Crocodile, was taken with such a feare, as that he forgot all that euer he had knowne, and setled this opinion so deepely in himselfe, namely. that he had lost an arme and a legge, as that he could neuer be per∣swaded the contrarie. The eight.There haue been seene very melancholike persons, which did thinke themselues dead, and would not eate any thing: the Phisi∣tions haue vsed this sleight to make them eate. They caused some one or other seruant to lie neere vnto the sicke partie, and ha∣uing taught him to counterfeite himselfe dead, yet not to forsake his meate, but to eate and swallow it, when it was put into his mouth: and thus by this craftie deuise, they perswaded the melan∣cholike man, that the dead did eate as well as those which are aliue. The ninth.There hath been seene not long since, a melancholike man, which affirmed himselfe the most wretched and miserable in all the world, because he was nothing. The tenth.There was also of late a great Lord, which thought himselfe to be glasse, and had not his imagination troubled, otherwise then in this one onely thing, for he could speake meruailouslie well of any other thing: he vsed commonly to sit, and tooke great delight that his friends should come and see him, but so as that he would desire them, that they would not come neere vnto him. The eleuenth.There is yet an honest man, and one of the best French Poets that is in this Realme, which is fallen within these few yeares into a foolish conceite. Being coursed with a continuall feauer, which was accompanied with much watching, the Phisitions appoyn∣ted for him a stupefactiue oyntment, called Populeon, and there∣with rubbed his nose forehead, and temples, since which houre, he hath Populeon in such hatefull loathsomenes, as that euer since, he casteth them from him, and will weare them no more: in other
points hee is able to talke very sensiblie, and ceaseth not to goe forward in his Poetrie. It hath been attempted by all the skilfull meanes in the world, to take from him this foolish conceite, he hath been shewed the description of the oyntment, to put him out of doubt that there goeth no dangerous thing to the making of it, he knoweth it, and is of the same minde, but yet this conceite is so deepely printed in him, as that hitherto no man hath attayned to know how to displace it. The twelfth.Aretaeus in his first booke of long diseases, saith that he hath seene a melancholike man, who hath imagined himselfe to be of bricke, and would not drinke therefore, fearing least thereby he should haue been dissolued. The thir∣teenth.Another imagined that his feete were made of glasse, and durst not walke least he should haue broke them. The foure∣teenth.A Baker had conceiued that he was made of butter, and no man could make him come neere either the fire or his ouen, he was so much a fraide of being melted. The fifteenth.The pleasantest dotage that euer I read, was of one Sienois a Gentleman, who had resolued with himselfe not to pisse, but to dye rather, and that because he imagined, that when he first pissed, all his towne would be drowned. The Phisitions shewing him, that all his bodie, and ten thousand moe such as his, were not able to containe so much as might drowne the least house in the towne, could not change his minde from this foolish imaginati∣on. In the end they seeing his obstinacie, and in what danger he put his life, found out a pleasant inuention. They caused the next house to be set on fire, & all the bells in the town to ring, they per∣swaded diuerse seruants to crie, to the fire, to the sire, & therewith∣all send of those of the best account in the town, to craue helpe, and shew the Gentleman that there is but one way to saue the towne, and that it was, that he should pisse quickelie and quench the sire. Then this sillie melancholike man which abstained from pissing for feare of loosing his towne, taking it for graunted, that it was now in great hazard, pissed and emptied his bladder of all that was in it, and was himselfe by that meanes preserued. As concer∣ning those which thinke themselues Kings, Emperours, Popes, Cardinals, and such like, seeing that such foolish conceits are com∣mon
enough. I haue purposed onely to name those which are most rare. And thus much for melancholie, which hath his seate in the braine, which is caused of a colde and drie distemperature, either simple or mixt with matter. It followeth sometimes the hote sickenesses of the braine, as frensies and burning feauers, and then the face appearethred. Auicen obserueth that stammerers, and such as haue rowling eyes, and such as are hairie and blacke, such also as haue great veines and thicke lippes, are most inci∣dent to this kinde of melancholie: sadnes, feare, deepe muses, the vse of grosse and melancholike meates doe oftentimes cause this disease. CHAP. VIII. An order of diet for such as haue this melancholike disease in the braine. How greatly good order of dyet doth a∣uaile and pro∣fit in olde dis∣eases.IT seemeth to me that I haue read some where in Aretine, that (in olde diseases, which haue got∣ten some certaine habit) the maner of liuing is to more purpose, then whatsoeuer can be drawne out of the most precious boxes of the Apotheca∣rie. Auicen the chiefe prince of the Arabians, doth teach vs, that the maner of liuing being neglected, may corrupt the best state and constitution in the world, and contrary wise being carefully obserued, may amend the worst. And therefore I will begin the cure of these melancholike men, by setting downe the way to order and gouerne themselues. The ayre.They must make choyse of such an ayre, as is temperate in his actiue qualities, and which is moyst concerning the passiue. It may be made such by art, casting abroad in your chamber good store of flowers, of Roses, Violets, and water Lyllies. Or else you may haue a great vessell full of warme water, which will keepe the ayre moyst continually. It will be needefull to perfume the chamber with Orange flowers, Citron pilles, and a little Storax: the chamber must be lightsome, and standing toward the East. A grosse, darke, gloomish, stinking ayre, is very contrarie, howso∣euer
such persons doe desire the same altogether. It is good to accustome them to beholde redde, yellow, greene and white colours. As concerning their meats, all such as are grosse, slimie, windie,Meats. melancholike, and of hard digestion, doe hurt exceedingly. They must haue their bread of good wheate, which is pure,Bread. and purged from bran, without fault, and which is (if possiblie it may be) knodden with raine or fountaine water. Their flesh must be very young, for that is the best,Flesh. as for exam∣ple among the rest that which is of a calfe, kid, mutton, pullet, par∣tridge: and contrarilie, that which is olde, and maketh a grosse nourishment, as is beefe, porke, hare, waterfowles, and all wilde beastes, as the wilde Bore & Harts, are very bad. Galen forbiddeth the flesh of hee-goates, Buls, Asses, Dogs, Camels, and Foxes, but he might haue spared this his inhibition, for their daintines is not such, as that men should delight in, much lesse doate vpon them. The Arabians commend the braines of things to be good against melancholie, by I cannot tell what propertie: but in my iudgement, they be not very proper and fit, seeing they are ene∣mies vnto the stomacke, and I take them to haue been too super∣stitious in a great number of things. The fishes that liue in standing waters, as also those of the Sea,Fish. which haue a grosse and melancholike flesh, as the Tunnie, Dol∣phine, Whale, Seale, and all such as haue scales are euill, and not to be vsed in this disease: one may eate of the fishes which liue in cleere and bright waters, and running streames. Salted or pow∣dred fish is starke naught. Egges that are new, soft and potched, and eaten with vineger, or veriuce, are very good. The vse of pottage and brothes is very good and necessarie,Pottage. be∣cause this humour being drie, must be moystned. The hearbes or∣dinarilie to be vsed in them, are Borage, Buglosse, Burnet, Endiue, Succorie, Hoppes, and a little Balme; there must great heede be taken, that there come not any Cole, Blites, Rocket, Cresses, Tur∣neps, Leekes, or very bitter and biting hearbes in them: husked Barlie, blanched Almonds, and gruell, doe serue very excellentlie well, to send vp pleasant vapours vnto the braine.
There must care be had to abstaine from all maner of pulse,Pulse. as peason, beanes, and fetches. As concerning fruites,Fruites. wee will allow, Plumbes, Peares, sweete Pomegranats, Almonds, Raisins, Pine apples, Citrons, Melons, and especially those apples which haue a merueilous propertie in curing melancholie: we forbid drie Figs, Medlers, Ceruises, Ches∣nuts, Nuts, Artichoakes, Thistles, and old cheefe. As concerning drinke,Drinke. there is some disagreement amongst Phisitions, for some doe allow, and othersforbid wine. I am of minde, that as concerning mad men, and them which haue much heate about the inward parts or bowels, and in the braine, wine is very contrarie: but in melancholike persons that are colde and drie, as those of whome wee intreate in this place, a little white or claret wine, which is neither sweete nor thicke, but indifferently delaied, is very good. Zeno said oftentimes, that wine doth miti∣gate the sharpenes of mens manners, as water taketh away the bitternes of Lupines. And Auerrhoes writteth, that wine reioyceth the minde and spirits.Artificial wine. One may make in the vintage time, an ar∣tificiall wine with Borage and Buglosse, (which is most singular in all melancholike diseases) and drinke his first draught thereof, either at dinner or at supper. If a man doubt the sweete sent, hee may cast a bunch of the flowres of Borage onely, or of the hearbe it selfe also into the wine which he ordinarilie drinketh. Watching is altogether enemie to those that are troubled with this disease, for we must with all the skill and cunning we can, procure sleepe, the meanes to doe it, follow in the next chapter. Moderate exercise may serue to very good purpose, but it must be done in pleasant and delightsome places, as gardens, me∣dowes, greene-plots, in places where there are many water springs, or some riuers: a man must not tyre himselfe in these exercises, he must rest himselfe oft. Melancholike persons should neuer be alone, they should al∣way haue some such companie left with them, as might best like and please them, sometimes they must bee flattered, and yeelded vnto in some part of that which they desire, for feare least this hu∣mour which is rebellious by nature, and giuen to selfe wilfulnes,
should grow raging and furious: some whiles they must be chid for their foolish imaginations, as also reproched and made asha∣med of their cow-hardinesse, they must be imboldned to the vt∣termost that we can, and praised in their actions: and if they haue in some cases done something worthie of praise, wee must put them oft in minde thereof, vphold them with merrie tales: wee may not call to their minde any thing that might cause them to feare, not yet bring them any vnpleasant tidings. To be short, wee must turne backe and driue away as much as wee can from their vnderstanding, al maner of passions ouerthrowing the mind, espe∣cially choler, feare and sadnes: for as Plato saith in his Dialogue called Charmides, the greatest part of the mischiefes that fall vpon the bodie, doe come from the minde.Musicke very meete for me∣lancholike persons. The old writers doe com∣mend Musicke in all melancholike diseases, whether they bee hot or cold. The Arcadians did reclaime the maners of such as were sauadge and vnnurtured, by Musicke. Empedocles Agrigentinus, did mitigate and appease the furiousnes of a certaine young man, with the melodiousnes of his song. Clinius the Musition as soone as he perceiued his melancholike fit to come vpon him, would betake him to his harpe, and keepe backe by this meanes the motions of the humour. Dauid also when the euill spirit came vpon Saul, made him merrie with his harpe, and he found ease thereby. The belly must be kept solubleThe belly must bee kept alwaies soluble in all melancholike diseases, and therefore if it neede wee must stirre it vp by all the meanes we can. CHAP. IX. How we must cure such melancholike persons, as haue the disease growing in the braine. All melancho∣like diseases are rebellious and very hard to be cured.DAily experience plainly teacheth vs, that all melancho∣like diseases, are rebellious, long and very hard to cure, and the reason thereof is as cleere: for the melancho∣like humour is earthie and grosse, enemie to the light, contrarie to the two principles of our life, heate and moysture, re∣sisting
the meanes and remedies, neither giuing eare to good ad∣uise, nor yet obeying the holesome precepts of Phisicke. And to be short it is the very scourge and torment of Phisitions. Aristotle in his seuenth booke of Ethikes sayth, that melancholike folk haue alwaies something which doth gnaw and feede vpon them: and this is the cause why they are alwaies running after the Phisition, and yet we ought not to leaue them helplesse. I will set downe in this chapter the most speciall remedies that I haue been able to obserue, together with the order how such melancholike persons must be handled. Three sorts of remedies re∣quisite in me∣lancholike dis∣eases.It seemeth vnto me that for the cure of melancholie, wee had neede of three kindes of remedies, that is to say, diminutiues, alte∣ratiues, and comfortatiues. The diminutiues are either letting of blood, or purgation. As concerning the letting of blood which is vniuersall,Blood-letting respecting the whole body. Galen appointeth it to be ministred, in that melancholy which is within the veines, and throughout the whole habite of the bodie, and willeth that if the blood issuing shew fayre and thinne, that it bee stayed by and by: but in that melancholie which hath his seate in the braine, and which commeth of a colde and drie di∣stemperature, he hath forbidden it most expressely. The Arabians commend in the cure of this kinde of melancholie,Blood-letting respecting some particu∣lar parts. the letting of blood called particular, to the taking away of the conioyned cause: they open the veines of the forehead, of the nose, and of the eares; they set cupping-glasses vpon the shoulders, hauing first scarified the place; they apply horseleaches vpon the head, and in all melancholike diseases, whether essentiall or accidentall; they cause the hemorrhoides to be opened, hauing the eleuenth Apho∣risme of the sixt booke for their ground and warrant, which saith, that in melancholike and mad men the varicous tumour or he∣morrhoides appearing, doe heale the same: but all these particu∣lar openings of a veine haue no place in the beginning of this disease.Purging. Wee must begin with that other kinde of euacuation, which is purgation. It may bee performed by the often vsing of Clister, Decoctions, Syrupes, and Opiates: the forme of an ordi∣nary Clister for melancholike persons, shall be such as followeth. Take of the rootes of Holihocke one ounce, of the leaues of Mal∣lowes, Mercurie, Clister. Violets, and Hops, of each a great handfull; of
Anise and Linseede, of each two drammes, of Damaske prunes one dozen, of the flowers of Borage and Violets, and of Barlie a handfull: boyle all together in cleere water, and straine them; adde thereto afterward of Cassia an ounce, of Catholicon halfe an ounce, of oyle of Violets two ounces, and as much of honie of Ro∣ses: make thereof an ordinary Clister.A potion mi∣noratiue. The Arabians vse in the disease of melancholie, pilles of Aloes of Hiera, and of Lapis lazu∣lus: but I doe not so well like of this forme as of the liquide: it were better therefore to vse decoctions. This potion may serue in the beginning for a minoratiue. Take of Licotice halfe an ounce, of Polypodie of the oke three drammes, of Borage, Buglosse, Balme, and Hoppes, of each halfe a handfull, of Anise and Citron seede, of each adramme, of orientall Sene three drammes, of the three cordiall flowers a pugill, boyle them all: take of this de∣coction foure ounces, and infuse therein of Rubarbe a dram and a halfe: after the straining of it, dissolue therein of the syrupe of Ro∣ses an ounce, and of the syrupe of Apples as much: make thereof a decoction, which you must take in the morning, and keepe your chamber. There are some which take in the broth of a chicken halfe an ounce of Sene: others an ounce of Cassia, or else the infu∣sion and expression of ten drams of Catholicum. The maner of preparing of the melancho∣like humour.This sleight purgatiue hauing gone before, the rest of the hu∣mour must bee prepared: for, to thinke of the rooting out of the preparing of whole at the first blow forcibly, (as the Emperickes doe) were to ouerthrow the sicke partie. Wee must attenuate, soften, and dis∣solue the same, and follow the precept of famous Hippocrates, which sayth in his Aphorismes, that when we will purge any bo∣die, we must first prepare it and make it fit to flow: for such pre∣paration there is good vse to be made of Iulebes and Apozemes. An ApozemeTake of the rootes of Buglosse and Elecampane, of the rindes of the rootes of Capers and Tamariske, of euery one an ounce, of the leaues of Borage Hops, Succorie, Fumitorie, Capillus Veneris, crops of Time and Balme, of each a handfull; of Anise, Fennell, and Citron feede, of each two drammes; of the three cordiall flo∣wers, of the flowers of Oranges and of Epithymum, of each a pu∣gill: boyle them all in fountaine water, and after you haue strained out a pound and a halfe, put thereto of the syrupe of Hops two
ounces, and as much of the syrupe of Fumitorie, and make thereof an Apozeme, clarifie it and aromatise it with a dram of the pow∣der of Cinamome, or of Electuarium de gemmis: it must be ta∣ken foure mornings together. Stronger meanes for the purging of this humour.The humour being thus prepared the bodie may be purged a∣gaine with the decoction before appointed, whereto you shall put of Catholicum, or else of Confectio Hamech, which purgeth melancholie very well: or ir you please, you may prepare an Apo∣zeme, which will purge euery second time it is taken: the same which is alreadie set downe will serue, if you boyle some orientall Sene and Polypodie in it. If this humour bee too rebellious, and that you cannot purge and auoide it by these benedicts and gentle remedies, you must bee forced to come to such as are stronger. Piolomeus the king vsed in rebellious melancholie Electuarium Hieralogadium: but the Hieras doe drie ouer much. The Ara∣bians commend the pilles of Lapi, lazulus, Pillulae Indae, pilles of Fumitorie, and those of Lapis armenus. There are some which make a powder for melancholike persons, and it is an excellent one.A purgatiue powder. Take of Lapis lazulus, well washed in Violet water, an ounce, of oriental Sene two ounces, of good Polypodie an ounce and a halfe, of Anise and Citron seede, halfe a dramme; of Sugar candie three ounces, of the foure cold seedes, two drammes; of the flowers of Elder-tree three drammes: make thereof a pow∣der; take thereof the waight of two French crownes. All, both Greeke and Arabian Phisitions, doe appoint in such diseases of melancholie,The vse of Hel∣lebor. as are old and hardly remoued, Hellebor should bee giuen. It is true indeede that wee must in this case vse discretion, and not to giue it in substance: for the decoction or infusion thereof must be taken, and choise made of that which is blacke and good: for the Apothecaries doe oftentimes sell for blacke Hellebor a kinde of Aconitum, which is very hurtfull and perni∣cious, the white is not to bee vsed at all in these cases: there must also diligent care be had not to mixc any thing with the Helle∣bor wee vse, which hath any astringent or binding facultie, such as are Mirabolanes, least thereby it might bee staied too long in the stomacke. The Poets that haue written long agoe, haue ac∣knowledged this propertie of Hellebor that it hath against me∣lancholike
diseases, when as they send melancholike persons vnto Anticyra where the best Hellebor groweth: and in Homer in his second Odissea, Melampus a great Phisition is brought in hea∣ling the foure daughters of king Pretus with Hellebor, who because they would bee equall in beautie to Iuno, were for a iust punishment of their arrogancie and pride, made fooles. Some there bee which vse Antimonie prepared:Antimonie. but all such forcible meanes must be prescribed aduisedly and with discretion. I could like it better to vse milder things, and to reiterate them the oftner, as a good magistrall syrupe, or else some Opiate.A magistrall syrupe. The syrupe may be made of the iuyces of Borage, Buglosse, and Apples, with some Sene: or else you may vse the syrupe of the Apples of Sabor the king. There may an Opiate be made after this fashion. Take of good Cassia drawne in the vapour of the decoction of Mal∣lowes, an ounce and a halfe: or (if you will haue it somewhat stronger) in the vapour of the decoction of black Hellebor, for so it will retaine some little part of the force & vertue thereof: after∣ward take of Tamarisk an ounce, of Catholicum sixe drams, of Se∣ne halfe an ounce, & as much of Epithymū, 3. drams of good Ru∣barbe besprinkled with the water of Endiue, vntill it become soft and relenting: incorporate all together, and mingle them with the syrupe of Violets or Apples, and make thereof an Opiate: whereof you shall take euery fiue daies in forme of a bole, the quantitie of an ounce more or lesse, according to the effect and working thereof. And thus much of purgatiues. Alteratiue me∣dicines.The second kinde of remedies is such as doth alter the melan∣cholike humor, that is to say; which doth take away the distempe∣rature therof. This humour offendeth in coldnes and drines, but more in drienes, & this is that very qualitie which maketh it so re∣bellious, & hardly to be remoued: the alteration of it thē doth consist in the moistning of the same.That there is more good done by moy∣stening then by purging of the melancho∣like humour. Galen in his third booke of diseased parts, as also Trallianus do make more accompt of these alteratiues, then they do of the diminutiues, & do confidētly pro∣fesse to haue cured moe melancholike persons by moystening the humours then by purging of it. This moystening is accomplished by inward and outward meanes: the inward are brothes, apo∣zemes, syrupes. I haue sometime caused a melancholike man to
vse for a long time together the broth of a chicken, with Borage Buglosse,Brothes. Succorie, Burnet, and a little Saunders, and Sassefras, which I caused to be added thereto: whereupon hee found him∣selfe exceedingly well amended. The sympe of Apples, Buglosse, Hops,Syrupes. and Violets doe macerate this humor in very good sorte: You may prepare an apozeme with the same hearbes which I haue mentioned here aboue. The vse also of Whay, and Goats or Asses milke will serue well to water and moisten this humour withall. Outward re∣medies.The outward remedies are either vniuersall or particular; the vniuersall are bathes. Galen boasteth himselfe to haue cured ma∣ny melancholike persons with the onely vse of baths of warme water,Bathes. or else you may if the whole body bee very drie, and the skinne very rugged, make an artificiall one with the rootes of Holibocks, leaues of Mallowes, Violets, Lettuses & Succorie, with the seedes of Melons and Gourds, Barley, and the flowers of Vio∣lets: you must bathe oft, and stay long in at a time, but not so long as to cause any sweate. At the time of being in the bath you may haue two bags filled with sweete and bitter Almonds, and the seede of Melons, grosly pownded, and therwith rubbe all the skinne ouer. If you wil make your bath well, you must put warme water in your bathing tub ouer night, and there let it stand and breath till morning,Ointments for the whole bo∣die. at which time you shall go into it. There be many practicioners in Phisicke which make such baths of milke only, as also it is oftentimes done in the case of consumption. In comming forth of the bath, there are some which inioine the body to be annointed al ouer with the oile of sweete Almonds, Violets, or new & fresh butter.Applying of remedies vnto the head. There are which applie remedies vnto the head as being the part most affected, and they vse such as doe moi∣sten, whether they be lotionsor embrocations, and these made of warme water, and of the same decoctions, or else of the oyles of the seede of Gourdes, sweete Almonds, and Violets, or else of milke. Comforting medicines.The third kinde of remedies good in melancholike cases, is of such as doe strengthen and cheere vp the spirits, which are (as A∣uicen saith) become wilde and duskish. It behooueth therefore to strengthen the braine, and to cheere vp the heart: the which in∣tentions
are effected by inward and outward meanes: the inward Sytupes, Opiates, Lozenges and pouders:Inward remedies. the outward are Epithemes, bags and ointments. I will giue you an example of each of them:An excellent Syrope. The fittest syrupe that I haue found both for the cheering and moistening of melancholike persons, is this, which I am about to set downe, being first inuented by Mounsieur Castel∣lane mine vncle, and one of the greatest and happiest Phisitions of his time, and ordinarily imployed in his calling by Kings and Queenes. Take of the iuice of Borage and Buglosse a pound and a halfe, of the iuice of apples that are very sweete a pound, of the iuice of Balme halfe an ounce, of Diers graines infused in the for∣mer iuices a long time, and after strained out, three drammes; of Saffron halfe a dramme, of fine Sugar two pounds: make these in a syrupe boyled to his height, and aromatize it with a dramme and a halfe of the powder of the Diamargaritum that is cold, and foure scruples of the powder of Diamber, there must be taken of it euening and morning two or three spoonefull. There are many sorts of Opiates, but I will content my selfe to set down this one. Take of the Conserue of the rootes of Buglosse,Opiates. and of the flowers of Borage, of each one ounce, of preserued Mi∣rabplanes, and of the rindes of Citrons condited, of each halfe an ounce, of the confection of Alkermes three drammes, of the pow∣ders of Diamargariton and of the Electuarie of precious stones, of each one dramme: make thereof an Opiate with the syrupe of Apples, whereof you must take a little in the morning, drinking after it some Claret wine delayed with the water of Buglosse. I will set downe some receipts of lozenges and powders in the chapter intreating of that melancholie which is begot amōgst the bowels and called the flatuouse or windie melancholie. Outward re∣medies for the cheering vp of the spirits.The outward remedies are applied vnto the braine and heart. Vnto the braine there are applied powders, and caps. But in as∣much as the greatest part of these aromaticall things are hote and drie, we must vse them but sparinglie. Vnto the heart wee may more boldly applie Epithemes, Bags, and ointments.An Epitheme for the heart. Take of the waters of Borage and Buglosse, of each halfe a pound, of the wa∣ters of Balme and Scabiouse of each foure ounces, of good white wine two ounces, of the powder of colde Diamargaritum one
dramme, of the confection of Alkermes three drammes, of the seede of Balme, and Diers graines, of each one dramme; mixe al together, and make Epithemes thereof and applie them to the re∣gion of the heart with a piece of scarlet. If liquid Epithemes dis∣like you, then you may vse a solide one, with the cordiall con∣serues, or else you may weare bags vpon the region of your hart; the descriptions whereof I leaue vntill I come to the chapter of windie melancholie, where they shall come in more fitly for the purpose, in asmuch as those which are troubled with the windie melancholie, haue almost continually the panting and beating of the heart. And thus much for the three kinds of remedies, which are (in my mind) needful for the curing of that melancholy which is setled in the braine, being purgatiues, alteratiues, and comfor∣tatiues. The means to remedie too much watch∣fulnes.There remaineth as yet vnremoued a tedious and trouble some accident which is continuall watching, which now and then whippeth melancholike men so cruelly, as that therby many haue bene plunged into the pit of despaire. Wherefore I will addresse my selfe with all the best wits I haue or deuises I can inuent to set downe the meanes of their comfort.Inward means to procure sleepe. Sleepe is procured by in∣ward and outward meanes. We will haue diuers sortes of the in∣ward, because melancholike persons doe loue varietie. We shall make for them mundified barlie, a Condite, an Opiate, a Tart, a Restauratiue, a Potion, a bole, and masse of pils: all giuen to pro∣cure sleepe.A mundified barley. The mundified barley is made with the flowre of barley prepared as is meet, with Almonds which haue been infu∣sed in Rose water, with the foure cold seeds, the seeds of Poppie, & rosed Surgar.A Condite. The forme of the condite shalbe such. Take of the conserues of the flowers of Borage and Buglosse, of each three drammes, of the pulpe of Gourds confected and of the rindes of Citrons, of each two drammes, of white Poppie and Mellon seedes, of each a dramme, of rosed Sugar so much as is needfull: make thereof a condite, whereof you shall take at night two or three, spoonefuls.An Opiate. The Opiate shall be thus made. Take of the conserues of the pulpe of Gourds, and of the rootes of Lettuse, of each an ounce; of the conserue of Roses and Water-lillie, of each halfe an ounce; of the powder of the colde Diamargaritum a
dram, of Poppie seede two scruples: make thereof an Opiate with the syrupe of Violets. Of this you must take at night the quā∣titie of a chestnut. For varietie sake you may make a Marchpane.A Marchpane. Take of sweete Almonds blanched and washed in hot water, and afterward infused in Rosewater, a pound and a halfe; of white Poppie seede very new and well mundified, three ounces; of fine Sugar two pound: worke them into a paste, and with the water of Roses make a Marchpane: of this you shall take when you go to sleepe. There are in like maner resumptiues,Restauratiues. or restauratiues of a liquide forme. Take the white of a good Capon, of water of Roses and Water-lillies, of each a quart; of Buglosse, Purcelane, and Sorrell waters, of each foure ounces; of the powder of colde Diamargaritum, two drammes: distill all these together in Ma∣ries bath. The potion may be prescribed after this maner.A Potion. Take of the syrupe of Violets, Apples and Poppie, of each halfe an ounce, of the powder of Diamargaritum, a scruple: make hereof a potion with the decoction of Lettuses and Endiue. And for such as may delight in a bole, this which followeth may serue.A Bole. Take of the conserue of Roses three drams, of Requies Nicolai, one dram: and with a little Sugar make a bole. Orelse: Take of the conserue of the flowers of red Poppie two drammes,Pilles. of new Treacle one dram, and with a little Sugar make a bole. If pilles be in request, then let there be made as followeth. Take of the pilles of Hounds∣tongue, or of Styrax, one scruple, let them bee moystned with the syrupe of Apples. The Chymists make a Laudanum. But in the vse of all these stupefactiue medicines taken inwardly, wee must take heed to deale with very good aduise, for feare that in stead of desiring to procure rest vnto the sillie melancholike wretch, wee cast him into an endlesse sleepe. Outwarde meanes to pro∣cure sleepe.The outward remedies are not altogether so dangerous, and wee may frame tenne or twelue sorts of them: as head powders, frontlets, bags, emplasters, oyntments, epithemes, nosegaies, po∣manders, and lotions for the legs. Take of the flowers of red Pop∣pie and red Roses, of each three drams; of Lettuse,A powder. Purcelane and white Poppie seede, of each two drams; of red Saunders and the seede of Coriander prepared, of each a dramme and a halfe: make them all into powder, and cast it vpon the head, the haire being
shaued.A Frontlet. Of the them same powder may a Frontlet bee made, putting thereto of the flowers of Water-lillies and a little Margerome. You may make great bagges after the fashion of pillowes,Bags. which shall be filled with the flowers of Roses, and the leaues and seedes of white Henbane.An Epitheme. You may applie this Epitheme vnto the head. Take of the distilled waters of Lettuse, Sorrell and Roses, of each three ounces; of the powder of cold Diamargaritum one dram; of red Roses and red Saunders two scruples: make thereof an E∣pitheme. Let the oyntment bee like vnto this.An oyntment. Take of populeon halfe an ounce, and as much of Galens colling oyntment; of oyle of Roses an ounce, mixe all together with a little vineger, and ther∣with annoynt the head, browes and nostrils. You may also make this plaister.An Emplaister Take of Castoreum a dram and a halfe, of Opium half a scruple: mixe both together with a little water of life, and make two small plaisters thereof, and applie them to the temples. You may make Nosegaies of flowers of Violets,Nosegaies. Roses, of Willowe and a little Margerome, they must be dipped in rosed vineger, and in the juyce of Lettuse and Poppie, wherein a little Opium and Camphire hath been dissolued. Or else: Take two heads of Pop∣pie beat together,Nodules. tye them vp in three nodules or knots: then ha∣uing in readines of Styrax three drams, of Rose water sixe ounces, and a little Opium: dip these nodules in the licour, and smell vnto them oftentimes.A pomander. There may also an Apple be made to smell vnto. Take of the seede of Henbane, of the rinde of the rootes of Man∣drags, of the seede of Hemlocke, of each one dram, of Opium a Scruple, of the oyle of Mandrags a little: mixe all these with the iuyce of Fumitorie and Houseleeke, and make an apple thereof: which if you smell vnto, it will cause you now and then to sleepe: put vnto these to correct them a little Amber and Muske. There are some which with good successe doe applie Horseleaches be∣hinde the eares,Blood suckers or horselea∣ches. and hauing taken away the Horseleaches, they put by little and little a graine of Opium vpon the hole. Lotions for the legs.Lotions for the legges doe much auaile to cause one to sleepe. Take of the leaues of the Orange tree, and of Margerome, of each a good handfull; two heads of white Poppie, of Roses, and Wa∣terlillie flowers, and Camomill, of each a pugill, boyle them all together in two parts of water, and one of white wine: and here∣with
you must wash the thighes and legges of the sicke partie at night, letting it be good and hot. I thinke that by this meanes you may procure sleepe vnto the most melancholike man in the world. It is true, that, to preuent that these cooling things may not altogether quench that small store of naturall heate that is in them, you must cause them to take now and then some cordiall Syrupes, or comfortable Opiates. And thus much for the cure of that melancholie which chiefly affecteth the braine. That melan∣cholie which commeth of a drie distemperature of the whole bo∣die, is cured almost by the same helpes. I come therefore vnto the windie melancholie: but because there is one kinde of this essen∣tiall melancholy, which happeneth through raging and fond loue, and that it requireth a speciall maner of curing, I will first speake of the same. CHAP. X. Of another kinde of melancholie which commeth by the extremitie of loue. THere is another kinde of melancholie verie ordinarie and common, which the Greeke Phisitions call Erotike,The names of amourous me∣lancholie. because it commeth of a furie and raging loue; the Arabians call it Iliscus, and the common sort, the diuine Passion; imputing the cause thereof to the pettie god, which the Poets haue made so great reports of. Cadmus Milesius (if we may credit Suydas) hath written foureteene great volumes of this subiect, which are not at this day to be found: I will onely make two chapters of it, the one describing the maladie, the other the remedies. I will not here curiously search out the crimologie of loue, and why this name Eros was giuen vnto it; neither will I vndertake to define it, seeing very famous and worthie men haue taken the worke vpon them, but haue not brought it to any good end: neither will I examine the differences or royal discent of the same, let them that list, reade what Plato, Plotinus, Iohannes Picus comes Mirandolae, Marius
Equicola, and Leon Hebraeus haue written thereof: I will satisfie my selfe with the reuailing of one of those thousand effects which it bringeth forth. I intend to manifest vnto euery man by the de∣scription of this melancholie, how greatly a violent and extreame loue may tyrannize in commanding both minde and bodie. How loue is begotten.Loue therefore hauing abused the eyes, as the proper spyes and porters of the mind, maketh a way for it selfe smoothly to glaunce along through the conducting guides, and passing without any perseuerance in this sort through the veines vnto the liuer, doth suddenly imprint a burning disire to obtaine the thing, which is or seemeth worthie to bee beloued, setteth concupiscence on fire, and beginneth by this desire all the strife and contention: but fearing her selfe too weake to incounter with reason, the principal part of the minde, she posteth in haste to the heart, to surprise and winne the same: whereof when she is once sure, as of the strongest holde, she afterward assaileth and setteth vpon reason, and all the other principall powers of the minde so fiercely, as that she sub∣dueth them, and maketh them her vassals and slaues. Then is all spoyled,The effects of violent loue. the man is quite vndone and cast away, the sences are wandring to and fro, vp and downe, reason is confounded, the i∣magination corrupted, the talke fond and sencelesse; the sillie lo∣uing worme cannot any more look vpō any thing but his idol: al the functions of the bodie are likewise peruerted, he becometh pale,Signes and to∣kens of amo∣rous melan∣cholie. leane, souning, without any stomacke to his meate, hol∣low and sunke eyed, and cannot (as the Poet sayth) see the night either with his eyes or breast. You shall finde him weeping, sob∣bing, sighing, and redoubling his sighes, and in continuall restles∣nes, auoyding cōpany, louing solitarines, the better to feed & fol∣low his foolish imaginations; feare buffeteth him on the one side, & oftentimes dispayre on the other; he is (as Plautus sayth) there where indeede he is not; sometime he is as hot as fire, and vpon the sudden he findeth himselfe as colde as ice: his heart doth al∣waies quake, and his pulse keepeth no true course, it is little, vne∣quall, and beating thicke, changing it selfe vpon the sudden, not onely at the sight, but euen at the very name of the obiect which he affecteth.The historie of Erasistratus. By all these tokens the great Phisition Erasistratus perceiued the disease of Antiochus the sonne of Seleucus the king,
who was readie to dye for the loue of Stratonica his mother in law. For seeing him to blush, to waxe pale, to double his sighes, and change his pulse so oft at the very sight of Stratonica, he dee∣med him to bee troubled with this eroticke passion; and so aduer∣tised his father. Galen by the very same wile did finde out Insta the wife of Boetius Consull of Rome her sicknes and disease, as that it was her burning loue she bare to Pylades. Loe here the ef∣fects of this affection, and all such accidents as accompanie this a∣morous melancholie. Let no man therefore hereafter call it a di∣uine and sacred passion, if it bee not onely to signifie the greatnes thereof: for the Poets would call the greatest fishes, sacred, and the Phisitions haue giuen the same name vnto that bone, which is the greatest of all the vertebres. Neither let any man call it the sweete passion or affection, seeing of all other miseries, this is the greatest miserie, yea so great as that all the tortutes which haue bin so exquisitely deuised by the wit of tyrants, wil neuer be able to exceed ye crueltie therof.The crueltie of loue. The Philosopher Thianeus knew well what to say to the K. of Babylon, which praied him to inuent some cruel torment for the punishing of a gentleman whō he had found in bed with his paramour: for (sayth he) let him liue, and in time his loue will punish him sufficiently. The Poets haue very well layd open vnto vs the crueltie of this passion, in that their fained fable of Titius:The fable of Titius. who for his exceeding loue vnto the Goddesse Latona, is fained to haue his liuer ordinarily fed vpon by two gry∣phens, and the fibres thereof euery day to grow againe. But how should we not call this a miserable passion, seeing it hath brought many to such extremitie and dispayre, as that they haue killed themselues. Lucretius the Poet who had written the cure of loue,Of such as haue killed themselues for loue. became so mad of loue, as that for it he slew himselfe. Iphis in dis∣payre to winne the fauour of Anaxaretes, hanged her selfe. A noble young man of Athens fell so farre in loue with a marble picture that was very cunningly wrought, as that hauing reque∣sted of the Senate that hee might buy it at any price that they would aske, and being denied, as also forbidden to come neere vnto it, for that his foolish loue did offend all the people: ouer∣come of dispayre he slew himselfe. See here how loue corrup∣teth the imagination, and may bee the cause of melancholie or of
madnes. For in thus busying both the bodie and minde, it so dri∣eth the humours, as that the whole frame of temperature, especial∣ly that of the braine, is ouerthrowne and marred. A second kind of amourous melancholie.There is another kind of amorous melancholy, which is a great deale more pleasant, as when the imaginations is in such sort cor∣rupted, as that the melancholike partie alwaies thinkes, that hee seeth that which he loueth, running after it continually, and kissing this his idoll in the ayre, daintily intertaining and welcomming it as though it were present: and, which is strange, howsoeuer the thing which he loueth bee ill fauoured, yet he thinketh it the most beautifull in the world:The descrip∣tion of perfect beautie. he is alwaies in hand with the deciphe∣ring of the rare beautie therein, he seemeth to himselfe to see long golden lockes, finely friseled and curled with a thousand roundes and winding twirles; a high brow, like vnto the bright heauens, white and smooth, like the polished Alablaster; two starres stan∣ding in the head very cleere, resembling the beautifull flowers and sufficiently defended, casting out in most sweete sort a thousand louely streames which are as pearcing arrowes; eyebrowes black as the Ebene wood, little and arched like a bow; a paire of cheekes of white and vermillion colour, like vnto the purple lillie and da∣maske rose, shewing in their sides a little double trench; a mouth of corall, hauing within it two sets of small orientall pearle, white and close joyned, and comming out of it a breath more sweete then Amber and Muske, and more fragrant then all the odours of Mount Libanon; a chin, hauing a little round pit, of an vniforme dye, delicate and smooth as the which Satten; a necke of milke; a throte of snow; a bosome full of gelliflowers; two little apples like alablaster balles, white puffed vp are apt to quiuer like a quaiemire, though afterward by little & little they falling downe all flat, doe resemble the flowing and the ebbing of the Sea; in the middest therof two knobs of greenish and carnation-like colour, and betwixt this little paire of mountaines a large valley; a skin ouer all the bodie like a Iasper or Porphirie, in the viewing wher∣of doe appeare many pretie azuie veines. To bee short, this poore melancholike man goeth alwaies imagining and dreaming that the sixe and thirtie beauties requisite vnto perfection are therein, and that with such a grace and stately maiestie, as surpasseth al the
rest; he doteth continually vpon this obiect, runneth after his sha∣dow, and is neuer at rest. There are now some certaine yeares past, since I saw a gentleman ouertaken with this kinde of melancho∣lie, he talked being alone vnto his shadow, he called it, welcomed it, kissed it, ranne after it euery day, and would aske vs if euer wee saw so faire and beautifull a thing: and this his disease did thus hold him for three moneths, and afterward he was curred thereof. Aristotle maketh mention of a young man named Antiphon, which saw his owne picture continually before his eyes. Some there are which attribute this to the reflexion of the beams which went out of his eyes: but I thinke rather that it was the weakenes and error of his imagination. CHAP. XI. The meanes to cure the loue-foolish and melancholike. Two waies to cure this dis∣ease.THere are two waies to cure this amourous me∣lancholie: the one is, the inioying of the thing be∣loue: the other resteth in the skill and paines of a good Phisition. As concerning the first, it is cer∣taine that the principal cause of the disease which is this burning desire, being taken away, the dis∣eased partie will finde himselfe marueilously relieued, though not∣withstanding there may remaine behinde some certaine prints and skarres in the bodie.Histories. The first. So Erasistratus hauing discouered vnto Seleucus the griefe of his sonne Antiochus, who was like to dye for the loue of his mother in law, saued the life of the young man: for the father hauing compassion vpon his sonne, and seeing him in extreme perill of his life, suffered him (as being a Pagan) to in∣ioy the vse of his owne wife.The second. Diogenes hauing a sonne forciblie and ragingly distracted by vnbrideled lust, was constrained (after he had consulted with the oracles of Apollo) to suffer him to inioy his best beloued, and by this meanes to heale him.The third, and that very plea∣sant. I haue in times past read a pleasant historie of a young man of Egypt, who suffe∣red extreame pinching gripes, for the loue of a Curtisane called
Theognis, and yet was not regarded of her, as one that stood vpon an excessiue summe of siluer. It happened that this miserable loue∣slaue dreamed on a night, that hee held his mistresse in his armes, and that she was altogether at his commund: whereupon when he a waked, he wel perceiued that this inward fire which whilome fed greedily vpon him, and thereby about to consume him, was become cold & vtterly quenched, so that he sought not any more after the Curtisane: who when she was aduertised of the whole matter as it stood, caused the young man to bee called before the seate of Iustice, alleaging for such her fact, this only reason, name∣ly that she had healed him. Bochor the Iudge did by and by ap∣point that the yong man should bring a purse full of crownes, and powre them forth into a basen, that thereby Curtisane might pay her selfe of the ringing sound and colour of the crownes, as he had satisfied himselfe of the sole imagination. The sentence was well like of all, excepted onely the cape Curtisane Lamia, which shewed vnto her friend Demetrius, that the dreame had vtterly quenched and taken away all maner of Iust from the young man, but that the sight of the gold had inflamed and increased a great deale more Theognis her desire, and that for this cause the matter was not equally proceeded in. My purpose in alleadging these three histories, is to shew that this rage and furie of erotike loue, may be staied by the inioying of the thing beloued. But this course of cure being such as neither ought nor can alwaies be put in pra∣ctise, as being contrary vnto the lawes of God and men, we must haue recourse vnto the other which dependeth vpon the industrie of the good Phisition.The second way to cure the amorous melancholie. Faire words and cunning speeches. If therefore it happen vnto any Phisition to meete with some of these melancholike patients, thus rauished of loue, hee must first of all assay to draw him with fayre words from these fond and foolish imaginations, shewing him the dan∣ger whereinto he doth cast himselfe headlong, and setting before him the examples of such as haue been ouerthrowne thereby, as not onely losing their liues, that their soules also. If all this doe no good, wee must by some other wile, and by the setting a worke of diuers men, striue to make him hate that, which so tormenteth him, as in affirming the thing to bee euill, in calling his mistresse, light, inconstant, foolish, deuoted to varietie, mocking and laugh∣ing
to scorne this his griefe and corrasiue, disdainfull as not ac∣knowledging his deserts, and one which loueth better a base com∣panion to glut her brutish lust, then to intertaine an honest and chast loue. And looke how deeply you dispraise his Ladie, so highly shall you praise himselfe, declaring the excellencie of his vnderstanding, his worthines and deserts. If words be not sufficient and able to cure this inchauntment, as in very deede they can doe very little in place where melancholike conceitednes hath taken roote, wee must bethinke our selues of some other course. Remouing, that is to say, the chaunging of the ayre,Change of ayre. is one of the rarest remedies, because that vnder colour of that wee may bestow him in some remote place, and send him quite out of the countrie: for the sight of his mistresse doth daily blow vp the coles of his desire, and the only reciting of her name, serueth as a baite for his ardent affections to bite vpon. It will bee good for him,Exercises. to lodge in the fields, or in some pleasant house; to cause him to walke often; to keepe him occupied euery houre with one or o∣ther pleasant pastime; to bring into his minde a hundred and a hundred sundrie things, to the end he may haue no leisure to think of his loue; to carrie him out a hunting; to the fenceschoole; to holde him vp sometimes with fine and graue stories; sometime with pleasant tales; and therewith to haue merrie musicke: you must not feede him too full or daintily, least the blood beginning to waxe hot, should rouse vp the flesh and thereby renew the olde fire. Take away idlenesse, take away bellie cheere, and quaffing of strong drinkes, and without doubt lecherie will fall starke lame. The Poets faigne that Ladie Lecherie could neuer insnare (not∣withstanding all her wiles and subtile inchauntments) these three Goddesses, Pallas, Diana, and Vesta: Pallas painteth out vnto vs the state of warriours; Diana of hunters; and Ʋesta of such as are giuen to fasting and austerenes of life. If all these plots, and an infinite number moe, set downe by Nigidius, Samocrates and Ouid in their bookes of the remedies of loue, proue nothing worth, and that the bodie bee fallen into such extremitie, as that it compelleth the minde to follow the temperature thereof: then
must wee hindle these amorous persons in such maner,The same course of Phi∣sicke is to be taken with these amo∣rous ones, and after which is ap∣pointed for the melancholike. and after the same order which I haue appoynted for the melancholike in the chapter going before, and almost with the very same remedies; wee must purge at sundrie times, and with gentle medicines the humour, which hath grauen such a drie distemperature in the braine; we must moysten him by vniuersall bathes, and by parti∣cularly applying of remedies vnto particular places, by an order of diet that is very moyst; you shall feede him with broths, with Al∣mond-milke, with mundified barley made into a creanie, & with the broth and milke of a kid. If watching doe oppresse him, then you shall make your choise out of such medicines as I haue set downe against it. You must also sometimes cheere vp the heart and the spirits with some cordiall Opiate.Diuelish and forbidden meanes. There are certaine re∣medies which the old writers haue set downe for the cuting of this raging loue, but they are diuelish, and Christians ought not to vse them. They cause the partie to drinke of the blood of him or her which is the object of the mischiefe, and doe warrant that the par∣ties griefe shall incontinently dye and decay.The historie of Faustina very strange to con∣sider. I haue read in Iu∣lius Capitolinus, that Faustina the wife of Marcus Aurelius con∣fessing her griefe, caused to be assembled all the Chaldeans, Magi∣cians, and Philosophers of the countrie, to haue a speedie and cer∣taine remedie for this her maladie: they in the end gaue counsaile to cause the teacher of defence secretly to bee slaine, and to cause his wife to drinke of his blood, and the same night himselfe to lye with her. This thing was accordingly put in practise, and Fausti∣na her fire was quenched: but so, as that of this fierie coniunction was ingēdred Antoninus Commodus, which was one of the most bloodie and cruell Emperours of Rome, resembling rather the swash buckler than his father, and which neuer stirred from a∣mongst the companie of masters of defence. See here how Sa∣tan vseth euery day his malicious crafts, and as it were a sea of de∣ceiuers and brasen faced fellowes, which goe about abusing the world.
CHAP. XII. Of the third kinde of melancholie, called the windie or flatuous melancholie, and of his differences. THere is a third kinde of melancholie, which is the sleightest and least dangerous of all the rest, but the most difficult and hard to be throughly knowne: for the greatest Phisitions doe make doubt of his essence, causes, and particular seate of residence; it is com∣monly called Hypochondriake or flatuouse,Why it is called the Hypochon∣driake or win∣die melan∣cholie. Diocles, his o∣pinion. because it hath his seate vniuersally in the region of the bodie, called Hypochondria: it is called the windie or flatuouse malancholie, because it is al∣waies accompanied with windines, Diocles supposed it to be an inflammation of Pylorus, which is the nether mouth of the ven∣tricle, because the partie affected doth feele himselfe greatly op∣pressed in that place, as also greatlie pained and swelled in the sto∣macke, enduring a vehement heate, and as it were a burning fire throughout his bellie, and much windines, which breaketh vp∣ward, with a waterishnes, which ordinarilie runneth out of the mouth, as if it were some humour flowing from the braine.Galen his opi∣nion. Ga∣len in his third booke of diseased parts, seemeth to approue this opinion, neuerthelesse it hath been confuted and reproued by all the later Phisitions: for that if it were an inflammation of the stomacke, it would be accompanied with a continuall seuer, and the disease would be sharpe, or of a shott crisis: but wee see the contrarie; for the Hypochondriake melancholie, is a diuturne dis∣ease, not iudged but in longtime, and seldome consorted with an ague. Theophilus thinketh that it is an inflammation of the liuer,Theophilus his opinion. and of the entrals: if he meane that it is a drie inflammation, cal∣led , his opinion is the better to be liked of, but if he vnder∣stand by inflammation, the tumour called Phlegmon, which is a swelling (caused of blood) against nature, it may be condemued in him as well as in Galen for that euery Phlegmon of the liuer and guts, is counted in the number of sharpe diseases.The difinition of the Hypo∣chondriake disease. The most lear∣ned Phisitions of our time, haue defined the Hypochondriake me∣lancholike,
to be a drie and hote distemperature of Mesenterium, the liuer and spleene, caused by an obstruction, comming of grosse humours, which being heated, doe breath abroad many vapours, which cause al such accidents as we wil speake of in the next chap∣ter. This definition contayneth all the essence of the Hypochondri∣ake melancholie, in as much as it toucheth and teacheth the partsThe parts af∣fected in this disease. The midriffe. and the causes of the disease. The partes where the Hy∣pochondriake melancholie is begotten, are the Mesenterium, liuer and spleene: the Mesenterium hath a large compasse, for it contayneth a million of veines, an infinite number of glandules, and all that red substance which is called Pancreas. This Mesen∣terium, is as it were the mine of a million of diseases, and especial∣lie of intermitting agues. There may rest and grow hote, the hu∣mour causing the Hypochondriake melancholie, and that not a∣lone in the veines thereof, but oftentimes in the red substance, cal∣led Pancreas, which commeth very neere vnto the stomacke, and lieth vpon the gut Duodenum or Pylorus: and heereby may Dio∣cles and Galen be excused, which tooke the nether mouth of the stomacke for Pancreas, by reason that these two parts doe touch one another.The liuer. The other part where the Hypochondriake breedeth, is the liuer,That the Spleene is for the most part the seate of this disease. when it is much heated, and draweth from the ven∣tricle the meates therein, halfe disgested; or else burneth the hu∣mours very much, and keepeth them in his owne veines: but that part which procureth the Hypochondriake melancholie most of all, is the spleene in as much as nature hath made it for the purging of the blood of feculent and melancholike iuyce: in such sort as that, if it attract and draw not the same vnto it, or cleanse it not to nourish it selfe withall, or expell not that which is superfluous, as in dutie it ought: we neede not doubt, but that this grosse iuyce, casting it selfe into the next veines, doth there take an vnnaturall heate, and maketh a marueilous hurlie-burlie in the whole order of nature. Thus you may heere beholde and learne the parts af∣fected in Hypochondriake melancholie,The cause of the Hypo∣chondriake disease. that is to say, the Mesente∣rium, the liuer and the spleene. The cause of their disease, is an ob∣struction, for the veines of these parts are stuffed and filled of some kinde of humour. This humour is sometime simple, as onely a naturall melancholike humour, or a humour adust and made of blacke choler, or else a flegmatike and raw humour: sometimes
it is mingled of two or three together, which falleth out a great deale more oft, but alwaies it is required, that this humour should growe into some excessiue heate, for to cause the Hypochondriake disease to arise thereof. If the matter be cholericke or adust, it is quicklie and easilie set on a heate, if it be colde by nature, as is fleagme and melancholie, the long continuance of it in that place, and the breathing of it out being hindred, may cast it into a heate, or else there neede no otherthing, but a little leauen (which will be supplied by a small portion of choler adust) to leauen the whole lumpe, and set it in a heate: this heate hath been called of olde writers , in such maner as that we may define the Hypo∣chondriake disease, to be a drie inflammation of the veines of Me∣senterium,The diuerse sorts of this disease. senterium, the liuer and spleene, rising of the suppressing of some grosse humours, from this definition we shall gather all the diffe∣rent sorts of the Hypochondriake disease: which are taken either from the part affected, or from the matter, or from the accidents thereof. If we looke vnto the parts affected, we shall finde three kindes of the Hypochondriake disease: that is, Hepatike, Sple∣netike, and Meseraicke.The Hepa∣ticke. The Hepaticke is caused through the fault of the liuer, which draweth by his excessiue heate, ouer∣great a quantitie of crudities from the stomacke, and also it selfe ingendreth through the same distemperature ouer hote humours, which it either retayneth in his owne veines, which are in so great number, as that no man can describe them, or else distri∣buteth them amongst all the braunches of the veine called Por∣ta. The Spleneticke commeth through defaulte in the Spleene,The Splene-t cke. when it cannot either attract, disgest or expell the melancho∣like humour. These defects happen when it is too great or too little; or when being puffed vp with winde, it cannot attract or retayne all the feculent and grosse part of the blood, where∣upon it must needes cast much of it out againe, and all the bo∣die growe leane. This is it which Hippocrates hath obserued very well in his Epidemikes, when hee saith, that they who haue a great Spleene, become leane of their bodie: and the Empe∣rour Traianus was wont to compare the Spleene vnto the Ex∣chequer: for looke how the inriching of the Exchequer is the im∣pouerishing and ruine of the people: euen so the greatnes of the Spleene, doth make a thin and leane bodie: the smalnesse also
of it comming through default of the framing facultie, may be an occasion of this accident: for being disabled thereby to attract or retaine all that melancholike humour which it ought, it is constrai∣ned to cast it vp againe, and to disperse it throughout all Messen∣terium. There is a house of great nobilitie, which is subiect vnto this Hypochondriake disease, there haue been three or foure of them which haue died at the age of thirtie fiue, and no other cause found of such vntimelie death, but onely the littlenes of the spleene, for it was so little and straite, as that it could not doe his office. The Mesente∣riacke.The last kinde of the Hypochondriake disease, is that which is called the Meseraicke, which is begotten either in Panchreas, or in the veines and glandules of the Meseraicke membrane. Hippo∣crates and many other Phisitions, do acknowledge an Hypochon∣driake disease, caused of the wombe or matrix, after the suppressi∣on of the tearmes, or some other matter: it causeth the same acci∣dents that the other, and is oftentimes most fierce and furious, be∣cause of merueilous sympathie which the matrix hath with all the rest of the parts of the bodie. The second difference.The second difference of the Hypochondriake disease, is in re∣spect of the matter: there is one kinde which is made of that me∣lancholie, which is colde and naturall, which keeping it selfe within the veines, and being there pinched for lacke of roome, groweth hote: another is caused of an adust and burnt humour; and the third of fleagme, and other raw crudities mixed with some small quantitie of choler.The last diffe∣rence. The last difference is taken from the accidents: for there is some kinde of Hypochondriake disease that is sleight and easie, and there is some other that is more chur∣lish and violent. There is some but young and in the beginning, and there is other some which is come to his state and perfited. CHAP. XIII. The signes of Hypochondriake melancholie, and the causes of all the accidents that accompanie it. The accidents of the Hypo∣chondriake disease com∣plete and come to his perfec∣tion.THe Hypochondriake disease being throughly growne and per∣fected, is commonly coupled with an infinite number of grie∣uous
accidents, which by times holde the partie with such pangs, as that they thinke to dye euery moment: for besides the feare and sadnes they suffer, as common accidents to all maner of melancholie, they feele a burning in the places called Hypochon∣dria, they heare continually a noyse and rumbling sound through∣out all their bellie, they are beaten with winde on both sides, they feele a heauines in their breast, which causeth them to fetch their breath double, and with a feeling of paine; oftentimes they spit a cleere and thinne water; they haue a swilling in their stomacke, as though it did swimme all in water; they feele an extraordina∣rie and violent kinde of mouing of the heart, called the beating of the heart, and on the side of the spleene, there is something which biteth and beateth continually; they haue some little cold sweats, accompanied sometimes with a little sowning; their face is of∣tentimes very red, and there appeareth to them in maner of a fly∣ing fire or flame which passeth away; their pulses doe change and become little and beating thicke; they feele a wearisomnes and feeblenes all ouer their bodie, and yet more specially in their legs; the bellie is neuer loose; in the end they grow leaner and leaner by little and little.The particular causes of all these accidents. The cause of heate. All these accidents depend vpon the generall cause which I haue set downe, but wee must therewithall search and finde out the speciall. The heate and burning which they feele on the spleene side, on the liuer side and about Mesenterium, commeth of the burning of this grosse humour, whether it bee flegme or blacke choler, which in this his heate comming as it were to boyle, is puffed vp and sendeth his vapours into all the parts neere thereabout. The noyse which they heare in euery part of their bellie,The cause of windines. commeth of the winde which doth runne to and fro in euery place, and doth so much accompanie this melancho∣like disease, as that for this cause old writers haue intituled it the windie melancholie: wee will obserue in the begetting of this windines the materiall and efficient cause. The materiall is a grosse, blacke, cholerike or flegmatike humour.The materiall▪ cause. These two hu∣mours are almost alwaies mixt in this disease, because that the li∣uer being ouerheated (as it is ordinarily in Hypochondriake per∣sons) attracteth and snatcheth from the stomacke, which is his very neere neighbour, such meates as are no better then halfe con∣cocted:
so that there is heaped together a world of crudities with∣in the veines by such attraction of the liuer: as also there is made a broode of hot and burnt humours by the distemperature of this noble part, in such maner as that thereby is caused to bee conti∣nually in the veines some humours that are raw and not suffici∣ently concocted, and other some that are ouer much concocted: the crude and scarse disgested was attracted too speedily, the ouer much concocted and burnt was begotten in the member it selfe. The weakenes of naturall heate is the efficient cause of windines,The efficient cause. for in mouing and stirring of the matter, it is not able to ouer∣come it throughly, and although the agent or naturall heat should be strong enough, yet not being like vnto the matter in propor∣tion, it may be called weake. The cause of heauines.The heauines which they feele in their breast, commeth either of winde or grosse vapours, which beare downe the muscle called Diaphragma, the principal muscle of respitatiō, or else they pitch themselues vpon the muscles running betwixt rib and rib; or lastly, within the coates of the ribs either inward or outward: and hence come those great tormenting paines which rise vp to the shoulders, and goe downe againe oftentimes vnto the armes, by the continued proceeding of the membranes, and sympathie of the muscles.The cause of the water and swilling which they haue within them. The water which melancholike persons doe or∣dinarily auoide at their mouth, is one of the most infallible tokens of the Hypochondriake disease, if wee will beleeue Diocles the cause thereof must be imputed vnto the coldnes of the stomack, which filleth all full of crudities. This coldnes commeth of the excessiue heate of the liuer, which draweth the chylous matter out of the stomacke altogether vnprepared, wasteth and consumeth all the fat of the stomacke, and seedeth rauenously like a gulligut vpon the heate of all the parts neere about it. I adde further, that oftentimes while the humour is neere vnto boyling, the crudest parts thereof are cast backe againe into the stomacke, and cooleth it, in such sort as that wee may obserue therein the two kindes of cold, that is to say, the priuatiue and the positiue, as the Philoso∣phers are wont to speake.The cause of the beating of the heart. The inordinate motion of the heart and all the arteries is caused of the vapour of this matter so stirred, which setting vpon the heart with great force, and seeking the o∣uerthrow
thereof, as commonly happeneth in euery conflict and fight, causeth it to bestirre it selfe with a double diligence, but so, as that therein it looseth oftentimes his iust and well proportioned stroke, and thereby the pulses also faile sometimes in that iust mea∣sure and time which they ought to keepe.The causes of the rednes and flushes appea∣ring in their face. The cause of their colde sweates. The rednes which ap∣peareth in the face, the vniuersall beatings ouer all the bodie, and the tickling stingings which they feele in euery place, as it were little Pissemires, ariseth either of a sharpe and subtile winde, or else of vapours sent from the lower parts. Colde sweates happen when the vapours rising from the places, called Hypochondria, as from a fournace doe pitch themselues vpon the skin, which is a great deale more colde, and therefore doth congeale and turne them into a thicker substance.The cause of their lassitude. The lassitude or wearisome feeble∣nes, which they feele in all their parts, commeth partlie of va∣pours, which running amongst the emptie spaces of the muscles, and mingling themselues with the substance of the sinewes, doe make them more loose and lanke, and make as it were a sence∣lesnes: and partlie of crudities and waterish parts, which are in the blood.The cause of their leanenes. Leanenes happeneth because there is defect and want of sufficient store of good and laudable blood. The bellie is hard and giuen to costiuenes, by reason of the excessiue heate of the liuer, which wasteth all the moisture of the excrements. CHAP. XIIII. Very worthie and not able histories of two persons grieued with the Hypochondriake disease. THere are found sometimes diseases so straunge in their kinde, as that euen the best able and most suf∣ficient Phisitions know not what to iudge of them. I haue feene two Hypochondriake persons so raging mad, as that the former ages neuer saw the like, and it may be the ages to come shall not see such other two of a long time.The first hi∣storie. There was at Mompelier an honest Citizen of a melan∣cholike disposition, and by constitution most subiect to blacke choler, who hauing been grieued by the space of two or three
yeares, with a milder and lighter kinde of windie melancholie, suffered the disease to growe so farre, as that at length he saw him∣selfe brought to this extremitie. He felt twise or thrise euery day a light kinde of mouing all ouer his bellie, but chiefely on the side whereupon the spleene lieth: there was also so great a noyse made in his bellie, as that not onely the sicke partie, but also all those that stoode by heard the same. This rumbling would last about halfe a quarter of an houre, and afterward vpon the suddaine, a vapour or winde seazing vpon the midriffe and the breast, did lye so wonderfullie heauie vpon him, and so accompanied with a drie cough, as that all men would haue thought him to haue beene short breathed. This accident being somewhat lesned, all the rest of the bodie was in such sorte shaken, that you would haue iudged it like vnto a ship tossed with a most raging storme: he heaued and set, and his two armes were seene to moue, as if they had in∣dured some conuulsion. In the end, these windes hauing coursed through his whole body, & ransackt euery part therof, brake forth with so great violence at the mouth, as that all those that stoode by were afraide, and then the fit ceasing, the sicke partie felt himselfe relieued. And yet this is not all, for two or three moneths before he died, he had euery day two or three little and light soundes, his heart fainted and fayled him by reason of an extreame great de∣sire that he had to pisse, and when he had pissed, became to him∣selfe againe: but the fiercenes of the sickenesse was so great, that the Soule in the ende was constrained to forgoe her lodging. I was called to the opening of the bodie, because that ordinarilie I had counselled him in his sickenes, together with one of my fel∣low Phisitions, Mounser Hucher Chancellour of our Vniuersi∣tie, whom I am willing for honour sake to name, and as knowing him to be one of the most learned and best practised Phisitions of our times. I found his breast halfe full of blacke and stinking water, therewith the left ventricle of the heart was all filled, and in the trunke of the great arterie, a man might see the same colour. At which time I calling to minde a notable place in Galen, in his sixth booke of diseased parts, I shewed vnto the companie, that the cause of these faintings, and of his earnest desire to pisse, came of this cursed humour, which hauing pained the heart, passed from
thence by the arteries vnto the reynes,A worthie ob∣seruation for the defence of Galen. and from thence vnto the bladder. It was my intent to stand vpon this by the waie, that so I may take occasion to defend Galen against the false accusations of young Phisitions, which thinke that putrified and purulent matter gathered in the breasts of those which are troubled with the disease Empyema and Pleurisies, cannot purge and conuay it selfe away by the heart or arteries. I haue handled this matter more largelie in the third booke of my Anatomicall workes. The second historie.The other historie is also very strange, I obserued it this winter at Towers, and was called to counsaile about the same, with Mounser Anselmeau, Valeseau and Vertunian, very learned Phisitions, and of great experience. A young Lord euer since he was eight or nine yeares olde, was troubled with this Hypochon∣driake disease: he heard euery day about nine of the clocke in the morning, a little noyse on his spleene side: afterward he perceiued avapour to rise which made all his breast and face red, and seazed the top of his head, the veines of his temples did beate very for∣ciblie, the veines of his face were puffed vp, and at the corners of his browes where the veines doe end, he felt an extreame paine, which passed not the breadth of a shilling, the rednes ran all along his left arme, euen vnto the fingers ends, and was like a Saint An∣thonies fire or cholerike tumour, called Erisipelas, the right side went altogether scorfree. All the time of the fit, he was so cast downe, as that he was not able to speake a word, teares trickeled downe his cheekes aboundantlie, and out of his mouth ran an in∣credible quantitie of water: without he burned, and within he was colde asyce: his left legge was all full of swolne veines; and that which I finde most strange; on the left side of the head, where the hard and rockie bone groweth, there was a peece of a bone carried and sunke somewhat inward, and that without any appa∣rant cause, as blow, or fall going before, neither could he suller one to touch him in that place: the disease hath hitherto been so re∣bellious, as that all the remedies which the best learned Phisiti∣ons haue appointed for him, could neuer finde the way to asswage and cure it. It was agreed vpon by all our consents,Or new reme∣dies deuised of our owne braines. that it should be impugned by extraordinarie remedies, and by inward cordi∣als, whereof wee haue not as yet heard what is the successe. See
how these grosse burnt, and melancholike humours, continuing in the veines of the liuer, spleene, and Mesenterium may cause an infiuite number of strange accidents, and are the occasion of a ve∣ry great iarre and strife, to the disturbing of all that good order and gouernement which should be in the whole bodie. CHAP. XV. The cure of the Hypochondriake disease. THere are necessarie for the curing of the Hypochon∣driake disease, two sorts of remedies. The one to be appoynted and vsed when the fit is not, and they are called preseruatiues: the other are to be vsed in the time of the fit, euen then when the partie is haunted of all these accidents: but I will begin with the former. The pre∣seruing of a man from this disease,To preserue a man from the Hypochondri∣ake diseease. Euacuating medecines. Blood letting. is attempted by three kindes of remedies, namely, Diminutiues, Alteratiues, and Corrobora∣tiues. The Diminutiues are letting of blood and purging: vni∣uersall Phlebotomie may serue to correct the hote distemperature of the liuer, and to emptie away some part of melancholike blood; it must be done vpon the Basilike veine, which the Ara∣bians call the blacke veine. The opening of particular veines, as the Hamorrhoids is counted amongst the number of the most fa∣mous and sure remedies for the cure of the Hypochondriake, in as much as they emptie the spleene, and all the Meseraicke mem∣brane. There are some which praise the opening of that veine which goeth to the little finger of the left hand, which is called Saluatella.Furging. The other diminutiue is performed by purgation, which must not be strong, least this humour should growe more fierce. You must purge therefore very gentlie, and at seuerall times. The purgations must be such as purge fleagme and melan∣cholie, because these are the two humours which doe most of∣fend: Sene and Agaricke haue the chiefe and principall place. I haue described in the chapter of the first melancholie, the receipts of many purgations which may serue heere in this place, but for as much as the humour causing the windie melancholie, is com∣pound,
pound, we must beforced to set downe some other fort.A magistrall Syrupe. I like and approue of magistrall syrupes and Opiates greatly, and they may be framed after this fashion. Take the rootes of Buglosse and As∣peragus, the rindes of the rootes of Capers-tree and Tamariske, of each an ounce, the rootes and leaues, of Succorie, Borage, Buglosse, Hops, Fumitorie, Ceterach, Maidens haire, of each a Handfull, of Sea wormewood and Balme a pugill, of Licorise and Corans washt in warme water, of each an ounce, of the seedes of Citrons, blessed Thistle and Endiue, of each two drammes, of the three cordiall flowres, of the flowers of Succorie, of the crops of Tyme and Epythymum, of each a pugill, boyle them all in a suffi∣cient quantitie of cleere water, and hauing strained it well, take two pintes thereof, and adde thereto of the infusion of orientall Sene, made in the former decoction, with a dramme of Cloues, an ounce and a halfe of the infusion of Agaricke, made in the water of Minthes, with a scruple of Ginger, and with a sufficient quan∣titie of Sugar, boyle them all together, to the height of a syrupe, which you shall keepe for your ordinarie vse. Hereof you must take two ounces once euery moneth, or twise, with the broth of a Chicken, wherein are put Borage, Buglosse, Hops, and the Capil∣lar hearbes: you may make a syrupe with the iuyces of the same hearbes, and put thereto the same laxatiues.An Opiate. The Opiate that I haue set downe, may serue here, but it may be made of a far other fashion, which purgeth most gentlie. Take of the iuyce of Mer∣curie well purified, as much as shall neede, infuse therein for the space of foure and twentie howres, two ounces of Orientall Se∣ne, and causing them to boyle once, afterward straine them strongly, and after boyle the licour strained out, with Sugar, till it come to the forme of an Electuarie, whereunto you shall adde of Cassia new drawne out of the cane, two ounces, of Epithymum, halfe an ounce, of Cloues made in powder, two drammes, the mixing all well together, you shall make an Opiate whereof you may take halfe an ounce or more. They which cannot vse decoctions nor Opiates, shall take pils,The extraction of Sene to be made into pilles. made of the extract of Sene, Agaricke and Rubarbe, for other pilles are not so fit in this disease. Take of good Polypodie foure ounces, the rootes and leaues of Succorie, Buglosse, Fumitorie,
Hops, of each a handfull, of damaske Raisines a dozen, of the three cordiall flowers one handfull: make a decoction vnto a pint, and boyle therein two ounces and a halfe of Sene, of Epithymum sixe drammes, of good Agaricke halfe an ounce: all these hauing infused together one whole night, straine and presse them out ve∣ry strongly, putting thereto of good Rubarbe, which shall be infu∣sed in the foresayd decoction with a little Cinamome, halfe an ounce: afterward you shall put all this together vpon hote ashes, you shall thereupon drie them, til they come to a reasonable thick consistence, and then putting thereto of Epithymum three drams, you shall make all vp into a masse of pilles, which will purge very gently if you giue thereof at one time the quantitie of foure scru∣ples. And let these serue for gentle and easie purgations; only you may adde hereunto the often vse of Clisters, which may serue for the windie melancholie. But for as much as this humour is grosse, and for the most part lurking in the most inward veines, it is not very easie to purge it well, if it bee not first prepared: wee must come therefore vnto the second kind of remedies, which we haue called Alteratiues. Inward Alte∣ratiues.The alteration to be made must consist in moystning and ma∣king thin of this humour: this may bee done by inward and out∣ward remedies.Apozemes. The inward are Apozemes, which must be some∣what opening because of obstructions, and it must be looked vn∣to with great care, that they be not made with too hot a fire. It will bee very fit to make them of such hearbes as properly respect the liuer and the spleene, and amongst the rest wee must not forget Wormewood: for all good practitioners doe confidently affirme, that the onely decoction of Wormewood hath preserued an infi∣nite number of persons from the windie melancholie. It will not bee amisse to lay in steepe these grosse humours, and for the ope∣ning of the vessels to commaund to bee vsed the decoction of the roote China with a little Sassafras for the space of twelue or fifteene daies.The vse of the roote China. Broths. Broths that doe alter and moysten the humour, the maner of liuing and vse of milke will serue marueilously well for the pre∣paring and moystning of this drie humour. Outward alte∣ratiues.As concerning outward remedies, bathes for the whole bodie deserue to be most chiefly accounted of: there may fomentations
also bee applied to the spleene, and all ouer Mesenterium, as also oyntments and liniments. The fomentations must be mollifying, somewhat opening and making thinne or apt to attenuate, ha∣uing mixt therewithall some carminatiues or things to breake winde: the manner of making them is common enough. The oyles of Capers, bitter Almonds, Broome, Elder, Lillies,Of the berries. Camo∣mil, & Danewort berries, are most fit & proper. The last kind of remedies is of such as are corroboratiues,Comiortable medicines. for there are in this dis∣ease of the windie melancholie many parts that are much weak∣ned, hauing bin branded with this humor: as the hart, the stomack and the braine. The weakenes of the heart is caused through the beating and light faintings ofthe same; the weake stomacke fil∣leth all full of cruditie; the weakened braine causeth that the ima∣gination and reason are oftentimes troubled in this disease. Wee must therefore haue regard vnto these parts.Meanes to comfort the heart. An Opiate. The heart is streng∣thened by inward and outward meanes: the inward, are Opiates, Condites, and Lozenges. Take the conserue of the rootes of Bu∣glosse, and of the flowers of Borage, of each an ounce; of the flesh of Mirobalanes and of the rindes of Citrons confected, of each halfe an ounce; of the confection of Alkermes two drammes;Confectionis laetificantis. of Pearle and of the powder of Mirth, of each one dramme: make thereof an Opiate with the syrupe of Apples, whereof you must take twice or thrice euery weeke, with a little of the water of Bu∣glosse. Take of the powder of the electuarie of precious stones and of Mirth, of each a dram;Lozenges. of the confection of Alkermes halfe a dram; of Pearle & Emerald made in powder, of each one scruple; of Sugar dissolued in the water of Buglosse or Balme so much as needeth, make vp Lozenges of the waight of 3. drams: you must take hereof euening and morning twice or thrice euery weeke. For such as are more delicate and daintie, there are some that make confections of Muske.Musk-cordials. Take the third part of a Nutmeg confected, of the rindes of Citrons three drammes, and as much of Mirobalanes confected, of Ambergrise halfe a dramme, and as much of Muske, of Sugar the double quantitie of all the rest, and with the muscilage of Gumme Tragacanth drawne in the water of Buglosse make Muscardins. You must not often vse these hote
medicines in the Hypochondriake disease, for feare of mouing and enraging of the humour. Outward re∣medies. Liquide Epi∣themes.The outward remedies to fortifie the heart withall, are liquide and solide Epithemes, oyles, oyntments and bags. Take the wa∣ters of Buglosse, Balme and Roses, of each foure ounces; of white wine an ounce and a halfe; of Dyers graines, of cordiall flowers, of each a dram; of the powder of Diamargaritum and Diamber, of each halfe a dram; of Saffron halfe a scruple: mixe all together and make thereof Epithemes, which you shall applie vnto the heart.Solide Epi∣themes. Take of the conserue of the flowers of Borage, of Roses, and a Balme, of each two ounces, of the confection of Alkermes and of the Iacinth, of each two drammes, of the powder of precious stones and of Mirth, of each halfe a dramme: make thereof a so∣lide Epitheme in forme of a cataplasme, with the water of Balme, or of the flowers of Oranges, and this you shall spread vpon a peece of scarlet,Oyles. and apply it to the heart. Take the oyle of lesa∣min and of Costus one ounce, of Amber grise three graines, chafe therewith the region of the heart, or else prouide you some naturall Balme.An oyntment. Take of the flowers of Camomile, Rosemarie and O∣range tree, of each two drams, of Ziloaloe, of sweete Saunders, of each one dram, of the oyle of lesamin and naturall Balme, of each one ounce; of Amber and Muske sixe or seuen graines: make hereof an oyntment with a little white waxe, and annoynt there∣with the region of the heart.Bags. Take of the leaues of Balme, of the flowers of Borage and Buglosse of each halfe a handfull, of the rindes and seede of Citrons two drams, of the seede of Balme, Ba∣sill, and Cloues, of each a dram; of the powder of Pearle, Emerauld and lacynth, of each halfe a dram; of the bone of a Harts heart one dram, of red and yellow Saunders one dram, of good Amber foure or fiue graines: pound them all and make a stomacher of red taffata well quilted, and weare it ordinarily vpon the hart. Thus much concerning the proper remedies as well inward as outward for the strengthening of the heart, and taking away of such weak∣nes, as commonly happeneth to them that haue the windie me∣lancholie. Meanes for the strengthening of the stomackThe other part to bee strengthened is the stomacke, and to pre∣uent that it may not beget such great store of crudities, you shall
vse powders helping disgestion, and certaine oyles properly vsed in such cases for the annoynting thereof: The digestiue powder must not be too hot.A digestiue powder. Take of Anise and Fennell confected of each three drams, of the rindes of Citrons confected one dram, of pre∣pared Pearle and red Corall, of each one halfe a dram, of fine Ci∣namome two scruples, of rosed Sugar foure ounces: make them in powder, and take thereof a spooneful alwaies after your meate. Outwardly you may strengthen the stomacke,Meanes to be applied out∣wardly to the stomacke. by annoynting it with the oyle of Nutmeg, Spikenard, Wormewood, or with some bag made of Wormewood, Balme, Cloues, Macis, Cinamome, red Roses, and such like powders: it is meete that diligent care be had that they bee not applied vpon the place of the liuer, because the hote distemperature of this part is commonly the originall of all Hypochondriake diseases. And for this cause you may annoint the liuer with the oyntment of Roses and Saunders well washed in Succorie water: or else you shall apply thereupon Epithemes of the waters of Succorie, Endiue, Sorrell, the seedes of Endiue, cor∣diall flowers and red Saunders. As concerning the braine which is weake, to the end it may not be subiect to so great quantitie of vapours, you may strengthen it with powders appropriate for the head, and sleight parfumes. And thus much as concerning preseruatiues which are to be v∣sed when the fit is not, and which without all doubt will keepe the fit from comming: for taking a way the cause of accidents, it must needes fall out that the effects cease.Remedies to be vsed in the accesse of the disease. But when the fit of the win∣die melancholie shall put the sicke partie in paines, you must vse other meanes, which the Phisition shall alter and varie according to the accident, which is most strong and vrgent. As, if it be feeble∣nes,Remedies and helpes against feeblenes. you shall leaue to doe all other things, and only strengthen the heart, and that by vsing the remedies before described. As, you may take of the confection of Alkermes, of bread dipped in wine, of Lozenges, cordiall Opiates, and the rindes of Citrons. You shall also apply vnto the heart, liquide and drie Epithemes, oyles, baulmes, oyntments and bagges.Remedies a∣gainst oppres∣sion through windines. If heauines (which is the most common accident in the windie melancholic, as that which is caused of the grosse vapours, or of the winde which waigheth
downe the midriffe and membranes) doe lye grieuously vpon the partie; it will be good to chafe and rub the thighes and legs light∣ly, to minister a Clister to breake windines, to apply great cupping glasses vpon the region of the spleene, vpon the nauell and all ouer the bellie: and if the griefe of these windes be very great, you may take a spoonefull of Ros Solis, or Cinamome water distilled, or Aquacoelestis, or else two or three drops of the essence of Anise seede in a little broth very hote, or a little Treacle and Mithridate: if the winde doe continue vnremoued, and will not stirre out of the breast, you shall remoue them with some bags applied very hote, and these shal be made of the flowers of Camomile and Me∣lilot, of the crops of Dill, of Millet and fried Oates. You may in like manner apply vpon the region of the spleene fomentations, which will resolue and waste some part of these grosse vapours. These are the three sortes of melancholie, which ancient writers haue deliuered vnto vs, that is to say, that which hath his seat in the braine, that which commeth of the sympathie of the whole bo∣die, and that which ariseth ordinarily from the places about the short ribbes, which is more common then either of the other, and which is so often happening in these miserable times, as that there are not many people which feele not some smatch thereof. I come to the third disease of Madame Dutchesse of Vzez, which is the Rheume.
THE THIRD DISCOVRSE, WHEREIN IS HANDLED THE breeding of Rheumes, and how they are to be cured. CHAP. I. That the braine is the seate to cold and moysture, and by consequent the fountaine of rheumes and distillations. IT is not without cause that Hippocrates (that great oracle of Greece) that written in di∣uers places,That the brain is the mansion of colde and moysture. that the braine is the principall seate of cold and moysture: for if we looke vnto his marrowie substance, his cold tem∣perature, his round forme, hollow and some∣what long like to the fashion of a cupping glasse, and his high situation, receiuing al the vapours of the infe∣riour parts: we shall finde that all these dispose it and make it apt to beget and containe great quantitie of water. The substance of the braine was of necessitie to be soft and marrowie, that so it might the more easily take the stampe of formes: and to the end that sinewes which must spring and rise from thence, might with least annoyance and paine bend or bow themselues. But indeed this marrowie substance is not so called for any resemblance it hath with the marrow in the hollow parts of other bones: for it serueth not for nourishment vnto the skull; it melteth not with fire nor consumeth; his originall is more excellent; for it is made with the other parts, that are of the purest and finest portion of the two seeds. The temperature of the braine must be cold,Why the tem∣perature of the braine is cold. there∣by to temper the spirits of sence and motion, to resist their apt∣nes
to be wasted and spent, and to keepe that this noble member (which is commonly imployed about so many worthie actions) should not set it selfe on fire, and make our discourses and talke rash and headie, and our motions out of order, as it befalleth them which are frenticke. It hath oft astonished me to thinke, how that great Philosopher Aristotle,Aristotle his error. durst say, that the braine was made cold, onely to coole the heart, not acknowledging any o∣ther vse of this his temperature. If the time and place would per∣mit me to confute his errour, I would make it appeare that the heele hath more force to coole the heart, then the braine: but fea∣ring to wander too wide out of my way, I will referre the reader vnto that which Galen hath written in his eight booke of the vse of parts. I will follow the leuelling line of my discourse, and say that the braine being of a soft substance and of a cold and moyst temperature (being compared with the rest of the parts of the bo∣die) doth beget many excrements:That the brain doth beget great store of excrements of it selfe. and for that it is nourished with a cold and raw blood, there must needes remaine great sur∣plussages, and so it cannot but beget great store of superfluities: in such sort as that of it selfe and of it owne proper nature it is con∣tinually disposed, to beget and containe water. It be getteth much also in respect of his shape and situation. His forme which is round, hollow and long, after the manner of a cupping glasse, draweth vnto it from all the parts of the bodie their exhalations. His situation which is aloft doth easily receiue them: so that these hote vapours falling into a part or member that is more cold, doe grow thicke and turne into water. As wee see the vapours rising, vpon the fire kindled in the parts about the short ribs, when they come to the skinne (which is more cold) to congeale and turne to sweate: Or a s exhalations drawne vp by the heate of the Sunne, doe thicken in the middle region of the ayre, and turne into raine, haile, and snow. See then how the braine both of it selfe, as also by accident, is apt to ingender excrements, and how in euery li∣uing thing it may be called the principall seate of cold and moy∣sture: but chiefly in man, for as much as according to the varietie of the animall functions which he executeth, he aboundeth with greater quantitie of braine, then any other liuing thing doth be∣sides.
Two sorts of excrements.But these excrements (if wee beleeue Hippocrates and Galen) are of two sorts; the one grosse, and the other refined. The subtile and refined doe breathe out by insensible vapours; the grosse doe stand in need of troughs and channels for to rid them by.Conuciances for the empty∣ing of the sayd excrements. Nature hath so prouidently forecast for them both, as that no man can but marueile at her industrious paines taken therein: for, to helpe and further the exhalation of the thinner and refined, she hath pearced the skull, and made all those seames which wee see therein, which stand in like stead to the bodie, as a chimney or breathing place doth to a house: and for the grosse excrements, she hath framed two conueiances and particular water draughts, by which all the water-poole doth emptie it selfe, the one of which betaketh it self vnto the nose, and the other vnto the roofe of the mouth. That in the palate is the more common of the two,The conuey∣ance vnto the palate of the mouth. and it riseth from the third ventricle of the braine, it is wide aboue, and growth nar∣rower and narrower, like a funnel: and that is the cause why the Anathomists doe call it Infundibulum. By this channell all the waterie substance of the vpper ventricles doe purge themselues, and betake themselues to a certaine glandule called the spitting kernell, which drinketh vp like a little spunge all their water, and after suffereth it to glide away very smoothly through many pre∣tie little clefts, which are to be seene by the side of the feate of the bone called Sphenoides, and so from thence betake themselues to the palate. The conuey∣ance caried vn∣to the nose,The other channell is led along to the nose: these bee the two bunches of the braine, which are fashioned like vnto paps. Their principall vse is to receiue the smels, and to conuey them vnto the brain: but when there is great quantitie of excrements, nature doth offer them some hard measures, in causing to runne downe by these two bunchie excrescences the waterish humours, which otherwise doe passe by some part of the bone called Ethmoides, which is pearced in manner of a searce. These are the two con∣ducts, I meane the nose and the palate, which nature hath ordai∣ned for the purging of the braine. There are some others, but not ordinarie, which Hip∣pocrates hath well obserued in his Booke of Glandules, as
the eyes,Extraordinarie conueyances. eares, spinall marrow, veines and sinewes: but these doe serue but at such times, as things are all out of order, and that the naturall gouernement of the braine is quite peruerted. CHAP. II. What this word Rheume doth signifie, what maner of disease it is, and in what the essence there∣of consisteth. IF the braine be of a good temperature, it will not ingender any excrements, but such as are naturall to it, and accordingly auoide them euery daye by such passages as nature bath assigned it: but and if it be distempered, it will gather a great deale moe then it ought, which either of their owne weightines (such is their elementarie forme) will fall downe into the lower parts, or else will be thrust out into some other part, by the vertue expulsiue of the braine, which shall feele it selfe oppres∣sed, either with the quantitie or euill qualitie of the same. This falling downe of humours in what maner so euer it be,What is meant by the word rheume. is general∣lie called of the Greekes a Catarrhe, which signifieth as much as distillation. I know very well, that there is a more strict significa∣tion of this name, and that as Galen obserueth very well in his third of the causes of accidents, a Catarrhe is properly when the hu∣mour falleth downe into the mouth: but I will rest my selfe in this place with the most common signification, and will call all ma∣ner of falling downe of humours from the braine, into what part soeuer it be, a Catarrhe, rheume, or distillation. Rheume if we beleeue Galen, is an accident of the third kinde, that is to say,That the rheume is an accident. an error in the excrements: this accident ordinarilie followeth another, and that is the weakning of some action; the action in this case weakened or hurt, is concoction. For the braine not being able to disgest his nourishment well, ingendreth grea∣ter store of superfluities then it ought.This disease that causeth this accident. The concoction offended, being an accident: doth immediatly depend vpon some disease. I thinke that this is for the most parta colde and moist distempe∣rature;
a drie distemperature may by accident sometimes bee cause hereof, as in detayning the vapours, and hindring them from passing any further; a hote distemperature also may be the cause in resoluing the humours present, and too much drawing of the vapours absent, but this happeneth but seldome. The braine then is the part that is principally diseased in the case of rheumes. The disease is a distemperature, which immediatly hurteth the digesti∣on of the member distempered, and of this hurt of disgestion commeth that, which is amisse in the excrement.The definition of rheume. But to vnder∣stand the nature of a rheume, it is needefull to play the Philoso∣pher in this sort. A rheume▪ or distillation, is no other thing then the mouing of humours from one place to another, which the Philosophers call locall. But in euery locall motion,Fiue things to be noted in a rheume. Aristotle hath obserued fiue things in his Phisicke: The moueable, that is to say, the thing which is moued; the mouing, that is to say, the thing which doth make the motion; and three tearmes or limits, as the place from whence the motion began, the place by which the motion was made, and the place where such motion staied and ended. In rheumes the moued, is a humour of what condition soeuer it bee, as whether hot or colde, gentle, sharpe, salte, thin,1. The moued.thicke, simple or compound. The mouer of this humour,2. The motiue or mouer. and cau∣ser of it to change his place, (which is called in one word the mo∣tiue) is twofold, the one inward, and the other outward. Againe, the inward is twofold: the forme of the humour, and the foule,The inward mouer. that is to say, the power expulsiue: the humour if it follow his na∣ture▪ and clementarie forme, must euermore of necessitie fall downeward, because it is heauie and weightie. But it often falleth out that the humour being no longer within the power and iuris∣diction of the soule (as when the retentiue facultie is altogether weakened) falleth downe of it selfe, hauing no other motiue of such motion, but onely his owne forme or weightines. So we see the most part of them which die, to be smothered with a rheume, the braine hauing altogether lost his force, and being (as it were) resolued. The other originall that moueth the humours being in∣ward, is the soule; for nature hath giuen vnto euery liuing part a vertue expulsiue, to expell whatsoeuer may annoy it. The braine then (being stirred vp, either by the aboundance of the humour
which oppresseth it, or by the qualitie which stingeth and biteth it) straineth it selfe to expell it,The outward mouer. and to thrust it from it, as far as euer▪ it can. The outward motiue is all that which from without may pinch and presse together, relaxe or loosen, or shake the braine: the colde ayre presseth the braine together, and causeth the hu∣mours to fall downe; the ayre and bathes that are hote, doe loosen and resolue the humours; strokes fals, and violent passions of the minde, may shake the humour which is within the braine, and make it change his place. And thus much for the mouing or mo∣tiue. It remaineth that we finde out the three tearmes or boundes within which euery locall motion is bounded. The place from whence the humour beginneth to moue,The end wher∣as the motion beginneth. is within, and without the braine. The humour oftentimes keepeth within the ventricles, and the whole substance of the braine, and beginneth to departe from thence: sometimes it keepeth without the braine, betwixt the bone and his membrane, and causeth outward distillations. The places by orthrough,The bounds through which. which the humour falleth (which is the second bound) are the ordinarie and extraordinarie passages of the braine, the ordinarie are the nose and the Palate: the extraordi∣narie are the eyes, eares, sinewes, marrow, veines, arteries, and space which is betwixt the bones and the membranes, or the spa∣ces of the muscles.The bounds, where it en∣deth. The tearme and limit where the humour en∣deth his course, may bee any part of the bodie, prouided that it bee in an inferiour region, or place that is lower then the head, and therewithall weake; for you shall neuer finde a rheume to rise from a lower part vpward. And thus much for the vnfolding of the definition of a Rheume, let vs now come vnto his differences. CHAP. III. The differences of a Rheume. Differences of rheumes ac∣cording to the matter that makes them.THe principall differences of rheume, are taken from the matter that falleth downe; from the parts receiuing or sending, from the accidents accompanying the same, and from the maner of their generation. The matter of al rheumes is a humour: I call a humour all that which is actuallie liquid, and
swimmeth. But in the humour we may obserue many things: the substance, temperature, qualitie, taste, and mixture, and from euery one of these wee shall draw some differences of rheumes. The substance or consistence of the humour (for so Phisitions are accustomed to speake) is either thin and subtile,The first diffe∣rence drawne from the sub∣stance of the humour. The second difference from the tem∣perature. or grosse and thicke, or indifferent, and betwixt both. There are then some rheumes that are subtile, thin, and sharpe, and there are others more thicke. The temperature of the humour is hote or colde, so then there are hot, and there are cold rheumes; but colde rheumes are more common, and are begotten of a colde and moist distem perature of the braine: the colde distemperarure weakeneth the concocting facultie, and causeth the braine to gather moe excre∣ments then it needeth, and that it cannot disgest the remainder of his colde nourishment. The moist distemperature weakeneth the retentiue facultie, and suffereth the humours to fall downe, al∣though they bee not superfluous.Signes of a colde rheume. Men may discerne this colde rheume by many signes, for the humour that falleth downe, is no∣thing sharpe or pricking, the braine is drowsely inclined, the eyes daseled, the hearing heauie, the nostrils stopt, all the sences dull, the face pale, the bodie slowe, heauie and lumpish, because that the strength of the armes and legges, commeth of the stiffenes of the muscles and sinewes, but in this case the sinewes are softned, and as it were relaxed, because the braine which is their common ori∣ginall and fountaine, doth swim all in water. The Phisition shall obserue yet for his further assurance, the temperature, age, dwel∣ling place, season of the yeare, and order of life: for if the bodie be of a colde temperature, if it be olde, if he dwell in colde, waterie and marishie places, and that it be in winter; if he eate ordinarilie of raw fruites, of moyst and colde victuals, and if he liue an idle and slouthfull sitting life, we neede not doubt but that it is a colde rheume. There be also hot rheumes,Hote rheumes. howsoeuer that many learned Phisitions denie it, for wee are confirmed in the contrarie, both by the authoritie of Hippocrates, and our owne experience. Hip∣pocrates maketh mention of a sommer squinancie, which com∣meth of a subtile, sharpe, and hot distillation: and we see come forth at the nose oftentimes, a yellow and cholericke humour, which taketh off all the skin, and it is ingendred ordinarilie of
choler in the braine, which is purged out from thence by the cares. The olde writers haue obserued very well, that there are three sorts of excrements ingendred in the braine, as, one sorte of fleagme; another sort of melancholie, and another sort choler: The fleagmatike passe away by the mouth and nose, the melan∣cholike by the eyes, and the cholerike by the eares: wee see also when wee make cleane our eares, that all that commeth forth is yellow, and extreame bitter. Then there are hot rheumes, which are such either by their generation, as if they be made of choler; or by corruption, as when fleagme putrifieth, it getteth a certaine a∣crimonie, and becommeth salt.The signes of a hot rheume. It is easie to finde out these hot rheumes: for if the humour passe by the palate and mouth, they taste it bitter and pricking, it burneth and taketh off the skin euery where, where it commeth; the face is all red and fierie, the fore∣head extreame hot, and commonly it walketh hand in hand with an ague: we must adde vnto all this a temperature that is hot and cholericke, a hot constitution of ayre, a maner of liuing, and all other things which are apt to heate the humours, and to ingender such as are hote.The third dif∣ference riseth from the qua∣litie of the hu∣mour. We obserue furthermore in the humour (besides his substance and temperature) what his qualitie is, that is to say, the maners thereof: for there are some humours which are mali∣cious, and haue a certaine secret malignitie, there are some more gentle, there are some that are concocted, and some that are crude and raw. From these conditions wee shall finde a difference of rheumes; as, there are some that are rebellious, as those which ac∣companie the french disease, or which rise of some remainder thereof, and these are not cured by ordinarie remedies, they must be ouercome by soueraigne cordials and preseruatiues: there are other some more gentle,Signes of con∣cocted, and vn∣concocted rheumes. The sourth difference ri∣seth from the taste of the rheume. which are easilie cured and helped by some simple purgation: there are some that are crude, and some concocted: it is known to be crude, when we see it cleere, thin, vn∣equall, greene, yellow, bitter or pricking: contrarilie, if it be e∣quall and euery where alike, and a little thicke, we judge it to be concocted. We take some difference of rheumes from the taste and sauour which is in the humour, there are salte, sweete, sharpe, and tastlesse sauours: the salt ones are alwaies most dangerous, for if they fall ones vpon the Lungs, they cause an vlcer; if among the
guts, a bloodie fluxe: finally, we may drawe from the mixture of the humours, these differences. There are simple rheumes, caused of one onely humour, and there are others which are made of the mixture of many. And thus much concerning the particular viewe of the first difference, which is taken from the matter. The second difference ta∣ken from the parts.The second difference may be gathered from the parts: now we haue two forts of parts to looke into, as the sending, and re∣ceiuing parts: those which send, are either within or without the braine. Those within are commonly full of excrements, both be∣cause of their colde distemperature, and also of their marrowish substance; those without also, as betwixt the scull and the mem∣brane next couering it, and betwixt this inner membrane, and the vttermost skin may be retained and gathered in great quantitie of water, either by the vapours, which not being able to passe any further, doe there growe thicke, or by the breathing forth of wate∣rish humours out of the veines and arteries, which there stay and abide. From these parts then we shalf draw these differences of rheumes, there are outward ones which come from without, and runne downe by the continued proceeding of the membranes through all the outward parts, euen vnto the ioyntes, and make oftentimes the Goute: There are inward ones which come from within the braine, and runne diuerse waies to the in∣ward partes. If they take the waie of the spinall marrowe, they will cause an Apoplexie, Palsey, astonishment, and trem∣bling: if they passe and fall into the eyes and eares, they will cause blindenesse and deafenesse: if they fall into the nose, they will cause the disease, called Coryza: if into the palate and rough arterie, they will cause hoarcenesse; as also short∣nesse of breath, the cough, the consumption, if into the Lunges; and the fluxe of the bellie, called Lienteria, they fall into the stomacke. The third dif∣ference taken from the acci∣dents.The third difference shall be taken from the accidents. There are rheumes which choake vp the parties, and kill them suddaine∣ly, and they are those which Hippocrates calleth , the other are without daunger, and distill but softly. There are rheumes without feauers; and there are some that are accompa∣nied
with the feuer: there are some also that are painfull, and here are some withour paine. The last diffe∣rence.The last difference is taken from the maner of their generation and the efficient causes. There are some rheumes that are of them∣selues as being begotten of the sole defect of the braine, all the rest of the body being found; and there are some which come by con∣sent, as those which are caused of the ill disposition of the other parts: as of the liuer too much heated, and of the stomacke too much cooled; the liuer ouer hote doth send great quantitie of va∣pours vnto the braine, and the stomacke too much cooled doth fill all full of crudities. There are epidemike or popular rheumes, and there are erraticke or hereditarie ones: the popular rheumes happen of the constitution of the ayre, as was the whupping or crowing disease which happened this yeare, and that which ranne through all Europe about tenne yeares agoe. The erraticke or he∣reditarie rheumes come of a particular constitution of the bodie, and of the maner of liuing, which is particular vnto euery one. CHAP. IIII. Of the causes of the Rheume. THe causes of the rheume are either outward or in∣ward: the outward doe ordinarily arise of the cor∣ruption of the ayre, and of the manner of life. The ayre may alter and change vs three maner of waies; by his qualities, by his substance, and by his sudden alteration and chaunge: that which is too cold, too hot, and too moyst, is apt to beget rheumes: the hot ayre doth it by resoluing and melting such humours as are contained in the braine, for thus it maketh them the more apt to fall downe: the colde ayre is the cause of distillations, because it presseth the braine together: and euen as a spunge full of water being pressed, wee may behold the water to run out like a riuer on euery side: euen so the braine be∣ing shrunke together by colde, letteth all her humours glide and slip away: the same cold ayre may also bee the cause of rheumes, by repelling and causing to retire the naturall heate from the vt∣ter
parts, to the inner. The Southerne and Northerne windes are mightie causes to moue and make rheumes: for those doe fill the braine and make it heauie, but these doe cause it to shrinke toge∣ther. Long tariance inthe Sun or open ayre doth effect as much. The sudden change of the ayre, and alteration of seasons are of the number of those causes which inforce the rheume. As also if the seasons doe keepe their naturall temper, as Hippocrates hath very well obserued in his third booke of Aphorismes, the yeare will greatly incline vnto rheumatikenes. If together with this partie alteration, or vtter ouerthrow of the temperature, there bee any particular defect in the substance of the ayre, as some secret and hidden corruption or infection, then it will ingender a popular and pestilent rheume. The maner of liuing may likewise bee put in the scrole of out∣ward causes, which doe ingender and beget the rheume: much eating and drinking doe likewise fill the braine, and this is the cause why drunkards and gluttonous feeders, are ordinarily sub∣iect vnto the Wrangling rheume.. Great abstinence may likewise cause rheumes in attenuating and making thin the humours; as also for that the stomacke being emptie, and not prouided of any thing to fill it selfe withall, is constrained to make attraction of such moysture as is in the parts neere about. Long watching, con∣tinuall studie, extreame violent passions of the minde, in as much as they spend and waste the naturall heate and coole the brainer doe ingender rheumes: to liue all idle, doth keepe the excrements vnconsumed. Great euacuations, but especiallie oft letting of blood, and in great quantitie, do cast headlong the body into old age, and make it altogether rheumatike. Much sleepe puffeth vp the bodie and maketh it moyst, especially that which is taken at noonetide. And thus much for the outward causes which may. cause and mooue the rheume: let vs now come vnto the in∣ward. The inward causes are either remote, or else conioyned: the remote (which it pleaseth some better to call Antecedents) haue relation to the euill disposition of the braine, head, liuer, stomacke, and sometimes of the whole bodie.The distempe∣rature of the braine causeth rheumes. The cold, moyst and hot di∣stemperature of the braine doe oftentimes cause rheumes, the cold
and moyst of their owne nature, the hot by way of accident: the cold distemperature weakeneth naturall heate, doth not make good disgestion of nourishment, neither yet spend and waste vn∣necessary superfluities: whereupon it followeth, that it must needs store vp abundance of excrements. The hot distemperature at∣tracteth more nourishment then it can well disgest, and moe va∣pours then it can dispatch and make away withall. There are some which haue very wittily obserued, that the closenes of the substance of the braine, is oftentimes the cause of rheumes, be∣cause it retaineth the vapours, and suffereth them not to spend by breathing out and euaporation.The euil shape of the head. The bad forme or shape of the head is likewise very forcible to procure rheumes: for such as haue thc seames of their head very close set together, or which haue not any at all, (as wee haue seene very many) are subiect to distilla∣tions, because the vapours retained doe turne into water, and in deede the seames were chiefly made to serue for a vent, and as it were a chimney vnto the braine. The distempe∣rapture of the lower parts. The distemperature of the lower parts, and especially of the li∣uer and stomacke, is one of the most ordinarie causes of the rheume, if wee beleeue Auicen the prince of the Arabians. For from the liner, being excessiuely hot, doe come as it were from a great burning cole many hot exhalations, which by the cold tem∣perature of the braine doe congeale and turne into water: I say further, that they which haue a very hot liuer, haue also their veines very hot, in such sort as that there rise continually very hot vapours from them. The cold distemperature of the stomacke ingendring many crudities, my also be a cause of rheumes: for thereby al the bodie is cooled, the second disgestion not being able to correct the errour of the first, But if it should so bee as that all the causes should concur and iumpe together, that is to say, that the braine should bee cold and moyst, the lieu hot, the stomacke cold, there were no doubt, but that thereupon would follow a perpetuall generation of excrements in the braine: and this is that which the Arabians would haue sayd, when they wrote that an vnequall distemperature of the principall parts is the greatest occasion of distillations. And thus much concerning the remote causes. The more neere or antecedent causes not onely of rheumes, but
of all other fluxes of humours are three;The causes more necrely procuring rheumes are three. The partsen∣ding. the part sending, the part receiuing, and the nature of the humour. In the part sending wee obserue his high situation, and his strength: if it bee indued with these two qualities, it will easily cast his burthen vpon all the infe∣riour-parts, which are as it were vassals vnto it. Hippocrates hath well obserued it in the booke of the wounds of the head, when he sayth, that amongst all the parts of the head, the brow is most sub∣iect vnto inflammation, because the brow is contained, but euery fluxe is from the part containing vnto the part contained: the brow is contained both in respect of the low situation thereof, as also in respect of the production of vessels. The part receiueth the humour, either because it is inferiour, or because it is weake;The part re∣ceiuing. or because it draweth it vnto it. Euery inferiour part is subiect to re∣ceiue the burthen, of that which commanded it: but and if the part be weake, it will yet be the more apt. This weakenes com∣meth either of it selfe, and from the proper nature of the part, or else by some accident:The weake part. the rare and spungie parts are naturallie weake, such as are all the glandules, and it seemeth that nature of set purpose hath made them such, to the end that they should re∣ceiue the excrements and superfluities of the principall parts. Hippocrates hath debated this matter so well in his booke of Glandules, as that a man cannot tel how to adde any thing there∣vnto. The skin was by nature made weak, to the end it might con∣taine al the superfluities that are frō within, whereupon some call it the vniuersall emunctorie. Parts may also be weak by some ac∣cident, as by a fall, or blow, or some distēperature: in what maner soeuer they bee weake, it maketh them apt to receiue the refuse of their neighbour parts.How the part attracteth the humour to it selfe. The last cause is the part his attraction of the humour. The Arabians haue acknowledged three causes of this attraction; heate, paine, and the auoyding of vacuitie. Heate attracteth of it owne nature, because it rarifieth the parts neere a∣bout, attenuateth and maketh thin the humours, and enlargeth the waies and passages, for the humour to runne through.How paine at∣tracteth. Paine doth not attract of his owne nature, because it is an affect of fee∣ling: but feeling is a patient and no agent, and euery one of the sences is executed by taking in of some thing: but the humours flow to the pained part, by reason of the weakenes of the same;
as also because the naturall heat thereof is weakened by the paine and cannot well concoct the humour, it must needes bee that it should stay in that place. They who affirme that the humour floweth vnto the part which feeleth the paine, because nature sen∣deth thither both spirits and blood, that she may comfort the same, doe deceiue themselues in my judgement, and offer great wrong vnto nature: for if she knew that such a part stood in need of spirits and blood, she would know therewithal, that in sending this blood, she should profit the part nothing at all, but rather hurt it: so that paine doth not properly attract and draw. The last cause of distillations is imputed to the humour. For if it bee thin in substance, hot in temperature, sharpe and pricking in qualitie, it will be a great deale the more apt to flow. CHAP. V. A generall order of diet to be obserued, for the preuenting and curing of Rheumes and distillations. I Will follow the same order and course in the lay∣ing downe of this regiment, which I haue taken in the other two going before. Wee must therefore so dispose of all the sixe things which are called not naturall, as that they may not only hinder the engendring of rheumes, but also consume and cure the same being alreadie begotten. Let euery man therefore make choise for himselfe of such an ayre as is temperate in his a∣ctiue qualities, and as for the passiue that it bee altogether drie: I say that it must be temperate in heate and cold, because that a hot ayre resoluing the humours of the braine, and a cold pressing them out, causeth them to fall downe aboundantly. If the ayre bee too cold, it may bee corrected with good fires made of Iuniper, Rose∣marie, Bay-tree, Oke, and Fig-tree: if it be exceeding hote, it may be cooled with hearbs and flowers that are indued with such pro∣pertie. There must care be had to auoide the Northerne and Sou∣therne windes, because the one filleth the head full, and the other presseth it out. You must not abide much in the Sunne-beames,
nor yet in the open ayre. The windes which pearce through chinkes and rifts, are extreamely dangerous for the rheume. The inequalitie of the ayre (as Celsus obserueth very well) doth migh∣tily further the begetting of rheumes: it is called an vnequal aire, when it is now hot, now cold. As concerning the passiue qualities, the ayre-must in all maner of distillation incline vnto drines: and for that cause it is good to dwell vpon mounted places, and such as are farre from riuers. In meates three things are to be obserued; the quantitie, qua∣litie, and manner of vsing them. As concerning the quantitie,In meats three, things are to be obserued. all repletion and full gorging is enemie to such complexions as are subiect vnto rheumes: we may not at any time eate to the full, it is better to rise from the table hungrie, and hee cannot but fare the better, which cutteth of one meale in a weeke. As concerning the qualitie, it must bee contrary vnto the disease, or the cause thereof: the cause of rheumes is a superfluous humour, so that it will bee fittest to vse such meates as may dry vp the same. All vaporous meates in generall must bee abstained, as also meates that are grosse, windie, full of excrements, and hard to disgest. In the ma∣ner of vsing of these meates, there must many rules bee obserued: as, there must no new meate bee taken into the stomacke, before the former bee throughly disgested. You must content your selfe to feede vpon one onely dish, and that such as is good: for varie∣tie filleth all full of cruditie, and it mingleth it selfe with the blood in the veines, and ministreth rheumatike matter vnto the braine. You must vse to eate more at dinner then at supper, in as much as sleepe which succeedeth supper within a short time, doth send great store of vapours vnto the braine, which are afterwards tur∣ned into water. The bread must bee of good wheate, and throughly baked,Bread. not cleane purged from his branne, but retaining a little branne and mixt with some salt; it must neuer be eaten hot: at the latter end of meate you may eate bisket, wherein some Anise and Fennell seede haue been put. Rosted meates are much better then boyled,Flesh▪ and of them such as doe not abound with humours: we allow the vse of Capon, Pi∣geon,
Partridge, young Hare, Kid, Hart, Feasant, Quailes, Turtle doues, and all birds of the mountaines, all which maybe interlar∣ded with Sage and Hissope of the mountaines. The vse of water∣fowles, Porke, Lambe, Mutton, and young Veale is forbidden: broths and pottage are very ill. Fish is exceedingly contrary.Fish. All sort of milk-meates is an ene∣mie in rheumatike diseases, as also all maner of pulse. As concerning hearbes,Hearbes. the Arabians recommend vnto vs, Sage, Hissope, Mints, wilde Time, Margerome, Rosemary, Burnet, Cher∣uill, Fennell, and Costmarie. Aetius tolerateth Coleworts and Leekes, but he forbiddeth in expresse tearmes Garlick & Onions, (because they send vp many vapours) and all cold moyst hearbes, as Lettuse, Purcelane, Sorrell, and such like. All fruites that abound in moysture,Fruites. as Apples, Plums, Melons, Cucumbers, and Mulberies are forbidden. But as for such as haue propertie to drie, as Pine apples, small nuts, Pistaces, Almonds, Peares, Quinces, Figs, drie Raisines, Medlers, Ceruisses, they may be vsed after meate. And thus much concerning meate. As concerning drinke,Drinke, cold water, and all maner of licour that is actually cold, it is enemie to al such as are subiect to the rheume, if so bee that such rheume be not extreame hot pricking, and ac∣companied with an ague; Barley water with a little Sugar and Cinamome is very good and fit, or a Ptisane, or water and Honey boyled together. If the stomack cannot indure the vse of these waters,Wine. you must make choise of some well conditioned Wine, which is small and neither sweete nor biting. Muscadels, Hypocras, and such like mightie and strong Wines, doe altogether strike vp into the head, and fill the braine with vapours. To drinke assoone as a man is set downe at the table, doth cause and increase the rheume mightily: and there is nothing so daungerous to them which are troubled with the rheume, as to drinke when they goe to bed. Excesse of sleepe maketh the bodie heauie, and heapeth toge∣ther store of excrements:Sleepe. it shall bee sufficient to sleepe sixe or se∣uen houres, and in the meane time the head and the feete must be kept couered: for as Aristotle obserueth, cold taken in the vtter∣most
parts doth infinitly indamage them which haue a cold and moyst braine. In sleeping it is good to lye with the head some∣what high, and vpon the sides: for to sleepe vpon the backe hea∣teth the bodie of the great hollow veine, which lieth vpon the backbone, and sendeth great quantity of vapours vnto the braine. Let euery man watch well ouer himselfe, that he vse no sleepe at noone, neither yet by and by after meate; it will be more health∣full to bestow the time in some short or gentle walke, or in some pleasant and religious talke. You must not straightwaies after meate applie your selfe to reading or writing, or any deepe medi∣tation, because such action might turne the course of naturall heat out of the way, which ought altogether to be imployed in making disgestion. Long watching may hurt as much as ouer much sleepe, for that it spendeth naturall heate, and cooleth the braine.Watching. It is good to rise early, and walking vp and downe the chamber, to cough, spet, and free ones selfe of all naturall excrements. The exercises of the whole bodie are much commended of Hippocrates that famous Phisition,Exercise. and those which are of particu∣lar parts, as frictions will serue for good vse:Frictions. but if the head bee weake and very replete, it will require that such friction be begun in the lower parts, and from thence to come vnto the thighes, backe, armes and necke, and to rubbe the hinder part of the head with bags or spunges artificially contained and made. And see∣ing the head is the fountaine of all distillations, it will be meete and conuenient to haue a speciall regard and consideration there∣of: it must not be ouerladen, neither yet too sleightly couered, but after a meane and middle maner, and yet it is alwaies better to in∣dure too much heat then too much cold vpon it: it is not good to tye it too hard, least it might draw humours from below. The bel∣lie must be kept soluble continually. CHAP. VI. A generall methode for the curing of Rheumes. FOr as much as in all distillations there is a part sending, and another receiuing; the Phisition must haue speciall conside∣ration
vnto them both. The head is the welspring and fountayne of all distillations: wherefore we must bestow one part of our la∣bour and trauell to purge the head, and to drie and strengthen it, that it may not gather any new excrements or superfluities. I will appoynt and set downe an order to be vsed in colde distillations, comming of a colde and moist distempcrature of the braine, be∣cause that those are most incident, and this method may serue for a rule vnto the other sorts. The first in∣tention. The first intention which we are to propound and set before our selues, is to purge this welspring, to draine it, and vtterly to drie it vp if we can. This will be effected and wrought by vniuer∣sall and particular cuacuations: the vniuersall must alwaies be first vsed.Blood-letting. If it be a full bodie, a hot rheume, an ague accompanying the same, and that the liuer be exceedingly hot, blood letting will profit very much, but if no one of these particulars fall out, then it hath no place, and profitcth nothing, and this is it which the Ara∣bian writers meane when they say, that the rheume meerely con∣sidered as a rheume, doth neuer require bloodletting, but onely when it is accompanied with some accident.Purging. Wee will come therefore to the maner of purging, which must first begin with a Clister which will purge the whole bodie, and draw also from the head. A Clyster.Take of the common decoction (whereunto hath been added Margerom, Hissope, Sage, of each a handfull) the quantitie of a pinte, of Annise seede three drams, of the flowers of Camomile, Stechados, and Rosemarie, of each halfe a handfull, after you haue strained the whole, dissolue therein of the blessed Laxatiue one ounce,Benedict Laxatiua. of Diaphenicon an ounce, of the honie of Rosemarie flow∣ers or Mercurie oneounce, of oyle of Dill two ounces, of salte a little, and make hereof a Clyster. Pils. A potion.The daye following, you shall take a dram of Pillulae Cochiae, which shall serue in steede of a minoratiue, or else this potion. Take of good Agaricke one dramme, of Rubarbe as much, infuse them all one night with a little Cinamom and a few Cioues, in the water of Hisope or Minthes: and after you haue pressed it out, dissolue therein of Diaphenicon, or else of Diacarthamum, two
drams, and of syrupe of Roses laxatiue, one ounce, make thereof a potion. Preparation of the humours. An Apozeme.If the humours bee colde, grosse and, slimie, it will bee good to prepare them with this Apozeme. Take of theroores of Acorus, of Cyperus, and of Galanga, of each halfe an ounce, of the leaues of Betonie, Hissope, Margerome, Sage, Balme, Agrimonie, of each a handfull of Anise and Fennell seede of each three drams, of the flowers of Rosematie, Stechados, and Betonie, of each a pugill, boyle all together to a pinte and a halfe, wherein dissolue of he honie of Rosemarie flower, or of course Sugar, three ounces, and make thereof an Apozeme, clarifie it and aromatise it with a dram of Aromaticum Cariophillatum, and with a little Cinamom, to take foure mornings together. After this, the bodie shall be pur∣ged again with ye same pils, or with the pils of Agaricke, Sine qui∣bus, or Pillulae foetidae, and the same potion, but in somewhat grea∣ter quantitie. The Arabians make a prettie obseruation about pils, as that they must be somewhat great, that so they may abide the longer time in the stomacke, and so not being so soone disol∣ued, may draw from further of. And thus much concerning pur∣gations vsually to be taken in such rheumes. Decoctions procuring sweate.Dyet drinkes that doe prouoke sweate, may be put in the num∣ber of vniuerfall euacuations, for they auoide all the waterish parts which are conteined in the veines, and drie vp the superfluous moisture vvhich is within the bowels. We shall make them with Guaiacum, Zarza-perilla, the roote China, and Sassafras, the ma∣ner of the setting downe of such, as also of the vsing of them is suf∣ficiently knowne vnto euery one. The bodie hauing been purged by these vniuerfall meanes, there may bee vsed particular purges for the braine. The euacuation may be sensible or manifest to the sences, or insensible, and such as the sences cannot discerne: the sensible euacuation is effected by errhiues, masticatories, garga∣rismes, vesicatories, sinapismes, cuppings, scarifications and cau∣teries, the insensible, by powders, bags, cupping without scarifica∣tion, and perfumes. Errhinesdoe purgethe braine by the nose:Enhines. there are diuerse sorts made of them, as some are drie, and some liquide: the drie are made with powders of pepper, the seede of Stauesacre, and white Hellebor: the liquid ones with the iuyce of
Margerome, Mercurie, Male Pimpernell, Beetes, and Coleworts, with white wine, there are some which greatly commend the oyle of nigella,Masticatories. if the nostrels be annoynted therewith within. Masti∣catories doe purge the head very strongly, and they are made with the rootes of Pellitorie, or with Masticke, Nutmeg, Cubeb, Da∣maske raisins, fteeped in the water of Sage, or in the essence of Sage and Time.Vesicatories. Gargarismes are not in so great vse. Vesicatories applied vpon the head, doe also purge the same sensiblie: they are made with very strong leauen, dung of Pigeons, the flies called Cantharides,Emplaisters. and a little Aqua vitae: you may likewise make em∣plasters which will draw forth water, with the rootes of Brionie, of Tapsia,Hote bread. Mustard-feede and Euphorbium. Bread very hot ap∣plied vpon the head and nape of the necke, with a little Aqua vitae, doth draw it selfe all full of waterish excrements. Cupping glasses with scarification,Cupping∣glasses. will serue to make euacuation in this case. Fi∣nally, in rheumes that are olde and rebellious, cauteries doe pro∣file very much,Cauteries. to drawe drie the fountaine, and to diuert the hu∣mour: they are to be applied vpon the head, behinde in the neeke, and in the armes.Insensible eua∣cuation. There is another insensible euacuation, which is then wrought, when any humour is discussed and resolued in such sorte as that it turneth into a vapour, and thereupon doth breath out by an insensible transpiration: the same may be done by bags, powder and perfume.Bags. Take of Millet, and Otes a good handfull, of bran and salt one ounce: frie all these together, and close them vp in a bag, which you shall lay very hot vpon the co∣ronall future; orelse: Take of Annise seede, Fennell seede, and Bay berries, of each two ounces, of Millet foure ounces, and as much of common salt, of the crops of Dill, of Camomile and Rosemarie flowers, of each a handfull, frie all these, and put them vp in bags, to be applied vpon the head.Perfumes. Perfumes that draw out and resolue, arc thus made: Take of Storax, Beniouin, and of Ni∣gella Romana, of euery one three drams, of cloues, and of the tro∣cisks of Gallia Moscata, of each one dram, make thereof a per∣fume, and perfume the head cloathes there with. Or else take of in∣cense, Ladanum, Beniouin, of each three drams, of gumme He∣dera, of Juniper berries, and Coriander prepared, of each two drams: mixe all these, and make thereof a perfume. By all these
helpes, we may accomplish our first scope and intention, which is to clense the braine, and draine the fountaine of rheumes. The second scope is to fortifie and strengthen the braine.Our second scope and drift must be to strengthen the braine, and take away the cold & moist distemperature, which causeth a con∣tinuall ingendring of excrements and turneth all into water: for in vaine shall we due vp this spring, except we take away all means whereby it may fill vp againe, and for the effecting hereof we may vse inward and outward remedies. The inward are Opiates,Inward reme∣dies. Lo∣zinges, and powders; Treacle and Mithridate are very singular good, as also the conserues of Betonie, Rosemarie, and Stechados. Take of the conserues of Rosemary, Stechados, and Betonie, of each one ounce, of old Treacle two drammes, of the powder of Aromaticum Rosatum, and Diagalanga, of ech one dram; make thereof an Opiate with syrupe of Stechados,An Opiate. taking thereof to the quantitie of a small nut at night when you goe to bed, you shall make lozinges to ye same effect after this maner.Lozenges. Take of the pow∣der of Aromaticum Cariophillatū one dram, of Diagalanga halfe a dram, of Nutmeg a scruple, of Sugar dissolued in the water of Be∣tonie or Balm so much as shall neede, make thereof an electuarie in lozenges, euery one weighing three drams, of these you must take one in the morning two howers before dinner, and another at night one hower before supper. A digestiue powder after meat will serue to strengthen the braine and stomacke.A digestiue powder. Take two drammes of Anise seede confected, of Cinamome two drammes of Nutmegs one dramme, of red Corall two scruples, of Pearles prepared, and Harts horne, of each one scruple, of rosed Sugar and white Sugar, of each foure ounces; make thereof a powder, of which you shall take a spooneful after euery meale: if you make it for them that are rich, you shall adde therto a little Amber grise, Aqua coelestis, Theriacalis, and Imprialis are very good to drie and strengthen the braine and especially in old folke, and such as are of a cold distemperature. Outward re∣medies. A head pow∣der. Bonnets or coifes.The outward remedies which doe strengthen the braine are head powders, which shall be cast all ouer the head, or else you shall make caps thereof. Take of Clones, Maces, and Ziloaloe, of each two drams, of red Roses, & Betonie well dried, of each three drams: make it into a powder, which you shall ordinarily scatter
ouer all the head: or else make a little cap after this fashion: Take the leaues of Betonie, Balme, Margerome and Mints well dryed, of each three drams, of Clones, Mace. Nutmeg, of each one dram, of red Roses and Rosemarie flowers a dramme and a halfe, of Dy∣ers graine, and of Ziloaloe, of each a dram: make them into a powder, and mingle them with Cotton wooll, to make a little quilted cap thereof with red Taffata.An emplaister to strengthen the braine. Also you may make em∣plasters to applie all ouer the head, which may strenothen and drie it very much: Take of Laudanum and Mastick that are very pure and cleere, of each halfe an ounce, of incense and Sandaraca, of each three drams, of the rootes of Cyperus, of Cloues, and of Ireos of Florence, of each halfe a dramme, of the flowers of Sage, Rosemarie, and red Roses, of each halfe a dram, of Cubebs two scruples, mixe all this with oyle of Ireos and a little Turpentine, and make thereof a plaister. There hath beene brought vs cer∣taine yeeres since, a very excellent Gumme called Tacamahaca: it is applied vpon the head, in forme of an emplaster, it streng∣theneth the braine, stayeth all rheumes, and hath such proper∣tie to appease and take away paynes, as that the Indians vse it in all maner of aches, if it fall not out that there be some inflammati∣on manifest and apparent. I my selfe haue seene very notable successe in the vse thereof.Lotions for the head. All the ancient practicioners do great∣ly praise for the drying and strengthening of the braine the Loti∣ons of the head that are made with hearbes appropriate for the head, as Betonie, Balme, Margerome, Lauander, flowers of Ste∣chados and Rosemarie.Asope for the purpose. There may be made a very good sope and fit for the purpose, after this fashion. Take of good Sope three ounces, of Agarick three drams, of Ireos of Florence two drams, of Cloues and Mace, of each one dram; make them into a Sope. Natural bathes of sweete water as they are called,Natural baths. are much com∣mended, because they be actually hot and sulphurous, as are those of Balaruc,Oiles to bee put in the eares.which are foure leagues from Mompelier. Some there be which put certaine drops of the oyle of Turpentine euery night in the eares and stop them afterward with musked or sweete Cotton wooll: and assure themselues that this drieth and streng∣theneth the braine mightily, All these remedies will serue in cold rheumes, and in such as haue the braine colde and moyst. If the
rheume be hot, and the braine hot, the Phisition shall be of iudge∣ment able to alter the remedies, and to appropriate them to the distemperature. Loe here the two seuerall intentions, which re∣spect the member sending, and leade vs first to the drawing of it drie, and afterward to the strengthening of it, for feare it should ingender new and fresh matter. We must now aduise what is to be done vnto the member re∣ceiuing. Euery inferiour and infirme member is apt to receiue, but yet the care to be had of it is greater or lesser, according as the patt is more or lesse excellent and seruing our necessitie: if the rheume fall vpon the eyes, I haue alreadie set downe the reme∣dies: if vpon the nose, it must be turned some other way: if vpon the teeth, you shall see in the chapter following how they are to be preserued: if vpon the stomacke, it may be cast out by the bel∣lie. The most dangerous of all is that which taketh his course vn∣to the rough arterie, and falleth suddenly into the breast or lungs, for it hindreth respiration, which is a most necessarie action, and so stisleth the pattie. Such must be cared for and helped with all speed, and that by vsing all those remedies which I haue set down, to euacuate, diuert, and turne away this motion of humours: but if it should fall out to be too swift,When wee must stop the rheume. we shall be constrained to cut it short with remedies that shall be held in the mouth, and which one may swallow downe, beginning with the sleightest, as Bole Armoniake, Terra Sigillata, Gumme Tragacanth, conserue of old Roses and rosed Sugar, of which there may bee made pretie re∣ceipts. Take of the conserue of old Roses a dram and a halfe, of the powder of Gumme Tragacanth a dram, of Terra Sigillata,Little Lozen∣ges. and Bole Armoniake orientall, of each two scruples, of Sugar dissol∣ued in the infusion of Gumme Tragacanth, so much as needeth: make thereof pretie small pellets. If this will not serue them, we must come to the remedies which are stronger, as Diacodium, new Treacle, Pillulae de Cynoglossa, or else those which are descri∣bed of the old writers, and are made of Styrax, Galbanum, Opium and Mirrh in equall portions. These remedies are not to bee ap∣pointed, but in extreame necessitie, and when the present and sudden stifling of the partie is fearedOutward re∣medies staying the theume. The rheume may also be slayed with outward meanes, as parfumes
and emplaisters. Take of red Roses, and of Corianderseed prepared, of each a dramme and a halfe; of Mastick, Sandaraca, and Gumme Hedera, of each a scruple; of the seede of Poppie halfe a scruple, of Mirtle berries halfe a dram: make them in a powder to parfume the head, and the same fume may also be ta∣ken either at the mouth or nose. The gum Tacamahaca (where∣of I haue spoken somewhat before) is very good to stay vp the rheume, and to cause it to cease suddenly. The rheume being somewhat stayed, wee must clense out that which is fallen into the breast, and euacuate it by the remedies vsuall for the cough. I will not set downe any particular remedies in this place, for as much as I teach the generall methode onely, which may serue for the curing of rheumes. CHAP. VII. The meanes to preserue the Teeth. FOr as much as rheumes doe oftentimes fall downe vpon the teeth, and spoyle them very mightily, I am perswaded that I shall not displease the Ladies and Gentlewomen, if I deliuer in a small chapter the meanes to preserue the same.Wherein con∣siseth the fairenes of the teeth. What may happen to the teeth. To haue faire and sound teeth, it behoueth that they should be white, smooth, hard, standing fast, and that the flesh of the gummes be whole, hard, and well trussed vp. I purpose first to shew and make knowne that which may loosen, blacke, or canker them: and after I will de∣scribe the remedies which are most exquisite, and may best serue for the making of them faire.The ayre. The cold ayre, as Hippocrates ob∣serueth in the fift booke of his Aphorismes, is enemie to the teeth. All raw,Meates. slimie, sweete, sharpe, fat, hard, vaporous meates, and such as are actually cold, doe hurt the teeth infinitly. The raw meates doe send vp very many vapours which canker them, and make them blacke: sweete, slimie, and fat meate doe leaue much filth about them: sharpe meates set them on edge, and cause a num∣nes in them, by reason of their roughnes and vneuenes: hard meates doe shake them very much. It behoueth to vse flesh of
good iuyce, and which is disgested easily: for who so will keepe their teeth faire, must aboue all other things take care of their sto∣macke. The common vse of milke, cheese, paste meates, tarts and pulse doe destroy the teeth: Sugar amongst other things doth make them blacke. It is not good to chaw the meate vpon one side onely, but rather on both sides equally, because the teeth that are not vsed will corrupt. All flesh of Lambe and Swine, and all fried meates, are extreamely contrary vnto them, as also the ordi∣nary vse of fruits which are very moyst. All writers haue marked that Leekes doe wholy spoyle both teeth and gummes. Wine must be well delayed before it bee drunke,Wine. and it must not bee sweete, nor very cold. Very hote broths, as also all other meate exceeding hot doe spoyle them. There is care to bee had in keeping of them very cleane after eating: and therefore the tooth-pickes of Masticke tree, Mulberie tree, Rosemary, Cipers, and other woods which haue some binding facultie are very fit: there may be added vnto the former a little of the wood of Aloes: They must not bee made cleane with a knife, pinne, or with any thing of gold or siluer, as many doe, because that it doth loosen the ligaments. It must also be auoyded to lie digging at them any long time, especially of such as are subiect to distillations. After that the teeth are thus picked and cleansed, they may bee washed with wine delayed. The continuall and common vse of Sublima∣tum,Sublimate hurteth them. doth blacke and spoyle the teeth very mightily: but and if you would preuent that it should doe no harme,To vse subli∣mate so as that it may not hurt the teeth. it must first bee well prepared, and afterward neuer to vse it, but when it hath been steept in water three or foure moneths, chaunging the water the first moneth euery day, and once or twice a weeke in the rest: it must also neuer bee vsed about the face, but the mouth must first be washed and the teeth cleansed, and water kept in the mouth. And thus much for the things which may hurt the teeth. Let vs now see what things are good and profitable for them. There are some that haue their teeth very white, but they are not fast, because that either the ligaments are loosened, or for that the gummes haue lost part of their fleshie substance: other some haue their teeth fast, but they be blacke. Wherefore there are two sorts of remedies to bee prouided: the one to blanch and make white
the teeth: the other to fasten them and incarnate. There are an infinite number of those which doe make white the teeth, but I will chuse the most fit and conuenient. The Greeke Phisitions commend the pummice stone burnt and made in powder,Things to make the teeth white. more then any other thing, and their ordinarie remedie is this. Take of pummice stone and burned salt, of each three drammes; of Iuncus Odoratus two drams, of Pepper a dram and a halfe: make them all in powder, and therewith rub the teeth. We shall make a powder which in my opinion will be very fit. Take of pure Chri∣stall a dram and a halfe,A powder. of white and red Corall of each one dram, of pummice stone and cuttle bone, of each two scruples, of very white Marble, of the toote of Florentine Ireos, of Cinamome and Dyers graine, of each halfe a dram, of common salt one dram, of Pearle well prepared a scruple, of Alablaster and Roch Alome of each halfe a dram, of good Muske tenne graines: make them all into very fine powder, and rub the teeth therwith euery morning, wasning them afterward with white wine. With the very same powder there may be made Opiates, putting thereunto some ho∣nie. The spirit of Vitrioll mixt with a little common water, doth white the teeth marueilously, and is one of the rarest and most sin∣gular medicines that is. There are some which do much esteeme Aquafortis well delayed with common water. There may also a water be distilled, which wil make them white. Take of liue Brim∣stone, Alome,A distilled wa∣ter. Sal Gemma, of each a pound; of Vineger foure oun∣ces: others vse the spirit of Vitrioll in stead of Vineger; distil here∣of a water with a retort, vsing a gentle fire, that so it may not smel of the Brimstone. This water doth make the teeth very white, and cleanseth rotten gummes. If the teeth be very blacke and filthie: Take of Barlie meale and common Salt two ounces,A powder. mixe them with Honey and make a paste, which shall be wrapped in paper and dried in an ouen: you shal take of this powder three drams, of Crab-shels burned, pummice stone, egge shels in powder, and A∣lome, of each two drams; of the rinde of drie Citrons one dram: they shall all bee mixed together, and the teeth rubd therewithall. The rootes of Holihocks well prepared,The prepared rootes of Ho∣lihocks. doe mightily cleanse and whiten the teeth. The way to prepare them is in this sort: Take the rootes of Holihocke being made cleane, and cut them in many
long peeces, boyle them in water with Salt, Alome, and a little of Florentine Ireos: afterwards drie them well in an ouen, or in the Sunne, and rubbe the teeth therewith. If the teeth be not fast but shake to and fro: Take of the rootes of Bistort and Cinquefoyle,To fasten the teeth that shake and are loose. of each one ounce, of the rootes of Cypers two drams, of red Ro∣ses, the rootes of white Thistle, and of the leaues or bark of Mastick tree, of each halfe an ounce, of Sumach two drams, and of Cloues a dram: boyle al these in Smithes water and red wine, wash there∣with your gummes, putting thereto a little Alome. Or else: Take red Corall, Harts horne and Alome, of each a dram and a halfe, of Sumach, and of the rootes of white Thistle of each a dram: make them in powder, which you shall mixe with the iuyce or wine of Quinces, and apply them vpon the gummes and to the rootes of the teeth in the forme of an oyntment.To beget flesh about the teeth. If the teeth be bare and without flesh, they must bee couered by causing flesh to grow a∣gaine with such remedies as followe. There shall be made a pow∣der, with Alome, red Corall, gumme and rinde of the Frankin∣cense tree, with a little Ireos and Aristolochie. Or else take plume Alome, Pomegranat flowers and Sumach, of each two drammes, of Aloes wood, of Cyperus, of Mirrhe and Masticke, of each a dram: make thereof a powder.An Opiate. Opiates also are very fit to beget flesh, and doe abide better vpon the place. Take of Roch Alome halfe an ounce, of Dragons blood three drammes, of Mirrhe two drams and a halfe, of Cinamome and Masticke of each a dram: make them all into very fine powder, and with a sufficient quan∣titie of Honey make an Opiate, which you shall apply at euening vpon your gummes, and there let it remaine all night: the next day morning you shal wash them with some astringent decoction or red wine. There bee some that take a corne of Salt euery mor∣ning in their mouth; and letting it melt, doe rubbe the teeth with their very tongue, holding that this doth white and make fast the teeth, hindring and keeping corruption and putrefaction from the teeth. And thus much for the preseruation of the teeth.
THE FOVRTH DISCOVRSE, WHEREIN IS INTREATED OF old age, and how we must succour and relieue it. CHAP. I. That a man cannot alwaies continue in one state, and that it is necessarie that he should grow old. THis is a generall and solemne decree, pub∣lished throughout the world,How euery thing that is must haue an end. and pronoun∣ced by Nature her selfe, that whatsoeuer hath a beginning (so that it consist of matter) must also haue an end: There is nothing vnder the cope of heauen (except the soule of man) which is not subiect to change and corrup∣tion. All the great and famous Philosophers and Phisitions that euer were, haue without any contradiction put to their hands to this writ of arrest. Hippocrates in his first booke of diet, Aristotle in a little booke which he made of the length and shortnes of our life, and Galen in his first booke of health haue giuen so cleere and apparant reasons for the same, that there is no way to withstand or gainsay it: adde hereunto, that experience doth so farre con∣firme vs, as that hee which should doubt should be holden for a foole, and one bereft of vnderstanding. Wee celebrate day after day the funerals of our ancestors. Euery houre doe we grieue and stand astonished at the consideratiō of the losse of so many great personages: and of all whatsoeuer hath been since the creation of the world, there is nothing remaining but that which the memorie of historie hath reserued to succeeding ages. It is not my purpose
here to sift out by peece meale all the causes which may alter and corrupt naturall bodies, I haue nothing to doe with the transmu∣tation of the elements, the corrupting of metall, the dying and growing olde of plants: I will onely make euident that which may alter our bodies, and whatsoeuer may cause them to waxe olde. My reasons shall bee drawne from the liuing and cleare springs of naturall Philosophie. The causes of old age.The causes of our dissolution are either inward, or outward: the inward are borne with vs, abide with vs dailie, and accompanie vs euen to the graue. The outward doe spring and rise from without, compasse vs round on euery side, and though a man may keepe himselfe from some few, yet there are an infinite number besides, which cannot be auoyded.The inward causes of our death. The contrarie∣tie of the cle∣ments. Those which are borne and bred with vs are two, the contrarietie of the elements, whereof our bodies are framed, and the working of our naturall heate. The elements ac∣companied with their foure contrarie qualities (which are heate, colde, moisture and drines) the better to mixe and vnite them∣selues together, doe make a kinde of league, euery one of them willingly for going some of his right and soueraigntie, and thereby reducing themselues vnto a mediocritie, which is called tempera∣ture; but this bond of vnitie doth not long last, for the qualitie which doth ouer rule, and giue the name vnto the temperature, beginneth the discord, setteth vpon his contrarie which is more weake, and ceaseth not to impugne it, vntill it see the vtter ruine and ouerthrow of the same: this is one of the vnauoidable cau∣ses of our death, and that which we bring with vs from our mo∣thers wombe; for there is not one bodie in the whole world to be found of so equall a mixture, as that there is not some excesse in one of the foure qualities ouer and aboue the rest. That tempera∣ture which the olde writers haue described and called ad pondus, is onely imaginarie, not seruing for any other thing then to iudge of the rest by, seeing it is not any more to be found, then Plato his common wealth, or Tullie his perfect Orator. This iarre therefore which is found in our complexion, is the principall cause of our olde age. And it is the same which Aristotle hath well obserued in the booke alleaged, whē he saith, that in euery thing wherein con∣trarie things concur, it must needes come to passe, that corruption
doe followe.The operation of our naturall heate, is the se∣cond cause of old age. The other cause of our death and dissolution, is the worke and operation of naturall heate. Our life is stayed vpon two pillers, which are the radicall heate and moisture; the radicall heate is the principall instrument of the soule, for is it that con∣cocteth and distributeth our nourishment, which procureth gene∣ration which stretcheth out and pearceth the passages, which fa∣shioneth all our parts, which maketh to liue (as saith Trismegistus) all the seuerall kindes of things that are in the whole world, and gouerneth them according to their worth and dignitie. This heate being a naturall bodie hath neede of nourishment; the humour which is called the radicall moisture, is the nourishment thereof, as the oyle which is put into the lampes, doth maintayne and feede the flame; this humour once failing, it must needes fall out, that the natural heate shuld perish, but this humor cannot last for euer, seeing the natural heate is daily threatning & consuming the same. But thou wilt say, that it is continually repaired and renewed, and that the heate and moisture influent, which come from the heart, as from a liuely fountaine, and are conueyed along by the arteries, as through certaine pipes, may restore and put as much againe in place,Our naturall moisture can∣not be renew∣ed with his first and for∣mer qualities. as hath been lost and spent. But then I would haue thee to know, that the new reparations cannot be so pure; as also that it neuer falleth out to be in like quantitie. As for the purenes there∣of, it is easie to see, that the moisture which commeth in place of that which was lost, cannot attaine the same degree of perfection with the former; for our solide parts wherein consisteth the foun∣dation of life, are made of seede that is most pure, throughly wrought and concocted, and refined in all those turning and win∣ding labyrinths, which are to be seene in the vessels of seede, and now they are nourished onely with blood turned white by vertue of the said solide parts, and that which passeth not through so ma∣ny refining pipes, whereby it commeth to passe, that as wine the more that water is mixt with it, becommeth so much the more waterish, and in fine changeth altogether into water: euen so the radicall heate and moisture waxe weaker and weaker euery houre, by the coupling of them with new nourishment, which is alwaies infected with some aduersarie and vnlike qualitie. And seeing it is a generall vnchangeable and infallible rule in Philosophie, that
euery natural agent doth become a patient, and sufferer in the per∣formance of his action, and so by consequent doth weaken it selfe: our naturall heate weakening it selfe euery daye, cannot repayre that which is lost, and place in other of the same degree of perfec∣tion; it must of necessitie therefore grow olde, and in time dye right out.The like quan∣titie of natu∣rall moisture cannot be re∣paired. And as forthe quantitie of that which (as things that runne out) is wasted, it cannot be repayred altogether in the same proportion and measure, for the wast is incessant, but the repayre is by little and little, and that after an infinite number of alterati∣ons. See here how that which should preserue vs, doth ouerturne and destroy vs, and how our heate consuming our radicall moy∣sture, doth thereby in the ende cut it owne throate. These two causes doe spring, growe and are nourished together with our selues. There is not that Phisition in the world, were it Aescula∣pius himselfe, which can saue and deliuer vs. All the precious li∣cours that are, Aurum potabile, conserues of Rubies and Eme∣ralds, Elixir vitae, or the fained and fabulous fountaine of resto∣red youth cannot withstand, but that our heate must at length grow weake and feeble. The opinion of the Egipti∣ans condem∣ned. Galen derideth very well an Egyptian Sophister which had drawen commentaries of the immortalitie of the bodie. If a man (sayth he) could when a thing is come to his perfection, renew the same, at that very instant, and make the principles thereof in like maner new, without doubt such a bodie would become immor∣tall: but this thing being impossible, it must needes fall out that e∣uery naturall agent must weaken it selfe, and so of necessitie waxe old. The men of Egypt & Alexandria did beleeue that the natunall cause of olde age did come of the diminishing of the heart: they said that the heart did growe till-fiftie yeeres the weight of two drams euery yeere, and that after fiftie yeeres it waxed lesser and lesser, till in the end it was growne to nothing: but these are no∣thing but vaine imaginations and meere fooleries. We haue cau∣sed many old men to be opened, whose hearts haue been found as great and heauie as those of the yonger sort. There is then but two inward causes of our old age, the contrariety of the princi∣ples whereof we are composed and framed: and the action or o∣peration of our naturall heat, which consisting in the consuming
of his radicall moisture, doth by little and little fall a drying and cooling of our bodies. Outward cau∣ses of our old age, that can∣not be auoi∣ded.There are other causes also of our dissolution, which are out∣ward and such as cannot be auoyded. For seeing that our bodies are compounded of three substances which are subiect to waste, the one wherof is subtile and of an airie nature, the second liquide, and the third solide: it must needes be that we haue some out∣ward thing for to repaire them: otherwise our life would ne∣uer last longer then the seuenth daie: for this is the terme which Hippocrates hath giuen to perfect bodies, and such as haue much naturall heate. That which repayreth our nature, is called nou∣rishment, and it is three fold, the ayre, drinke, and meates: the aire vpholdeth and maintaineth the substance of spirits, the drinke, all that which is liquide, and the meate, that which is solide. This threefolde kinde of nourishment, how well soeuer it be cleansed and purified, hath notwithstanding euermore something disa∣greeing with our nature, and that so much, as that it cannot assi∣milate and turne it into it owne nature, and therefore maketh an excrement of it, which being retained, altereth the bodie, and ma∣keth an infinite number of diseases. See and beholde how meates doe of necessitie alter out bodies. I leaue to speake of all other outward causes, (as ouer violent exercises, an idle and sitting life, long and continuall watching, the passions of the minde (which of themselues can make vs olde, as feare and sadoes) because we may in some sort auoide and shunne them. I leaue also to say any thing of chancing causes, or such as may befall vs by hap hazard, as hurts: I am onely purposed to shew that it is of necessitie that euery liuing creature must waxe olde, that he sostereth within himselfe, the naturall causes of his death, and that he hath out∣ward causes thereof hanging about him, which cannot bee auoyded.
CHAP. II. A very not able description of olde age. SEeing is is most certaine that our bodies,Distinction of ages. euen from the daye of our birth are subiect vnto many altera∣tions and changes, the phisitions hauing regard vn∣to such alterations as are most sensible and appa∣rant, haue diuided the whole life of man into many parts, which they haue called ages.The opinion of the Egypti∣ans. The Egyptians haue made as many ages as there are seuens in the number of an hundred, for they verily beleeued that a man could not liue aboue a hundred yeeres. The Pythagoreans,The opinion of the Pytha∣gorists. which were very superstitious in their numbers, haue published in their writings how that in euery se∣uenth we feele some notable change, both in the temperature of the bodie, and in the disposition of the mind, and that al this ought to be referred and attributed to the perfection of the number of seuen. I purpose not here to discusse the question of numbers: I haue handled it largely enough in my third book of critical daies: it is sufficient for me to sit downe and rest my selfe with all the most famous writers, in saying that man following the naturall course of life, vndergoeth fiue notable alterations and changes in his temperature, and runnoth through fiue ages, which are,Fiue ages. Infan∣cie, Adolescencie, Youth, Manhood or the constant age, and Old age. Infancie is hote and moist,Infancie. but moysture exceedeth and kee∣peth heate so vnder foote, as that it cannot shew his effects, it la∣steth till thirteene yeeres of age. Adolescencie followeth next,Adolescencie. which yet is hot and moyst, but so as that heat beginneth to play the master: the sparkes thereof are seene to glitter, twinckle and shine in euery thing. In the mankind the voice groweth greater, all their waies and courses stretch and reach further and further, they cast their first wool. In the female kind their paps grow hard & great to the sight of the eye, their blood stirreth it selfe through∣out all their bodie, and causeth it to giue place and make way for it, till it haue found out the doore: this age holdeth on to twenty foure or tweny fiue yeeres, which is the appointed and prefixed
terme for growth After this commeth Youth,Flourishing youth. which is hot and drie full of heate, liuelihood and nimblenes: it hath his course till fortie yeeres.The manly age. Then the bodie is come to his full stature, and this is called the mans age or constant age, it is the most temperate of all the rest, participating the foure extremities indifferently, and continueth to the fiftith yeere.Old age. And there beginneth Olde age which containeth all the rest of our life. But yet notwithstanding, this olde age may further bee diuided into three ages:Three degrees of olde age. there is a first old age, a second, and a third. I haue nothing to doe with that which is caused by sickenes, and called Senium ex morbo. The first old age is called greene, because it is accompanied with pru∣dence,The first. full of experience, and fit for to gouerne common weales. The second beginneth at seuentie yeeres,The second. and is incumbred with many small disaduantages, it is very cold and drie. As for the cold∣nes there are so manifest signes and tokens of it, that no man hath euer made anie doubt of it, for if you do touch them; you shall al∣waies finde them as cold as yee, they haue no liuely or vermilion colour, all their sences are weakened, and become subiect to an infinite number of colde diseases: but as for the other qualitie which is drynes, some there are which take vpon them to ouer∣throw it, and say that this old age is moist and not drie, because a man shal see the eyes of these old men alwaies distilling teares, their nose alwaies running, there commeth out of their month e∣uermore great store of water, yea, they doe nothing but cough and spet:The tempera∣ture of old men, is cold and drie, but Galen answereth verie learnedly in his booke of tem∣peratures, that old men are moist through a superfluous moisture, but that they are drie concerning radicall moisture: and in the first booke of the preseruation of the health he saith, that old men haue all those parts drie which infants haue moist, that is to say, the solide parts, of which dependeth the constitution of the whole body. This is the opinion comming neerest to the trueth, & which we must take hold vpon: for their leannes, wrinckles, stifnes of sinewes and skin, and stifnes of ioints doe sufficiently shew their drie temperature: the ringwormes also and itches ouer al their bo∣dies, the scales which they haue on their heads, maketh it plainely appeare vnto vs that their braine is full of salt humors, and not of sweete flegme. In the end commeth the last olde age, which is
called decrepite: in which as the kingly Prophet saith,The last de∣gree of old age is called, de∣crepise. there is no∣thing but paine and languishing griefe: all the actions both of the bodie and minde are weakened and growne feeble, the sences are dull, the memorie lost, and the iudgement failing, so that then they become as they were in their infancie: and it is of these that the Greeke prouerbe (, that is to say, that old men are twice children) is to be vnderstood. This last old age is descri∣bed in the twelfth chapter of Ecclesiastes, in so notable an allego∣ricall sort, that there is not the like againe for excellentnes in all the world. It was also the greatest Philosopher and profoundest scholler in natures workes that euer was, which tooke the same vpon him: this is that sage Salomon, which elsewhere is sayd to haue knowne all the secrets and mysteries of nature, which hath discoursed of all the plants of the field, from the Ceder of Libanus to the Hissope which groweth out of the walls, that is to say, from the tallest and highest; vnto the least and lowest: for by this His∣sope, wee vnderstand one of the capillar hearbes which is called Saluia vitae, which is one of the least hearbes that may be seene. I will set downe the whole maner of this description from the be∣ginning to the end, because that besides the pleasantnes of it, wee may reape instruction, and a plaine and manifest declaration of the thing we haue in hand. An excellent Allegorie de∣scribing and laying out the estate of old age.Remember (sayth he) thy Creator in the daies of thy youth, be∣fore the Sunne, the starres and light grow darke, and the clowdes returne after raine: for then the keepers of the house will tremble, and the strong men will bow themselues, and the grinders will cease and bee no more: in like manner, the lookers through the windowes will be darkened, the doores will be shut without, be∣cause of the base sound of the grinding: and he shall rise vp at the voyce of the bird; so shall all the singing maides be humbled, they shall feare the hie thing: the Almond-tree shall florish, and the grashoppers shall grow fat; the Caper-tree shall be withe∣red, before that the siluer chaine doe lengthen it selfe, or the ewer of golde bee broken, and the water pot dasht in peeces at the head of the spring, or the wheele broken at the cesterne, and that dust returne vnto the earth, as it was from thence, and the spirit goe vnto God. See here the description of the last age, which is
admirable, and which hath neede of a good Anatomist to helpe out with the true vnderstanding of the same. The interpre∣tation of the Allegorie.In decrepite old age the Sunne and starres do waxe darke, that is the eyes, which doe lose their light. The clowdes returne after raine, that is to say, after they haue wept a long time, there passeth before their eyes, as it were clowdes, being nothing else but grosse vapours, which grow thicke and foggie. The keepers of the house tremble, that is, the armes and hands, which were giuen vnto man for the defence of the whole bodie. The strong men bow, that is to say, the legges which are the pillars whereupon the whole buil∣ding is set. The grinders doe cease, that is to say, the teeth which serue vs to bite and chaw our meate. The seers grow darke by rea∣son of the windowes: those are the eyes which are couered and o∣uergrowne oftentimes with a cataract, which shutteth vp the ap∣ple of the eye, which is commonly called the window of the eye. The doores are shut without, because of the base sound of the grinding, that is the iawes, which cannot open for to eate any thing, or the passages of meate which are become narrow and streite. They rise vp at the voyce of the bird, that is to say, they can not sleepe, and are alwaies wakened with the cockcrow. All the singing maides are abased, that is their voyce, which faileth them. The Almond-tree doth florish, that is the head, which becom∣meth all white. The grashoppers waxe fat, that is, the legges be∣come swolne and puffed vp. The Caper-tree withereth, that is, their appetite is lost: for Capers haue a propertie to stirre vp appe∣tite. The siluer chaine groweth longer, that is the faire and beau∣tifull marrow of the back, going all along the bone, which grow∣eth loose and boweth, and causeth them to bend in the back. The golden ewer is broke, that is the hart, which containeth (much after the maner of a vessell) the arteriall blood, and vitall spirit, which are somewhat yellow and of golden colour, which ceaseth to moue, and cannot any longer containe or hold, much after the na∣ture of a thing that is broken. The water pot is broken at the spring head, that is, the great veine called the hollow veine, which cannot draw blood any more out of the liuer, which is the common store∣house and fountaine which watereth all the bodie; in such sort as that it yeeldeth no more seruice then a broken pitcher. The wheele
is broken at the cesterne, that is, the reines and bladder, which be∣come relaxed and cannot any longer containe the vrine. Then, when all this happeneth, dust (that is to say, the body which is ma∣teriall) doth returne to the earth, and the spirit (which is come from aboue) doth returne to God. Loe here the fiue ages descri∣bed and bounded with their number of yeares, according to their seuerall contents. That the num∣ber of yeares doth not make old age.But I would not that from hence any man should so tye him∣selfe to the number of yeares, as that he should make youth and old age necessarily to depend thereupon: but that he would rather iudge thereof by the rule of the temperature and constitution of the bodie: for euery man that is cold and drie, is he whom I may call old. There are very many which become old men at fortie, and againe there are an infinit sort, which are young men at sixtie: there are some constitutions that grow old very speedily, and o∣thers very slowly. They which are of a sanguine complexion grow old very slowly, because they haue great store of heate and moy∣sture: melancholike men which are cold and drie, become old in shorter time. Why women grow old soo∣ner then men.As for the difference of sexes, the female groweth old alwaies sooner then the male. Hippocrates hath very well obserued it in his booke intreating of the seuenth moneth childbirth. The fe∣males males (sayth he) as they are in their mothers wombe, are formed and grow more slowly then males: but being once out, they come sooner to growth, sooner to ripenes of wit, and sooner to old age, by reason of the weakenes of their bodies and of their manner of liuing. Weakenes maketh them to grow vp sooner, and to waxe old sooner: for euen as trees which are short liued, grow vp to their height by and by; euen so the bodies, which must not long continue, come very speedily to the top of their perfection. Their manner of liuing also doth make them to waxe old, because they liue as it were alwaies in idlenes. But there is nothing that haste∣neth old age more then idlenes.
CHAP. III. An order of gouernment for the prolonging of the strong and lustie estate of man. SEeing that the naturall and vnauoidable causes of our old age are three; as the contrarietie of the prin∣ciples of our life, the waste of radicall heate and moi∣sture, and the excrements which are ordinarily in∣gendred by our nourishment, it behoueth vs (if wee will keepe our bodies in good plight, and preserue them from waxing old so soone) so to dispose of and order these three things, as that the agreement and vnitie of the elements (which is called temperature) be throughly prouided for, that our heate and moy∣sture (which waste euery houre) bee well repaired, and that the excrements (which hide themselues and stay behinde in the bo∣die) bee hunted out. We shall obtaine all this very easily, by kee∣ping good order of gouernment and diet, without hauing need to haue recourse to Phisicke. Now this name of Diet (as I haue alreadie sayd) comprehendeth many things, all which may bee referred to sixe. The Phisitions call them, not naturall: because that if they be rightly vsed, and that a man know how to make the best maner of seruice of them, they doe preserue the health, and may bee called naturall. But and if a man abuse them, if they be vsed either too little, or too much, though it bee neuer so little, they are the causes of many diseases, and may be sayd to be contrarie to nature. They are these which follow; the ayre, meat and drinke, sleepe and watching, labour and rest, emptines and fulnes, and the passions of the minde, which I am about to runne through in order.
CHAP. IIII. What choise wee must make of the ayre, for our longer life, as also what ayre is most fit for such persons as are old. The necessitie of the ayre.AMongst all the causes, which may alter our bodies, there is not any one more necessary, more headlong, or which concerneth vs more neerely then the ayre. The neede wee haue of it, doth sufficiently appeare in sicknesses, which abridge and depriue vs of brea∣thing: for if it happen that any one of the instruments which are appointed either for the giuing of entrance, or receiuing or prepa∣ring of the ayre bee greatly impeached, the man dyeth by and by strangled, in so much as it seemeth hereby, that the ayre and life are things inseparable in all such kindes of creatures as are called perfect. The naturall heate (if wee beleeue Hippocrates) is preser∣ued by moderate cold, and if you take the ayre away from the fire, which is as a continuall bellowes vnto it, it is quenched and cho∣ked incontinently. Our spirits which are the principal instruments of the soule, are begotten and nourished by the ayre, they doe not vphold nor purge themselues but by the passing of the ayre in and out: this is the cause also why all the bodie is porouse and perspi∣rable, this is the cause why our arteries doe continually beate, and that nature hath made so goodly and wonderfull doores and en∣trances for the two vessels; in such sort as that I dare bee bold to say, that the ayre is as needfull for man, as life it selfe.The quicknes and celeritie of the ayre. As for the celeritie and swiftnes which it participateth, wee perceiue it euery day. In a trice it passeth through the nose to the braine; and pres∣sing through a million of streits, which are to bee seene in the ad∣mirable net, it entreth in into the most secret chambers thereof, it dispatcheth it selfe downward after that, with like incredible cele∣ritie and swiftnes, through the mouth vnto the lungs, and from thence vnto the heart, it pearceth (and cannot bee perceiued) the pores of the skinne, and entreth by the transpiration of the arte∣ries vnto the most deepe and hidden corners of our bodies. This is a bodie so common and neere vnto vs, that it compasseth vs about
continually, without forsaking vs any moment, yea we must whe∣ther we will or no, make our daily supping meate thereof. Diuine Hippocrates hauing very well perceiued this powerfulnes of the ayre, sayth in his Epidemikes, and in his second booke of Diet, that the whole constitution of our spirits, humours and bodie, doth de∣pend wholy vpon the ayre. Wherefore the chusing of a good ayre, and of a fayre and pleasant dwelling place, must alwaies in all good order of diet keepe the first and chiefe place.Wherein the goodnes of the ayre consisteth. The Phisitions take acknowledgement of the goodnesse of the ayre by his sub∣stance and qualities. By his substance, as when it is well purified, not hauing any seeds of corruption in it, neither yet being infected with any venemous vapours, which might rise from dead bodies, priuies, and filthines of townes, or from the putrifaction of stan∣ding waters. There are also certaine plants which a man must hardly come neere vnto to make his ordinarie lodging, because they haue a contrary qualitie vnto the animall spirit, as the Nut tree, Figge tree, Colewort, Danewort, wilde Rocket, Hemlocke, and an infinite sort of others. The vapour of forges and mines, is a very great enemie vnto the hart, and causeth (as Aristotle ob∣serueth) the greatest part of them which labour therein, to fall into a consumption. How to recti∣fie the ayre.If the ayre bee corrupted, and that wee cannot auoide it very quickly, wee must purifie it with artificiall fires, of Rosemarie, Iu∣niper, Cypers, Bay tree, and with parfumes of the wood of Aloes, Saunders, Iuniper beries, Fusses, and such other aromatical things. The vapour of Vineger doth marueilously correct ye maliciousnes of the ayre. As for the qualities of the ayre, all excesse of heat, cold, moysture and drines is euill: it must be chosen such as is (if it bee possible) of a meane temperature.The signes of a good ayre. It is knowne to bee such, if it grow warme shortly after that the Sunne is vp, and contrarily grow cold after the Sunne is set. If there cannot bee found an ayre of such a temperature, it were better that it were a little too drie, then too moyst. For (as Hippocrates saith in his fift Aphorisme of his third booke) drines generally is alwaies more holesome then moysture. What ayre is fittest for old folkes.For old persons there must choise bee made of a hot ayre, an their chamber must neuer be without fire: for it is very certaine,
that they fare and do a great deale better in summer; because they carrie a winter about with them continually. They must be lodged in a place that is raised hie, and their house must bee open on the East-side, that so the morning Sunne may come into their cham∣ber; and on the North-side, the better to purifie the ayre, and to driue away al euill vapours. I will referre vnto this choise of ayre, the vse of sweete sauours, which marueilously reioyce the heart and spirits. It is good daily to carrie some good smell, to keepe ones selfe cleanly and handsome, and to change ones linnens very oft. The ayre then, if it haue all these properties, will serue to repaire our first substance, which the Phisitions call spirituall, which is in∣gendred, nourished, and preserued by the ayre. CHAP. V. Generall rules to be kept in eating and drinking, for the longer preseruation of life. MEates and drinkes must keepe the second places: for the one repaireth the losse of that which is liquide, and the o∣ther doth preserue and vphold that which is solide. I will not here particularly describe all the meates which may hurt or profit; or which are of a good or euill iuyce, let those which are disposed reade what is written by Galen in his bookes of the properties of nourishments, and in his bookes of the preser∣uation of health. I will onely in this chapter deliuer the generall rules, which I haue drawne out of other Phisitions, and aboue all out of Hippocrates, which shall serue all sortes of ages to keepe them from growing old soone, and the first of them is this. The first rule.A man must neuer eate but when he hath some feeling of hun∣ger: for the stomack maketh small reckoning of such meates as it coueteth not, and oftentimes disgesteth better the worst sorts of meates when it receiueth them with an appetite, then the most delicate which doe not delight and please it. This rule is to bee found in the 38. Aphorisme of his second booke.The second. The second rule is, that the meate be well chawed before it be swallowed: for there follow two discommodities when it is swallowed before it bee well chawed; the first is, that one shall eate more then he should,
and thereby ouercharge his stomacke; the other is the greata doe that the stomacke hath to concoct that which is not chewed. The teeth and mouth doe as much seruice and helpe in making prepa∣ration for the first disgestion, as the ayre doth for the cookes, when it maketh their meate tender: and this is the reason why they which haue many teeth doe liue long, namely, because they chaw their meate well. This sentence is to be found in the sixt section of the . booke of Epidemicall diseases.The third. The third rule is, that wee must beware of glutting the stomack: for he that would liue long; must rise vp from the table alwaies with some hunger. The reason is very apparant, because if you loade your stomack too much, you put the naturall heat (being the principall instrument of the soule) to too much paines, and cause it to languish in the end, because e∣uery natural agent, doth suffer in doing. Hippocrates hath very wel noted the same in his 6. book of his Epidemicall diseases. This (saith he) is one of the principall heads for to preserue health, not to feed vnto the full, and not to bestow to labour.The fourth. The fourth rule is, not to eate of moe then one or two sorts of meats: for varietie hurteth infinitly and ouerthroweth our stomacks, because meates are not all of one qualitie, and by consequent one degree of heat will not suffise: some sortes are concocted sooner, and other some more slowly, so that thereby all the kitchin is out of order. You may ioyne here to, that eating varietie of meates and sawces, a man is constrained to drink the oftner: but this maner of drinking doth hinder disgestiō, as you see that the putting of water sundry times into the pot, doth hinder the broth from boyling. Therefore you must neuer abuse the stomack, although it be very good, because that if you displease the cook, you are like to dine but badly. Reade the worthie sentence of Hippocrates in the 3. section of his 6. book of Epidemicall diseases. The slothfulnes of the slomack (saith he) commeth of the disordering of the whole bodie, and of the impu∣ritie of the vessels. And as fulnes doth greatly damnifie, and fill al full of crudities; euen so too much abstinence may heap a whole measure of discommodities vnto the health, because the stomacke being emptie, doth fill it selfe with euill humours. And Galen also obserueth, that a famished stomacke, if it bee not satisfied with some delectable licour, draweth first from the braine a world of
water, and after that the grossest excrements, that are in the gut Ileum. The fift rule teacheth to obserue such an order in eating,The fifth. as that those meates which are easily corrupted be first eaten, be∣cause that if they be taken in the end, they destroy and corrupt the others: such as are concocted with lesse paines, and sooner disge∣sted, ought first to enter into the stomack: but grosse meats, hard and heauie meates shall be the last, quite contrary to the fashion of our artificiall kitchins. Such meates as are apt to loose the bel∣lie, as plums, apples and potage, must also be the first.The sixt. The last rule is, that wee must accustome ourselues to eate more at supper then at dinner, I meane if the bodie be sound and not subiect vn∣to rheume. The reasons thereof are very plaine: for there is more space from supper to dinner, then there is from dinner to supper, so that there is more time to concoct and distribute the nourish∣ment. It is most certaine that when we sleepe, heat is stronger, for that it withdraweth it selfe wholly vnto the center of the bodie. I will adde thereto how that to make good disgestiō we haue need of rest: but in the night al the animal functions cease, there is no∣thing to draw aside our heat, so that it may concoct a great deale better. Thus also haue all the famous and great Phisitions, Hippo∣crates, Galen and Auicen, determined the case. Thus haue all the elder times practised. Wrestlers (as Galen obserueth in the fift booke of the conseruation of health) did neuer eate flesh but at their supper. The Pythagoreans (as Aristoxenus writeth) tooke nothing to dine withall but a little bread with honey: and du∣ring the siege of Troy, the Grecian souldiers (if wee giue credit to that which Philemon reporteth) made foure meales a day, but they tooke nothing but bread and wine at the three first, and at the last which was their supper, they did feede vpon porke. Be∣hold here the generall rules which are to bee obserued in eating, whereto I will adde for an end, that the fittest houre to eate at, is that houre of the day which is most temperate, as in winter that which is most hot, in summer that which is most fresh, and that also with some moderate exercise hauing gone before.
CHAP. VI. How we must in particular nourish old folke, and with what maner of victuals. THe victuals wherewith old men are to be nourished, must bee prouided according to the degrees of their old age. The first kind of old age which is yet greene and strong, may take direction from all those rules, which I haue set downe in the chapter going before: but the other two kindes of ages, haue neede to bee guided after this fashion. They must bee heated and moystned, because their temperature is cold and drie. Let them therefore haue euen all of them, their lodging in a very warme ayre, and let their chamber be neuer without fire.The quantitie of their meate. In seruing them with meate, there must re∣gard be had of the quantitie, qualitie, and maner of vsing of it. As concerning the quantitie, wee must neuer ouerloade them with much meate, because (as Hippocrates obserueth in the fourtenth Aphorisme of the first booke) they haue very little quantitie of na∣turall heate, and that would be quenched, as it falleth out when a great deale of wood is cast vpon a little deale of fire, and further∣more (as the same author sayth) because they can indure fasting very easily.The qualitie. As concerning the qualitie, it is requisite that their meates be of good iuyce and easie disgestion, and of a light mat∣ter, in as much as the substance of old folke doth not lightly wast and spend it selfe. They must be forbidden all slimie, grosse, win∣die, flegmaticke, melancholike and obstructing meates, which may stop the passages. The maner that they must be made to vse in taking them, is to nourish them a little & oft, principally those which are of a decrepite age: others which remaine somewhat Iustie, shall bee content with three meales a day. So were the two old men fed, of whom Galen speaketh in his fift booke of the pre∣seruation of health, that is to say, Antiochus the Phisition, and Te∣lephus the Grammarian. Their bread must bee of good wheate well baked, leauened well, and hauing a little salt mixt with it; they must not eate it hot, because it is not so easily disgested, it ma∣keth
a great deale more alterations in the bodie, ingendreth ob∣structions, and sendeth many vapours to the braine, it must bee of the same day or two daies old, if it passe three daies it drieth too much, and staieth too long time in yt stomack. Al maner of cakes made with cheese, milke, butter; & all other sorts of vnleauened bread, are very hurtfull vnto them.Flesh. Flesh is a very good nourish∣ment, for it nourisheth much, and turneth easily into blood. All flesh that is hard of disgestion and clammie, is altogether contra∣rie vnto this age; the flesh of birds is sooner concocted, then that of foure footed beasts; and such as feede in drie places are more holesome, then those which feede in waterish places. Wee must make choise of such flesh as is of a middle age, for old folke: for young flesh is too moyst, and old flesh is too drie. Their nourish∣ment must be of good Capon, Chickens, Partridge, Feasant, Hen, Mutton, Veale, God wit or Morehen, and yong Pigeons. The Ara∣bians highly commend Turtle doues, because they turne into good iuyce, and make all the sences the more subtile and fine. Some there bee which praise porke, because it commeth next in temperature vnto man: but I forbid it vnto old men, because it ingendreth much superfluous moysture. All the braines of beasts are hurtful vnto the stomacke; liuers doe ingender a grosse blood; the vtmost parts, as the head, the tayle and feete, are hard of disge∣stion, and of small nourishment. The flesh of Lambe, Beefe, Wild-bore, and birds of the riuer, are naught for the stomackes of old men; they must haue made some delicate gallimaufrie with some sauce, good coolasses, gellie, and white meate.Egges. Egges new layd and soft are very good for them, for they nourish much and quickly; if they be hard or fried, they be naught, because they ingender a grosse iuyce, and stay too long in the stomacke. Pot∣ched egges ate most holesome; and those which are boyled in hot water (which Aetius tearmeth to stifle) are much better then them which are rosted in hot ashes, because they are boyled in e∣uery place equally and alike. But in what manner soeuer they bee eaten, they must bee eaten alwaies with salt, to the end they may goe out of the stomacke the sooner: the white of the egge doth nourish but a little, and troubleth the stomacke.Fish. The vse of fish is contrarie to their age, they may eate of a Rochet, Sole and Trout,
but they must be sowst with salt, sage, fennell and wine. Meates of a sharpe taste and which bite a little, as also powdred meates, are not euill, because they stirre vp the appetite, awake naturall heate, and consume all that store of grosse flegme which is within the stomacke.Spices. It is good to spice their meates, with Pepper, Gin∣ger and Cinamome, and to vse gray mustard. Onions and Gar∣like are not euill for them, if they loue them, and haue been accu∣stomed to eate them. Cheese is naught: butter is wholesome for them, because it moystneth and heateth them, and also gratifieth the breast: sweete oyle Oliue is also excellent good. Milke is good for some: but in such as are subiect to many obstructions, it rather doth harme. They of old time haue much esteemed the vse of Honey in this age, spreading it vpon their bread, putting it in their sauces,Fruites. and almost in all their meates. Raw fruites, and such as are very moyst, are not good for them, because they are easily corrupted. Damaske and dried Raisines are good for the liuer, stomacke, reines and bladder. Almonds doe procure sleepe, in∣crease (if we beleeue Auicen) the substance of the braine, and cleanse the passages of vrine. Drie Figs, Pistaces, Dates, small nuts rosted, nuts confected with Honey, Mirobalanes, Oliues, and Pine-apples are very fit for old men. CHAP. VII. What maner of drinke is best for old folkes. DRinke is as necessarie and profitable for olde men, as it is hurtfull for children. There is an old pro∣uerbe which sayth, that olde folke liue onely on the pot, as old Eagles doe vpon the iuyce of carryon. Wine is all their refreshment,The praise of wine. and therefore some doe call it old folkes milke; it heateth all their parts, and casteth out the waterish parts of the foure humours by vrine. Plato in his second booke of Lawes writeth, that wine heateth the body, and reuiueth the drouping spirits of old men, euen as the yron relenteth with the heate of the fire. Zeno sayd oftentimes, that
wine correcteth and maketh pleasant the manners of the most harsh and churlish natures. One of the most renowmed Phi∣sitions that euer Arabia bred, writeth, that yong folke must refraine wine: but so soone as they bee fortie yeeres olde, looke how oft they either see or smell it, they ought to praise God, and giue him thankes for creating of so pleasant and delightsome a licour. The wine that is chiefly to bee made choise of for old folke,What wine is best for olde folke. must be an old, red, and good strong wine, and it must not bee much delayed. New, sweete and grosse, are not good, because they stop the liuer, the spleene and passages of vrine, and make old age sub∣iect vnto the dropsie or stone. It is not good to drinke wine fa∣sting, nor after that one is throughly heated, because the vapour thereof ascendeth by and by vp into the head, hutteth the sinewes, and causeth conuulsions, sudden rheumes and apoplexies. Olde men must drinke a little at once and oft. Galen commendeth artificiall wines, made of Betonie and Parcelie, for the Stone and Goute, Hippocras, Malmesie and Candie wine; foreseene that they be not counterfeited, neither yet contrarie to their natures. Honyed water is commended of all men, they may vse the com∣mon for their ordinarie drinke, and the other (which is called the counterfeite of wine, being strong like vnto Malmesie) they may take in the morning with a toste, CHAP. VIII. Of the exercises of old folke. IT is most certaine, that all manner of nourish∣ment how cleane and puresoeuer it bee, hath al∣waies something in it not agreeable vnto nature. It must necessarily therefore follow, that in euery concoction there be ingendred some excrement, which being kept and not auoyded, may bee the cause of an infinite sort of diseases. The grosser kinde of excre∣ments doe purge themselues, by a sensible and manifest kinde of euacuation: but the more subtile and fine maybe wasted and resolued by exercise.
This is the cause why diuine Hippocrates in his bookes of Diet,The necessitie of exercise. hath affirmed, and that very well, that man cannot liue in health, if he ioyne not labour and foode together, because (sayth he) that the one repayreth natures expences, and the other spendeth her superfluities and surcharging burthens. Plato in his Theaetetus writeth, that exercise vpholdeth and preserueth the good state of the bodie, and that idlenes on the contrarie doth ouerthrow it. Exercise moderatly and orderly vsed, preuenteth repletion, the meere nurse of a thousand diseases, increaseth naturall heate, kee∣peth open both the sensible and insensible passages of the bodie, maketh the bodie plyant and nimble, prepareth and disposeth all the superfluities and excrements, as well vniuersall as particular, vnto auoidance, strengtheneth the sinewes marueilously, and ma∣keth all the ioynts more firme. And this is it which Hippocrates saith in his Epidemicall treatises, that as sleepe is requisite for the inward parts, so labour serueth to strengthen the ioynts. There is a notable treatise in Celsus, which I must not passe ouer with si∣lence. Sluggish slothfulnes (sayth he) doth make the bodie loose and heauie, but paines and labour doth make it firme and nimble: idlenes maketh vs soone to waxe old, and exercise preserueth our youthfulnes long and many yeares.How we must vse our exer∣cises. But we must carrie our selues cunningly in the manner of our exercises: first, it must bee done before we eate, because thereby wee awake naturall heate, that it may be the readier to disgest, and not asleepe when it should bee doing his dutie. Hippocrates his Aphorisme is most plaine and euident: Let labour goe before meate. This exercise must be mo∣derated according to our meate: for they that eate much, must worke much; and they that eate but a little, must labour the lesse. This exercise also must be moderate and equall. I call that mode∣rate, which maketh not wearie: and I call that equall, which ex∣erciseth all the parts of the bodie both vpper and lower alike. Vio∣lent and vnequall exercise ouerthroweth the strongest bodies, weakeneth their ioynts, and maketh all the muscles loose, wherein consisteth a part of nimblenes. The morning exercise is best, or else at after dinner when the two first concoctions are perfected: that which is vsed by and by after meate, begetteth an infinite number of obstructions, filleth the veines with raw humours, and
causeth the meate to descend too soone out of the stomacke. In winter we must walke more swiftly, and in summer more softly: and alwaies the Phisition must haue regard to that whereunto the partie is accustomed: for as Hippocrates writeth in his second book of Aphorismes; They which are accustomed to take paines, doe beare it the more easily, although they be weake, and come to old age. There are vniuersall and particular exercises. The vni∣uersall (if a man can do them) are the better: and amongst them, one praiseth especially the ball play, foote-walkes, and riding. The particular are fricasies, which auaile much to the stirring vp of naturall heate, to make attraction of nourishment to any part, and to consume the vapours and excrements of the third concoction, which lie lurking oftentimes in the voide spaces of the muscles and among the membranes. Old folke must content themselues with moderate exercise,The exercise of old folke. for feare that the little naturall heat which they haue should be spent. Frications, or rubbing of the parts are most fit for them. They must be rubd and chafed in the morning after they be awake, vn∣till the parts begin to bee red and warme. The rubbing must be∣gin at the armes, and from thence to the shoulders, backe and breast, from thence we must goe downe to the thighes, and rise vp againe from thence to the shoulders; the head must bee the last, which must be combd and trimd vp euery morning. There are o∣ther particular exercises of the eyes, voyce and breast, which are of vse. CHAP. IX. What rules are to be obserued in sleeping. SLeepe is one of the chiefe poynts of well ordering and gouerning ones self: cōcerning which there are certaine generall rules to be obserued of thē which are desirous to keep back and hinder the hastie ac∣cesse of old age. It is good (saith Hippocrates) to sleepe onely in the night, and to keepe waking in the daytime. Sleeping at nooneday is very dangerous, and maketh all the body
heauie and blowne vp. It must be obserued not to goe to bed vn∣der three or foure haures after supper, and then also to take a little walke vp and downe the chamber before you goe into bed. The best and most naturall sleepe is that which lasteth seuen houres, and in that time not to haue ouer many clothes vpon the bed, to the end the vapours may haue the freer passage. One must sleepe hauing their head somewhat raised, least the meate should rise from the bottome of the stomacke vnto the vpper mouth there∣of; and in sleeping he must not lie vpon his backe, least the ordi∣narie excrements of the braine, which are purged by the nose and mouth, should fall vpon the backe bone; and least also that by ly∣ing vpon his backe, he should heate the grosse hollow veine and great arterie, which are fastned to the loynes, and so these vessels thus heated, should increase the heate of the reines, ingender the Stone, and send great quantitie of vapours vnto the braine. It is good to take his first sleepe vpon the right side, for seare the liuer should fall vpon the stomacke and oppresse it, as it would doe if he should he vpon the spleene; and further because that lying on the right side, he liuer vnderlaieth the stomacke, and seruing it in stead of a chafing-dish, helpeth disgestion very much. After this he must turne him vpon his left side, to the end that the vapours retayned by lying on the right side, may breathe out: & finally he must lie vpō the right side, to the end that what shalbe concocted, may discend the more easily. The parts of the bodie must not be stretched out al along in sleeping, they must be somewhat drawne vp: for as Galen obserueth in his first booke of the mouing of the muscles, the rest of the muscles consisteth in a meane kind of con∣traction. And that is the figure, which the Anathomists call the meane or middle figure, which is most naturall and least painfull. And thus much for the generall rules of sleepe, which seeing all old men cannot tell how to keepe, we will permit them to sleepe a little after dinner, in as much as they cannot but lie waken al∣most all nights long. Some referre the cause of their lying awake to their temperature, which is drie, and to the sharpe vapours which commonly are raised of salt flegme.
Chap. X. How we must make old folkes merrie, and put them out of all maner of violent passions of the minde. PLato in a Dialogue, which he intituleth Car∣mides, writeth as the trueth is, that the most violent and dangerous diseases that the body suffereth, doe come from the minde: for the minde (sayth he) hauing a soueraigne power and absolute authoritie to command the bo∣die,The power of the minde o∣uer the bodie. moueth, altereth, and chaungeth it in a moment as it pleaseth. How many diseases doe we see to rise, and to bee cured by the onely force of imagination? How many ex∣amples haue we of such as sudden and extreame ioy hath brought vnto their end? And griefes, pensiuenes, and sadnes, doe they not cast vs headlong into an infinite number of melancholike disea∣ses, which serue for a scourge vnto the Phisition, and their owne confusion for their obstinacie? Wee haue read many histories of such as haue growne white haired in foure and twentie houres, vpon feare onely and a conceited opinion of death. So that hee which would liue long and in health, must keepe himselfe as much as he can free from all violent passions. But olde men more then any other must beware, both because they are ordinarily more subiect to feare, taking of offence, and waywardnes, because of their cold distemperature: as also because of the weakenes of their braine. And other men must indeuour to take from them all occasion of feare and sadnes, least they should thereby become more cold. There is no danger now and then to moue their cho∣ler, thereby to rouse them vp and warme them a little: they must bee made merrie as much as may bee, and euery thing ministred vnto them that may content and please them. But for as much as all the pleasures and displeasures which wee feele in our mindes, doe rise from the sences, which are the trustie spyes, and faithfull messengers thereof, wee must (if wee will con∣tent and please olde men,) flatter and tickle their sences,
the sight, hearing, smelling and taste, in prouiding for euery one of them, matters that are most agreeable and fit for them. The eye delighteth it selfe wonderfully in the beholding of beautifull wo∣men;The pleasures of sight. and I am of opinion that such sight onely will content old men. Varietie of flowers, and diuersitie of faire colours doth re∣ioyce them infinitly. They must weare continually some one or o∣ther rich and precious Iewell, and amongst others the Saphir and Emerauld, because there is not any other colour that doth pre∣serue and comfort the sight so much as doth the greene and vio∣let. The hearing hath his particular delights, which pearce yet more deeply,The rauish∣ment of the eare. and sound the very bottome of the minde. Musicke with voyces and instruments, doth calme and make gentle the most outragious, rough and sterne natures. Clinias (as I haue ob∣serued in the treatise of melancholike diseases) so soone as he saw any passion to assaile him, tooke his harpe, and by this meanes kept away the motions of his humour. Old men must be held vp with such discourses as they like of; they must bee praised, they must bee flattered, they must not bee gainsayd in anything, and there must bee propounded vnto them matter which may please them, and whereunto they haue been brought vp; as lucre and gaine vnto the marchant; great exploytes and feates of armes, to the warriour; learned discourses, to such as are learned: for these doe hold them awake and content. Witnesse hereof is that good old man and graue law-maker Solon, who being in his death-bed, and seeing two or three of his friends whispering together, for feare they should offend him, did list vp himselfe luftely, and desi∣red them to speake aloude, thinking himselfe most happie if at his last houre he might leame any thing.The pleasures of smelling. As concerning the sence of smelling, it is most certaine that good smels doe make the heart ioyfull and merrie, and purifie the spirits. I am of opinion there∣fore, that it were good for olde men to carrie about them some good odours, as chaines and balles of Muske, that they haue al∣waies in their chamber some good parfumes, that they wash their beards,The pleasures of the taste. hands and faces with sweete waters. As for the taste, it is to be referred vnto the victuals, and for it there must daily bee pro∣uided some daintie dish, and some one meate or other that is sharpe in taste, to stirre vp their appetite. Behold therefore and
see wherein consisteth the maner of dyet to be obserued of olde folke: and it behoueth (that I may make an end of the whole dis∣course) that euery one become wise, to know his naturall inclina∣tion, and that experience of such things as do him good or harme, make him a maister and Phisition vnto himselfe. CHAP. XI. What medecines are most fit for olde folke, and by what meanes, the discommodities of olde age may be amended. SO many are the discommodities which olde age bringeth with it, as that the learned of olde time did thinke it to come neerer to the nature of a disease then of health.The discom∣modities wai∣ting vpon old men. You shall see olde men commonly to be costiue, to abound with fleagme, and sharpe waterish humours, which causes some small itchings and burning of vrine, they are all full of windines, and feele an vniuersall weake∣nes ouer all their bodies, because they haue a weake stomacke, and the naturall heate of their whole bodie is faint and languish∣ing, they are in a maner altogether subiect to theumes, and cease not either to cough, spit, or weepe. All these infirmities may be prouided against by some gentle and delightsome medicines. And first of all, the bellie must be made good,How the belly may be kept soluble. A laxatiue broth. (that is to say loose) with artificiall brothes, which may bee prepared diuerse waies. Take of the tender crops of Mallowes, of Mercurie, Garden and wilde Artichoke, and of the hearbe called Cynocrambe, boyle them with a Chicken, and take it in the morning. The broth of red Coleworts with oyle, is very good, but the broth of a Cocke is the excellentest of all the rest: it must be made thus. Take an olde Cocke, pull him and beate him well, afterward kill him,The broth of a Cocke. and ha∣uing taken out his guts, wash him twise or thrise in white wine, and stuffe his bellie with a handful of the rootes of Percely, the leaues of Borage, Buglosse, Burnet, Mercurie, Artichoke of the garden and field, fat Figs, damaske Raisins, Dates, Iuiubes the seed of Carthamus and Hisope, boile all these together perfectly, and
afterward straine them very well for the purpose, and cause it to be taken three dayes together. Some put thereto a little of the salt of Tartar, to giue it some sharpenes. This broth serueth ex∣ceeding well for olde men, for it keepeth the bodie loose, cleanseth the waies of Vrine, and is very profitable for the breast, and short∣nes of breath, whereunto they be subiect. Suppositories must be ordinarilie vsed of them, as also mollifying Clysters. Galen would not that we should vse any strong and sharpe Clysters, he resteth contented in the onely vse of oyle Oliue. For inward Laxatiues I like well and allow of the pills of Hiera, of Aloes well prepared, and those which are called Mastichinae. Turpentine cleanseth and purgeth all the inward parts,Remedies for the weakenes of their sto∣macke. without danger for the weakenes of their stomacke, and to discusse the windes which put them to paine, the roote of Ginger confected, Lozenges of Aromaticum Rosatum, sugard Anise seede, Cinamome water, the essence of Anise seede,To stirre vp the heate of olde folke. of Iuniper berries and Cloues is commended. To stir vp the heate which may seeme to be asleepe all ouer the bodie, I finde nothing better, then to cause them to take oftentimes the weight of two French Crownes of Amber Grise in a very new egge. I allow also of the vse of Treacle, Mithridate, Confectio Alkermes, Aquae Theriacales, Imperiales, and Caelestes. The com∣positions whereof I set not downe, because they are at this day ve∣ry common. All the parts also may be strengthned with outward medecines, as the braine by caps and head powders, amongst which Auenzoar praiseth Cloues powdred and scattered vpon the Coronall suture, the heart by emplasters, oyntments, and bags, the stomacke by oyntments and bags. Finally, we must thinke, that all aromaticall things, and those which smell well, are good for olde folke. FINIS.
