7279 20051016 23626
AN EPISTLE OF the Ladye Iane a righte vertuous woman, To a learned man of late falne from the truth of Gods most holy word, for fear of the worlde. Read it, to thy consolacion. VVherunto is added the com¦munication that she had with master Feckenham vpon her faith, and belefe of the Sa∣craments. Also another Epistle whiche she wrote to her sister, with the words she spake vpon the Scaffold befor she suffered. Anno. M. D. Liiii.
SO oftas I cal to mind the dreadful, & feareful say∣ings of god: that he whi∣che laieth hold vpon the plough, and looketh back again, is not meete for the kyngdome of heauen. And on the other syde, to remember the comfortable words of our sauiour Christ, to all those that forsaking them selues, do fo∣lowe him, I can not but meruel at thee, and lament thy case. That thou, which some tyme wast the liuely member of Christ: but now the defourmed impe of the diuel, some time the beutiful temple of God: but now the stincking & fil∣thy kenell of Sathan, some tyme the vnspotted spouse of Christe, but nowe the vnshamefast para∣mour of Antichrist, sometyme my faithful brother: but now a straū∣ger and Apostata yea some tyme a stout christen souldier: but now a cowardly runawaye. So ofte as I consider the threatninges & pro∣mises of god to al those that faith fully loue him: I can not but speak to the, yea, rather cry out vpō the, thou sede of Sathā, & not of Iuda
whom the deuill hathe deceiued, the worlde hath begiled, and de∣sire of life hath subuerted & made the of a Christiā, aninfidel. wher∣fore hast thou taken vpon the, the testamēt of the lord in thi mouth? wherefore hast thou hitherto yel∣ded thi body to the fire, and blo∣di handes of cruel tirauntes? wher fore haste thou instructed other to be strong in Christ, when thou thy selfe dost nowe so horribly abuse the testament and law of the lord: when thou thy selfe preachedst (not to steale) yet most abhomina∣bly stealest (not from men) but frō God, and as a most hainous sacre∣leger, robbest, Christ thi Lorde, of his right, of his members, thy bo∣dy and thy soule▪ when thou thy selfe dost rather chose to liue mi∣serably (with shame) to the world then to dye, and gloriouslye with honour to taigne with Christ, In whom? euen in death, theris life. And when I say thou thy selfe art most weke, thou oughtest, to shew thy selfe moost stronge. For the strength of a forte, is not knowne
before the assaulte, but thou yel∣dest thy holde, before any battry be made. Oh wretched and vnhappi man what art thou but dust and ashes? And wilte thou resist thy maker that formed the, & fashioned the, wilt thou nowe forsake him that called the frō costome gathering, among the Romish antichtistians to be an imbassadour and messen∣ger of his eternall worde, he that first framed the: and since thi cre∣ation, and birth preserued the: no rished the: and kepte the: yea, & in spired the with the spirit of kno∣ledge: (I cannot say of grace) shal he not possesse the? Darest thou deliuer vp thy selfe to another, be¦ing not thine owne, but his? How canst, thou hauinge knowledge, or how darest thou neglect the law of the lord: & folow the vaine tradi∣cions of men? And where as thou hast bene a publicke professour of his name, becom now a defacer of his glorye. I will thou refuse the true GOD: and worshippe the inuencio of manne, The golden
Calfe, the whoore of Babilon, the Romish religion, the abominable idol, the most wicked masse: wylt thou torment againe, rent & teare the most precious bodi, of our Sa∣uiour Christ, with thy bodily and fleshly teeth? without the brea∣king wherof vpon the crosse, our sinful sinnes could els nowaies be redemed. wilt thou take vpon the to offer vp ani sacrifice vnto God for our synnes? Consydering that Christ offred vp him self (as Paul saith) vpon the crosse a lyuely sa∣crifice once for al. Can neyther the punisment of the Israelites (which for their ido latrye so oft they receaued) moue the, neyther the terrible threate∣ninges of the auncient prophetes, stirrethee, nor the cursses of gods owne mouth, feare the to honour any other god then hym? VVylte thou so regarde him, that spared not his deare and only sonne for the, so deminishing, yea, vtterlye extinguishing his glori, that thou wilt attribute the praise & honour to idols, which haue mouthes. &
speake not, eyes, and se not, eates and yet heare not: which shal pe∣rish with them that made them? what saith the prophet Barucke, wher he reciteth the epistel of Ie∣remi, writtē to the captiue Iewes? Did he not forewarne them, that in Babilon thei should se gods of gold, siluer, wood, & stone, borne vpon mens shulders, to cast a fear before the heathen, but be not ye afraide of them (saieth Ieremie) nor do as other do. But when you se other worship them, saye you in your hartes: it is thou (O Lord) that oughtest only to be worship∣ped: for as for the timber of those gods, the Carpenter framed them and polyshed them, yea, gylded be they, and laid ouer with siluer, and vayne thynges: and can not speake. He sheweth moreouer, the abuse of their deckings, how the priests toke of their ornamēts, and appareled their women with¦all. Howe one holdeth a Septer, another a sworde in hys hande, and yet can they iudge in no mat∣ter, nor defend them selues, much
Iesse any other, from either batte or murther, nor yet from gnawing of woormes, nor anye other euyll thing. These, & such lyke words, speaketh Ieremy vnto them, wher by he proueth them butvain thin∣ges, and no gods. And at last he cō cludeth thus: Confounded be thei that worship thē. They wer war∣ned by Ieremye, and thou as Iere∣my, hast warned other, & art war∣ned thy selfe, by many scriptures, in many places. God saieth: he is a gelious god, which wil haue al honour, glorye, and worship geuen to him onlye. And Christ saith in the fourth of Luke to Sathan, whiche tempted him: euen to the same Sathan, the same Belsabub, the same dyueil, whyche hath preuayled againste thee. It is written (saieth he) thou shalt honour the Lorde thy God, and him onelie shalt thou serue. These and such like do prohibite thee and al Christians to worship anie other God then whiche was before all worldes: and laied the foundations bothe of heauen and
earth. And wilt thou honour a de∣testable idol, inuented by Romish Popes, & the abominable colledge of craftie Cardinals? Christ offred him selfe vp once for al, and wylte thou offer him vp againe dayly at thy pleasure? But thou wilt saye▪ thou dost it for a good entent. Oh sincke of sinne, Oh child of perdi∣cion: Doest thou dreame therein a good entent, wher thy conscience beareth the witnes, the promis of gods wrath toward the? How did Saule: who for that he dysobeied the word of god for a good entēt, was throwen frō his worldli & tem poral kingdome? Shalt thou then, that dost so deface gods honor, & robbe him of his right: inherit the eternal and heauenly kingdome? wilt thou for a good entent pluk Christe oute of heauen, and make hys deathe voyde, and deface the tryumphe of hys crosse, offeryng hym vp daylye? VVylte thou ey∣ther for feare of death, or hope of life, deny and refusethi God, who enriched thi pouerti, healed thine infirmitie, & yelded to this victori,
if thou couldest haue kept it? Doth thou not consider that the thryde of lyfe, hangeth vpon hym that made the: who can (as his wyll is) either twine it hard, to last the lō∣ger, or vntwine it againe to breake it the sooner? Doest thou not re∣member the saying of Dauid a notable king, which teacheth thee a myserable wretche, in hys, ciiii. Psalme, wher he sayth: whē thou takest away thy spirite (O Lorde) from men, they dye, and ar turned againe to their dust, but whē thou lettest thy breath go fourth, they shalbe made, & thou shalt renew the face of the earth? Remember the saying of Christ in his Gospel, who soeuer seeketh to saue hys lyfe, shall loose it, but whosoeuer wil lese it for mi sake, shal find it. And in another place: whosoeuer loueth father or mo∣ther aboue me: is not mete for me. For he that wyll be my dysciple, must for sake Father and Mother, and him selfe, & take vp his crosse and folow me. VVhat crosse? the crosse of infamy, & shame, of mi∣sery
and pouerty, of affliction & persecution for hys names sake. Let the oft faliing of those hea¦uenly showres pearce thy stonye hart. Let the two edged sword of gods holy word, shere a sōder the sewed together sino wes of world ly respectes, euen to the very ma∣ri of thi carnal hart, that thou mai¦est once againe forsake thy self, & embrace Christ. And like as good subiectes wil not refuse to hasard al in the defence of hys earthly & temporall gouernour: So flye not lyke a white hewred milke soppe from thy standynge, wherein thy chief captaine Christ hath set the in a rai of this life, Viriliter age cō¦fortetur cortuum, & sustine Domi¦num. Fight manfullye, come lyfe, come death, the quarel is gods, & vndoubtedly the victorye is ours. But thou wilt say: I wil not break vnitye. what, not the vnitie of Sa∣than and his members? Not the v¦nitie of darknes, the agreement of Antichrist and hys adhearentes? Nay, thou deceiuest thy self with fond imaginations of suche an v∣nitie
as is amonge the enemyes of Christ. were not the false prophe∣tes in an vnitie? were not Iosephs brethren, and Iacobs sonnes in an vnitie? wer not the heathen, as the Amelechites, the Feresites and Ie∣busites in an vniti? I kepe no order but rather looke to mi matter. wer not the Scribes and Phariyses in an vnitie? Doth not king Dauid te∣stefie: Conuenerunt in vnū, aduer∣sus Dominum? Yea, theeues and murtherers conspyratours, haue theyr vnitie. But marke my frende (ye frend) if thou be not Gods enemy. Ther is no vnitye, but wher Christ knit∣teth the knotte among such as be hys. Yea, be you wel assured, that where his truthe is resident, the it is verefyed that he sayeth: Non veni mittere pacem in terram, sed gladium. That is, Christe came to set one against another: the sonne against the father, the daughter a∣gainst the mother. Deceiue not thi selfe therfore with the glysteryng and gloryous name of vnitye. For Antichrist hath his vnitie, yet not
in deede, but in name. The agree∣ment of euery man, is not an vniti, but a conspiracie. Thou hast heard some threate∣ninges, some curses, and some ad∣monishions oute of the Scripture, to those that loue themselues a∣boue Christ. Thou hast heard al∣so, the sharpe and byting wordes, to those that denye him for loue of life. Saieth he not, that he that denieth me before men, I wyl de∣nie hym, before my father in hea∣uen? And to the same effecte wry∣teth Sainte Paule. Hebru. vi. It is impossyble (saieth he) that they which be once lightned and haue tested of the heauenly gyfte, and be partakers of the holy gost, and haue tasted of the good worde of God, if they fal and slide away, it is impossible that they shuld be renewed againe by repentaunce, crucifiynge againe to them selues the sōne of God, and making him a mocking stocke. And again (sai∣eth he) if we shal willinglie sinne, after we haue receined the know∣ledge of the truthe, there is no
oblation left for sinne, but the ter¦rible expectation of iudgement, & fire which shal deuour the aduer∣saries. Thus S. Paule writeth, and this thou readest. And dost thou not quake and tremble? well, yf these terrible & thundring threat ninges cannot stur thee, to cleaue vnto Christ & forsake the worlde: yet let the swete consolaciōs and promises of the scriptures, let the example of Christ & his Apostles, holi Martirs and Confessours, en∣courage the to take faster hold by Christ. Harken what he saith: bles¦sed are you when men reuile you & persecute you for my sake, Re∣ioyce, & be glad, for great is your reward in heauen. For so persecu¦ted thei the prophets before you. Heare what Esay saith: Feare not the cursse of men, be not afraid of theyr blasphemes & reuylynges, for wormes and mothes shal eate them vp like clothe & wol, but my rightousnes shal endure for euer, and my sauing health, from gene∣ration to generation. VVhat art thou then (saith he) that featest a
mortal man, the chylde of a man that fadeth away as doth the flo∣wer, and forgettest the Lord that made the, that spread out the hea¦uens, and laid the foundations of the earth. I am the Lord thy God that maketh the sea to tage, and to be styl, who is the lord of hosts. I shal put my word in thy mouth, and defend the, with the turning of a hand. And our sauiour Christ saith to his disciples: They shall accuse you, and brynge you be∣fote the princes and rulers, for mi names sake. And some of you thei shal persecute & kil, but feare you not (saith he) neither care you not what you shal say, for it is mi spi¦rit that speaketh in you, the hand of the highest fhal defēd you, for the heates of your head are nom∣bred, and none of them shall pea∣rish. I haue layed vp treasure for you (saith he) wher no theefe can steale, nor moth corrupt, and hap¦pye are you, if you endure to the end. Feare not them (saith Christ) that haue power ouer the bodi on¦ly, but feare him that hath power
both ouer the bodi and soule. The world loueth her owne, and if ye wer of the world, the world wold loue you, but you ar mine, therfore the worlde doth hate you. Lette these and suche like consolacions, out of the Sctyptures, strengthen you to Godward. Let not the en∣samples of holy men & wemen, go out of your minde, as Daniel, & the teast of the prophetes, of the thre Childrē, of Eleazarus that constāt father, of the vii. of the Machabes Children, of Peter, Paule, Steuen, & other Apostles and holi Martirs in the beginning of the church. As of good Simeō Archbishop of Se¦loma, and zetrophone, with infy∣nite other vnder Sapores the king of the Persians and Indians, who cōtempned al tormentes deuysed by the tiraunts, for theyr Sauiours sake. Returne, returne, againe into Christes watre, & as becommeth a faithful watriour, put on that ar∣mour that S. Paule teacheth to be moste necessatye for a Christian man. And aboue all thynges take to you the shyelde of faythe.
And be ye prouoked by Christes owne example to withstande the deuil, to forsake the world, and to be come a true and faithful mem∣ber of his mistical body, who spa∣red not his own body for our sins. Thro we doune thy selfe with the feare of his thretned vengeaunce for this so great & heinous offēce of Apostacy, and cōfort yout selfe on the other part with the mercy, bloud and promises of him that is ready to turne to you, when soe∣uer thou tourne to him. Disdaine not to com again with the lost son seinge you haue so wandred with him. Be not ashamed to tourne a∣gain with him frō the swil of straū¦gers, to the delicates of the moste bening and louing father, Ackno∣ledginge, that you haue sinned a∣gainst heauen and earth. Againste heauen by stainynge his glorious name, and caused his most cinsere and pure worde to be euill spoken of, through you. Against earth, by offending your so many weak bre¦thren, to whom you haue bene a stomblinge blocke throughe your sodaine slidinge.
Be not ashamed to come againe with Marye, and to wepe bitterly with Peter, not only with sheding of teares out of your bodely eyes: but also powring out the streames of your heart, to wash awaye out of the sight of God, the filth and mire of your offensiue fal. Be not ashamed to saye with the Publi∣cane: Lord be merciful to me a sin¦ner. Remember the hortible histo¦ry of Iulien of old, and the lamen∣table case of Fraunces Spira of late, whose case (me thyncketh) should be yet so grene in your re∣membraūce, that being a thing of our time, you should fear the like inconuenience, seing that you are fallen into the like offēce. Last of al, let the liuely remembraunce of the last day be alwaies afore your eyes, remembring the terrour that suche shalbe in at that time, with the tunnagates and fugetiues frō Christ, which setting more by the worlde, then by heauen, more by their life, thē b him that gaue thē their life, did shrink, yea did clean sal away from him that neuer for∣soke
them. And contrary wise the inestimable ioyes prepared for thē that feared no parel, nor dreading death, haue manfully fought, and victoriouslye triūphed oueral po∣wer of darknes, ouer hel, death, & damnation, through their most re∣doubted captain Christ, who now stretcheth out his armes to receiue you, ready to fal vpon your necke and kisse you, and last of al to feast you with the deinties & delicates of his own precious bloud, which vndoutedly, if it might stād wyth his determinate purpose, he wold not let to shed againe, rather then you should be lost. To whō with the father and the holy ghost, be honoure, prayse and glorye euerlasting ly. Amen. Be constant, be constant, feare not for payne: Christ hath redemed the, and heauen is thy gayne.
A CERTAYNE COMMVNY∣cation, betwene the Lady Iane, & Master Feckenham, iiii. dayes be∣fore her death, euen word for word, her own hand be∣ing put therto. Feckenham fitst speaketh. WHat thing is required in a Christian? Iane. To be∣leue in God the Father, in God the sonne, in god the holi gost, thre persons and one God. Fecken. Is ther nothing els required in a Christian, but to be∣leue in God? Iane. Yes, we must beleue in him, we must loue hym, with al our hart, with al our soule, and al our minde, and our neygh∣bour as our selfe. Fecken. VVhy thē faith iustifieth not, nor saueth not. Iane. Yes verely, saith (as S. Paule saith) only iustifieth. Fec. whi. s. Paul saith: if I haue al faith without loue, it is nothing. Iane. True it is, for how can I loue hym, in whom I trust not? Or howe can I trust in him, whō I loue not? faith and loue agreeth both together, & yet loue is comprehēded in faith. Fecken. Howe shall we loue our
neyghbour? Iane. To loue oure neyghbour, is to feede the hungri, clothe the naked, and geue drinke to the thirsty, and to do to hym, as we wold do to our selues. Feck. why then it is necessary to saluati∣on to do good workes, and it it not sufficient to beleue. Iane. I deny that, and I affirme that faith only saueth. But it is mete for Christiās in token that thei folow their ma∣ster Christ, to do good workes, yet may we not say that thei profit to saluaciō. For although we haue al don al that we cā, yet we be vnpro¦fitable seruauntes, and the fayth onelye in Christes bloude, saueth. Fecken. How many sacrameutes be there? Iane. Two, the one the sacrament of Baptisme, & the o∣ther the sacrament of our Lordes suppet. Fecken. No, ther be. vii. Iane. By what scripture find you that? Fecken. well, we will talke ther of hereafter. But what is sig∣nifyed by your two sacramentes? Ian. Bi the sacramēt of baptisme, I am washed with water, & regene¦rated bi the spirit, & that washing
is a tokē to me, that I am the child of God. The sacrament of the lor¦des supper is offred vnto me as a sure seale and testimoni, that I am by the bloud of Christe whiche  shedde for me on the crosse, mad partaket, of the euerlasting kyng∣dome. Feck. why▪ what do you receiue in that bread? Do you not receiue the very body and bloude of Christ? Iane. No surelye, I do not beleue so, I thinck that at that supper sireceiue neither flesh, nor bloud, but only bread & wine. The which breade when it is broken, & the wine whē it is dronke, putteth me in minde, how that for my sins the body of Christ was broken, & his bloud shed on the crosse, and with that bread & wine, I receyue the benefites that cam bi breaking of his bodi, & bi the sheddyng of his bloud on the crosse for mi sins. Feck. why doth not Christ speake these wordes▪ take, eate, this is my bod? Require we ani plainer wor∣des? Doth not he say that it is hys body? Iane. I graunt he saith so, & so he saieth: I am the vine, I am , but yet he is neuer the
mote, the vine nor doe. Doth not S. Paull say, that he calleth those things that are not as though thei were? God forbid that I shuld say that I eate the very natural bodi & bloud of Christ, for then eyther I shuld pluk awai my redētiō, either els ther wer .ii. bodies, or .ii. christs or els. ii. bodies, the one body was tormented on the crosse, & then if thei did eate another body, thē ei∣ther he had. ii. bodies, either els if his bodi wer eaten, it was not bro∣ken vpō the crosse, or els if it were broken vpon the crosse, it was not eaten of his disciples. Feck. whi is it not as possible, that Christ by his power coulde make his bodye both to be eaten & broken, as to be borē of a womā, without the sede of mā, & as to walke on the sea, ha∣uing a body, & other such like mi∣racles as he wrought by his power only? Iane. Yesvereli if god wold haue done at his supper a miracle, he might haue don so, but I say he minded no worke nor miracle, but only to breake his bodi, & shed his blud on the crosse for our sins. But
I pray you answer me to thys one question, wher was Christ whē he sayd: Take, eate, this is my body? was not he at the table when he said so? He was at that time aliue, and suffred not, til the next daye. well, what tooke he, but breade? and what brake he, but bread? and what gaue he, but breade? Looke what he toke, he brake, and looke what he brake, he gaue, and looke what he gaue, that did they eate, and yet al this while he hym selfe was at supper before his disciples or els they were deceiued. Feck. You groūd your faith, vpon suche authors as say & vn say, both with a breathe, & not vpon the church, to whō you ought to giue credyt. Iane. No, I ground my faith vpon gods word, & not vpō the church. For if the church be a good chur∣che, the faith of the churche must be tried by gods word, & not gods word by the church, neither yet mi faith. Shall I beleue the churche, because of antiquitie? Or shall I geue credit to that church, that ta¦keth awai from me, that half part
of the Lordes supper, and wyl let no lai mā receiue it in both kindes: but thēselues? which thing if they denye to vs, thei denie vs parte of our saluation, and I say that is an euil church, and not the spouse of Christ, but the spouse of the diuel, that altreth the Lordes supper, & both taketh from it, and addeth to it. To that churche I saye, God wil adde plages, & frō that church wyll he take their parte out of the booke of lyfe. Do you not learne that of S. Paul, when he ministred it to the Corinthians in both kyn∣des? Shall I beleue that churche? God forbid. Fecken. That was done of a good intent of the chur∣che to auoide an heresi that sprōg on it. Iane. whi, shal the church alter gods wil and ordinaūces, for a good intent? How did king Saul the lord define. with these & such like perswasions. He wolde haue had me to haue leaned to the chur¦che, but it would not be. Ther wer many mo thinges, wherof we rea∣soned, but these wer the chief. Be me Iane Dudley.
These woordes were spoken o∣penlye. After this Master Fecken∣ham tooke his leaue sayinge: that he was sorie for her. For (said he) I am sure we two shal neuer mete▪ Trothe it is (quoth she) that wee shal neuer mete, vnlesse god turne your hart▪ For I am sure (vnles you repent and turne to God) you ar in an euyl case, and I pray to god, in the bowels of his mercie, to sende you his holy spirite. For he hath geuen you his great gift of vt∣teraunce, if it please him to open the eyes of your hart to his truth And so she depar∣ted.
AN EXORTATION written by the Lady Iane the night before she suffered, in the ende of the New-testament in Greke, whiche she sent to her sister, Lady Katetine. I Haue here sent you good sister Katetine, a booke: which although it be not outwardly trimmed with gold, yet inwardli it is more worth thē precious stones. It is the boke (deare Sister) of the Lawe of the Lorde. It is his testament and last will, which he bequethed vnto vs wretches, whiche shall leade you to the path of eternall ioye. And if you with a good mynde read it, and with an ernest desire folowe it, it shal bring you to an immortal and euerlasting life. It will teache you to liue and learne you to dye. It shal winne you more, then you should haue gained by the posse∣ssion of your woful fathers landes For as if God had prospered him
you should haue inherited his lā∣des: so if you appli diligently this boke, seking to direct your life af∣ter it, you shalbe an inheritour of sutche riches, as neither the coue∣tous shal withdtaw from you, ne∣ther the theife shal steale, neither yet the mothes corrupte. Desire with Dauid (good sister) to vnder¦stād the law of the lotd your god. Liue stil to dye, that you by death maye purchase eternall life. And trust not that the tēdernes of your age, shal lēgthen your life: For as∣sone (if God cal) goth the yong as the olde. And laboure alwaye to learne to die. Deny the world, de∣fie the deuil, and dispisethe flesh and delight your selfe only in the Lord. Be penitent for your sinnes and yet dispaire not: Be strong in saith, and yet presume not: and desire with S. Paull, to bee dissol∣ued, and to be with Christe, with whom, euen in death ther is life. Be like the good seruaut, and euen at midnight be wakig: Least when death commeth and steale vppon you like a these in the nighte, you
be with the deuils seruaunt found sleping: and least for lacke of oyle ye bee founde like the fiue folishe wemen, and like him that had not on the wedding garment, and thē you be cast out from the Mariage. Reioyce in Christ, as I trust ye do. And seinge ye haue the name of a Christian, as nere as ye can, folow the steppes of your master Christ, and take vp your crosse, lay your sinnes on his backe, and alwaies imbrace him. And as touching my death, reioice as I do (good sister) that I shalbe deliuered of this cor¦ruption, and put on vncorruption. For I am assured, that I shall for losing of a mortal life, winne an immortal life. The which I praye God graunt you, sende you of his grace to liue in his feare, and to die in the true Christian saith. Frō the which in gods name I exhorte you that ye neuer swar ue, neither for hope of life, ner fear of death For if ye wil deny his truth, to lēg then your life: God wil deny you, and yet shorten your daies, And if ye wil cleaue to him, he wil pro∣long
your daies, to your comforte and his glory. To the which glo∣ry, God bringe me nowe, and you hereafter, whan it shal please god to cal you. Far well good sister and put your onlye trustin God, who onely must helpe you. Amen. Your louing sister, Iane Dudley. The Lady Ianes wordes vpon the Scaffold. GOod Christen people, I am vnder a lawe and by a law I am coudempned to dye, not for ani thing I haue offended the quenes Maiesti, for I wil wash my hands giltles therof, but only for that I cōsēted to the thing which I was inforced vnto. Not withstā¦ding I haue offended almyghtie god, for that I haue felowed ouer much the lust of mi flesh, and the pleasure of this wretched world, and I haue not liued according to the knowledge that God hath ge¦uen me, whetfote God harh pla∣ged me nowe wyth thys kinde of
death, and that worthelye accor∣dyng to my desertes. Howe be it I thancke him hartelie that he hath geuen me time to repent my syns here in this world, wherfor good Christian people, I shall desyre you all to pray with me, & for me while I am now aliue, that god of his goodnes will forgeue me my sinnes. And I pray you al to beare me witnesse, that I here dye a true Christian woman, and that I truste to be saued by the bloud of Iesus Christ, and bi none other meanes, and now I pray you al, pray for me and with me, & so said the psalm of Miserere mei, that don, she sai∣ed Lorde saue my soule, whyche now I commend into thy hā∣des, and so prepared her¦selfe meekelie to the blocke. Finis.
