A265 R4269 11887750 50393
AN ACCOUNT Of the Confession and Execution OF Captain Vratz, Geo. Boraski, AND John Sterne, Who were this present Friday, being the Tenth of March, Executed at Pell-mall, for the Barbarous Mur∣ther of Thomas Thynne Esquire. TOGETHER With a particular Relation of their Behavi∣our in Newgate since their Condemnation, and manner of their passing to the place of Execution. SInce the Condemnation of these Notorious Criminals, they have been constantly Visited by many eminent Divines, who have Re∣ligiously endeavoured to prepare them for their speedy End, and to make them have a due sense of the State they are going to enter into, by pressing several Pious and Religious Discourses to them, importing the horridness of Bloud-guiltiness, and how hainous a thing it is in the sight of God to shed Innocent Bloud; endeavouring thereby to bring them to a true sensibleness of their approaching death. On Sunday last the Reverend Doctor Burnet Preached to them, and the other Prisoners, and made a most excellent Sermon, setting forth the nature of Sin, and the dreadfulness of Hell and Damnation, shew∣ing them their danger of being irrecoverably and eternally lost and un∣done; exhorting them to repent and mourn heartily for their sins. As for their Behaviour since their Condemnation, the Captain appeared for some days after his being Sentenced, with no kind of seeming Concern, but onely at the Manner of his Death; declaring, He had many times in Battel hazarded his Life with absolute Unconcernedness; but his dying this Ignominious Death, would leave a Stain upon his Posterity. But upon hearing the Doctor preach, it pleased God to set his sin so home upon his Conscience, that he began to be somewhat more concerned than be∣fore; whereupon the Doctor took the opportunity of his seeming Con∣cernedness, by farther instructing and directing him in the Work of Re∣pentance and Faith; so that it is hoped he is become a true Penitent:
and as a signal of it, hath, as 'tis said, confessed very considerable things to the Doctor, in relation to the Murther for which he was Condemned. Yesterday-morning there was a Dutch Minister with him, wo likewise took a great deal of pains to prepare him for the Reception o he blessed Sacrament; at, and after which, he appeared very devout and penitent, and spent the rest of the day in Meditation and Prayer, and a serious Preparation for his Death; the time of which he was made sensible of, by a person who was sent to him for that purpose. John Sterne the Lieutenant, hath behaved himself very penitently ever since his Commitment, and hath employed himself in writing, as 'tis thought, the full Account of his being brought into this Tragedy; as also a Relation of his former Life. He has exprest a great sorrow for his being concerned in that Inhumane and Unmanly Murther; declaring, he never was concerned in any private Murther before, but had many times hazarded his Life in the Field. He was likewise extraordinarily af∣fected with Dr. Burnet's Sermon, making all outward signals of his sor∣row and abhorrence of that great sin, and all others which he had been guilty of, heartily desiring all them which were Auditors to that most Excellent Discourse, to continue their Prayers for him, during that little time which he had to sojourn here. Yesterday he received the holy Sa∣crament from the aforesaid Dutch Minister, in a very devout and seri∣ous manner; after which he continued praying for a considerable time, and so continued to spend the remaining part of the day; very much e∣videncing his sorrow for the barbarous Fact, and heartily begging God forgiveness, and that he would enable him to prepare his Soul for E∣ternity. As for that unhappy person George Boraskie, the person that gave the Mortal Wound, at his first Commitment he seemed no way to be concer∣ned, being a fellow very ignorant and unlearned, and trained up from his Youth, to the time of his Taking, a Souldier; (too many of whom, sel∣dom think on the God that made them, or have any thoughts of Reli∣gion.) By reason of his not being able to understand one word of Eng∣lish, he has been frequently prayed with in his own Dialect, and seems now to be brought to some particular sense of his condition; and, as 'tis said, has likewise received the Sacrament. Thus have we given you a true Account of their Behaviour since Com∣mitment; and now shall come to tell you the manner of their Conveyance to the place of Execution; which was in Pell mall, very neer the place where the horrid Murther was committed. The Captain and Lieute∣nant were conveyed in a Coach from Newgate down the Old-baily, through Fleet street, and so along the Strand, to the place of Execution. The Captain was in a black Suit, and an embroidered Cap on his head, with a scarlet Ribbon round it. And after them came the Polander. They had a very strong Guard, and a multitude of People following them. All the Balconies in their passage were filled with Spectators. When they came to the place of Execution, they were taken out of the Coaches, and put into Carts; and after some short Speech and private Prayers, they were all three executed according to their Sentence. LONDON: Printed for S. T. 1682.
