A3019A R170298 12725593 66367
THE AMOROUS Convert. Being a True RELATION Of what happened in HOLLAND. LICENSED, Octob. 19. 1678. Ro. L'Estrange. LONDON, Printed by R. E. for Richard Ton∣son, within Grayes-Inne-Gate, next Grayes-Inne-Lane. 1679.
THE AMOROUS Convert. ONE of the Prince of Orange's Officers, that, by reason of his Post and courage, was one of the last that endeavoured to save himself from the fury of the Wa∣ters, which the People of Amster∣dam had let loose on their own Amy, had curiosity enough, in the midst of danger, to take up something that floated by his side on the top of the Stream. As soon as he had recovered dry ground, he saw 'twas a Ball of Wax that seem'd to have some∣thing
in it; and having pull'd it asunder, he found a Paper with these Words written in great Let∣ters, If this Note fall into the Hands of a Gentleman of Merit, I conjure him, in the name of Love and Glory, to come and rescue a Person from misery, that perhaps he will not think unworthy of a better Fortune. A little lower in less Cha∣racters was added: If he accept this offer, let him come next Friday, at Four of the Clock in the After∣noon, to the Door of the Synagogue of Amsterdam, with a green Rib∣band in his Hat. This was writ∣ten both in French and Low Dutch: but the Address, to a Gentleman of Merit, was very general, for hardly in the whole Army, could it have light upon one that would not have given himself that Title; so natural is it to Men, if they have really good qualities, to be the first in perceiving them, and if they
have not, in usurping them. But, by good fortune, the direction of this Note was fitted for the Person that found it, and it could not easily have met in any other, all that which goes to the making a Gal∣lant Man. Though he was suffici∣ently used to Adventures, yet he was surprized with the odness of this, the place of Rendezvous, as well as all things else, seeming ex∣traordinary. After, having mused on it a while, he let the Troops pass, and followed by none but his Man, he took the way to Mayden, a little Town three Leagues from Amsterdam. The weariness of his Journey was not sufficient to give him a sound Sleep, which was broke three or four times with the violent working of his Spirits, which were the more inflamed by the con∣stant representation of the same Image, Three or Four times one after another. However it be, said
he still as he waked, if she be as fair as she appears in my Dream, I shall not repent my pains. For you must know he was only concern'd for her Beauty, making no question of his own success; for his own nature, be∣ing a Frenchman, and his good for∣tune in a great many Intrigues, had given him so good an opinion of himself, that he doubted not the Lady, whether she were Dutch or French, would not fail to be equal∣ly taken with his Wit and good Meen. He was of the Family of Lu∣signan, that is considerable enough in Zaintonge and Poictou. He was known by the name of Villeneufe, a small Lordship that belonged to the younger Brothers of that Fami∣ly; the Alliance that he had with the Marquess of Boulaye had drawn him into the Civil Wars of France, where he had behaved him∣self very bravely for a Man of two
and twenty. But the Loyalty that was in his nature making him re∣pent his bearing Arms against his own King, after the second Ba∣nicades of Paris, he retired, with some others, first to Bruxells, and then into Holland, that then was called the retreat of brave Men that voluntarily banished them∣selves their own Country. His merit was quickly known, and the Prince of Orange, who was extreme happy in finding out the good Qualities of worthy Men and generous in rewarding them, gave this Gentleman a Company in the Regiment of Hautervie. You need not question, that having spent all his Youth in War, he knew not perfectly the Duty and Office of a Souldier; but, besides that, he had a great facility in speaking Lan∣guages, and writ so well in Prose and Verse, that a great many Sparks, who take a glory in their
ignorance, found fault with his Learning, and said, he wrote too well for a Gentleman. But the Ladies were not of that Opinion, and there was hardly one of them, either of the Princess of Orange's Court, or the Queen of Bohemia's, that would not have paid one of his Letters willingly with one of their own. And indeed he was so liberal, discreet, and complaisant, that he could not fail of gaining very much on the Sex. Besides, his Air, his Shape, and his Hair, which he wore of his own, made a cer∣tain mixture that touched at first sight. With all this he had as much courage as he ought, which helpt to bring him off with honour from many an Engagement which his good Meen had occasioned. After a considerable stay at the Hague, he had invitations to go to Stockholme, where the Queen of Suede was well pleased to welcome
Men of his Character; and having resolv'd to take that Journey with two of his Friends, La Chastre and Persans, he went to take leave of the Prince, who freely gave it him, only desiring his company for two or three days, which was when the Army appeared before Amster∣dam, where he met with that ex∣traordinary Note, in so extraordi∣nary a manner. After having passed the Night as unquietly as he did, he got up early in the Morning to pursue his Journey to Amsterdam. But, said he to himself, why so much haste? Perhaps this Note came only from some idle Hand, that had no other de∣sign than to abuse him that should find it. And shall I not look very sillily, to make a serious business of anothers Impertinence. But on the other side, I have told no body of it, and therefore am in no danger to be laugh'd at. And had I not found
this Note, I must have gone to Am∣sterdam however, to have found ship∣ping for Stockholme. And above all, there was a se∣cret force that led him to believe, that something extraordinary and real would arrive to him out of this adventure, and as if he had been already assur'd of the truth of his own imaginations, he began seri∣ously to contrive how he should convey a Person that Heaven and his own Fancy conspired to give him. He read the Note again, and staying on these words, Rescue a Person from misery: Without doubt, says he, 'tis some young and rich Woman that is going to be married against her will; and that having a noble mind, chooses rather to marry a Gentleman that she does not know, than some poor conditioned Merchant that she does both know, despise, and hate. Ten thousand Pound in Gold will do me no great hurt, and may
be easily enough convey'd away. The difference of our Quality shall never hinder me from so advan∣tageous a Fortune; and to speak the truth, why should we undervalue Merchants, when all our life is no∣thing else but a different sort of Commerce; and we that have No∣bility ought to truck it with those that have Money, thereby supplying each others wants. Is there not enough examples of this at the Hague, where Aumale has mar∣ried the Daughter of a Burgomaster of Leyden, Mombas the Daughter of Grotius, and de Bret had wit enough to advance his Fortunes the same way. At this rate did he en∣tertain himself, as if the Lady and the Money were both in his hand, and this was the effect of his hu∣mour that never presented him but with pleasing Ideas. The only thing that troubled him was the place of Assignation.
Why before the Door of the Syna∣gogue? Is she a Jew, if she be, I have done with her, for I have no great fancy for that People. With these sort of thoughts he came to Amsterdam, and lodg'd himself in a by Quarter of the Town, to shun the meeting with his acquaintance. He had been often in that great City, which is as well worth see∣ing as any in the World. One may very well say that all Holland is a Miracle of Art, where nature de∣signed nothing; and that it has made the refuse of the Sea more considerable, than almost all the Land of Europe. The wonderful diligence of the People first provid∣ed against the power of the Ocean, by stupendious works, and then took care to adorn their acquisition with all the beauties imaginable: For, above Forty Miles together there is nothing to be seen but the finest Scene in the whole World;
for so one may justly call all that green Country, filled with Hou∣ses, neatly built, and delicately painted. I must confess that Saumaise made another discription of Holland, when he said 'twas the Country from whence the four Elements were banished; and where the Idol of Gold, crowned with Tobacco, sits enthroned upon a Cheese. And this unlucky Picture is something like the Original, for in all that Province so famous, the Earth brings forth no Fruit, the Water is not to be drunk, and the Air is as thick as Smoak, and as heavy as a Fog, and the Fire stinks so cruelly, that they are forced to in∣close it in Stoves. And Cheese (mix∣ed with dry Fish) is the chiefest part of their subsistence, as Tobacco is of their diversion: And Gold, which has every where the su∣preme Authority, did then govern
there so absolutely, that one would have thought Peru had there emptied all its Treasure. Which had, nevertheless, its chief Seat at Amsterdam, which exceeds all others in Beauty and Pride; and passes, according to the judg∣ment of best Travellers, the Cities of Italy, in Circuit, Magnificence, and Regularity. In a word, without mentioning the particular Streets, that by their neatness, and uni∣form proportion, give a surprizing pleasure; one can hardly believe the number and splendor of their publick Buildings; among which the State-house passes for one of the wonders of the World. The very Hospitals themselves, exceeding, in riches and finess, the Buildings of most other places, of which there are Ten for the succour of several sorts of Humane misfortunes, which equally shew both Charity and Plenty.
And to make the wonder the greater, several such Structures have been the work of private Persons. Very lately a Merchant that had gain'd, in the Levant, a vast Estate, returning to Amster∣dam; offered two Tun of Gold to found an Hospital, to maintain se∣veral sort of Animals that could no longer be of any use. He had seen that extravagant sort of Charity practised among the Indians, where almost in every Town you see a publick House to receive aged Horses, sick Dogs, and other sort of afflicted Animals with a sin∣gular Humanity. Those poor Peo∣ple use that Hospitality out of a Su∣perstition, believing that the Souls of Men pass into the Bodies of Beasts, and so some of them think, that in taking care of a sick Camel, they may chance to tend their Grandfather. Perhaps our good Hollander might have some such
fancy in his head, and on that score the Magistrates of Amsterdam would not admit of such an Ho∣spital. There is a thousand things fit to amuse Persons Curiosity, but there is nothing more surprizing than that part of the City called, The Emperour's Canal; which is thrice as long as that of St. James's Park. The Water that runs in the middle is so clear, and kept so high, that almost all day 'tis covered with little Boats painted and gilded, that sail there for pleasure, or carriage. There the greatest heats of the day are never troublesome, because the rows of great Trees, planted in or∣der on each side, with one half of their Boughs, shadow the Canal, and with the other afford a most plea∣sing shade to the walk on the Key. These Trees as thick and shady as they are, do not hinder the Eye from delighting it self with the
magnificence of the Houses that are built on each side of the Canal. In other places, where all things are complemented into fine names, those Houses should be called Pala∣ces; which name they better de∣serve, then most Structures that have it. They have not their en∣trance even with the Street, but by an ascent of several steps of Mar∣ble, bordered with a Balustrade of Iron guilded. The Eye alone has not its satisfaction, but there are Charms proper for the Ear too, an infinity of Birds making a sweet and natural consort, from all the boughs of those Trees, that are planted on that lovely Canal. If any thing could have divert∣ed Villeneuse from the entertain∣ment his amorous thoughts gave him, it would have been so plea∣sing an employment as that of viewing these Rarities; but he had his Heart so set on seeing the sub∣ject
of his impatience, that he cared for seeing nothing else. At last the day of appointment being come, he dressed himself as well as he could, not forgetting the green Ribband, and walked to∣wards the Synagogue. The Door was open, but as yet he saw no Body there, but some Men who were set∣ting up Tents very finely made, that were ranged from the top of the Synagogue to the bottom, almost as the Beds of an Hospital; as he was looking upon them, one of the Workmen, that lov'd to hear him∣self talk, told him that those Tents were set up for a Feast, which the Jews keep every year in the begin∣ning of September, called, The Feast of Tabernacles: The truth is, con∣tinued he, to have the Ceremony exact, these Tents should be set up in the Fields, and so we observe it in Asia and Africa, where we are al∣lowed a greater liberty than here,
and that is more suitable to our de∣sign, which is to keep in memory the life our Fathers led in the Wil∣derness for forty years together, where they had no Lodging, but a kind of Tabernacles like these Tents we now set up. But here in Eu∣rope, where we do not enjoy so much liberty, we cannot perform this solemnity with that Purity and State we could wish; though we have lately offered a considerable sum to the Ma∣gistrates here for obtaining the li∣berty we desire. The worst of it is, that being obliged to leave our hou∣ses for a whole week to pass it here, we are forced to eat, and drink, and sleep in the same place where we assemble for our devotions, which is very inconvenient. And must all Persons of each Family be assistant at this Ceremony, said Villeneufe. No, Sir, said he, and, we have ordered now, because of the hot weather, and littleness of the place, that
there shall come but one of a Family: and having said that the Ceremo∣ny would not begin yet a good while, our Adventurer went a∣way full of new hopes. She'll lye alone, said he, and will have much greater freedom this eight days of the Fedst, than she could have at any other time; I see she has wit to chuse her time, and order her designs. With these fancies in his head he went away a little longer than he should, for when he came back he saw the Ceremony was begun: But he was strangely confounded, when, before the Door of the Syna∣gogue, he met two Gentlemen of his own Country and acquaintance, who had been in the Army before Amsterdam as well as he, and who he thought had been returned, as the Army was, into the several Garrisons. They had both more green Ribband than he himself, one had nothing else but green in
his Hat, and the other had a trim∣ming all of the same eolour. All three fell a laughing at one another, and Villeneufe cryed out, 'Tis the same design that has brought us all hither. With that the other two confessed the truth, and each of them produced their Notes, all writ with the same hand, and contain∣ing the very same words. In troth, says Villeneufe, we may call this fish∣ing for Gallants, for we were all in the Water when we were biting at these Notes. And so burst our a laughing, maintaining however that he was not made so great a Fool as they, because he was come to Amsterdam to embarque for Sue∣den, whereas they had come thither only to be laughed at. The truth is, it was pleasant enough to see three French Gentlemen all dress'd up in green, entertaining themselves at the Door of a Synagogue with a design upon some of the Daughters
of Abraham; and they were so sensible themselves of being expo∣sed, that they agreed among them∣selves never to speak one word of it. In the mean time the Ceremony was begun, and being at it, they resolved to satisfie their curiosity and see it, before they went to sup∣together. The Women were all on one side covered with great Mantles, that hid all their shape, and they held in their hand Bran∣ches of Trees, as well as the Men, who were placed over against them; so that all the place was full of green, which made some mystery in their Religion. For ought I see, says one of our Sparks, green makes a piece of the Ceremony, and when we were ordered to put it in our Hats, we were treated like Proselyte Jews. Whiles he was talking, Villeneufe, who still had a strong fancy of some real adven∣ture,
turned his Eyes on all sides; and he perceived a Woman, cover∣ed with her Mantle, left her place, and, with a languishing Air, went into one of the Tents, where ano∣ther Woman followed her; but he had not observed that the other, which was her Woman, had before softly pulled her by the Mantle, which had made her counterfeit a little indisposition to leave her place. Madam, says she, there are Three with green Ribband, and therefore I thought fit to ask you what I should do. The Lady having thought a little, at last took the end of a piece of Parchment, that was interwoven up and down on her Garments, according to the Jewish Custome, and after having done something with a little Bod∣kin she pulled out of her Head, Here, says she, give this to one of them so neatly, that the others may not see you. But to which of them,
Madam? To him that has the best Meen, says she; But because thy judg∣ment, it may be, will be different from mine, go about them, and having well marked them, bring me word what thou thinkest of them. She came back presently, and told her, Oh, Madam, one cannot mistake: There is one so extraordinary, who is as handsome for a Man, as you are for a Woman. Perhaps for all that, said she laughing, you may be de∣ceived, for there be a many of those handsome Men, who are great Cheats. However, they resolved the hand∣somest should have it, which the good Woman could not have so well executed, if Villeneufe had not plaid his part. For seeing the Woman fig'd about as she did, he imagined there was something in the Wind, and as she came by him, he let fall his Handkerchief, which she took up and gave him with a great deal of civility.
The Ceremony lasted not long, for it consisted chiefly in bowing of themselves towards the East, where Jerusalem is scituated, and in singing the 113. Psalm, waving up and down the Branches they held in their Hands. After the Ceremony was over, the Three Cavaliers passed the Evening to∣gether, though Villeneuf was impa∣tient till he had seen what 'twas that he thought he felt in his Hand∣kerchief: 'Twas very late before he could satisfie his curiosity, and at last he found 'twas a bit of Parch∣ment; where he saw nothing but Characters that he did not under∣stand, that were writ on the sides of it. They laugh at me, says he, flinging down his Parchment, to write me Love Letters in Hebrew: do I look so like a Rabbin, that they think I understand their Language? However, being loath to give o∣ver his hopes, he fancied there was
some mistake, and that he should see more of it the next day. To consider the matter right, one could not judge very well of a Note sent so uncertain a way, and of so odd a kind, of an assignation given at the Door of the Syna∣gogue, and of a concern that made an interruption in the solemnest act of Divine Worship. There was in all this a certain Air of In∣trigue, and Face of Gallantry, on which the greatest goodness in the World could not put a favourable construction. But appearances are false, as they were here, where all this idle and vain romantick shew did cover a very good intention, and a very laudible design. The Night being spent, Ville∣neufe again looked on his Parch∣ment; and all the while his Man was dressing him, did nothing but turn it up and down, and at last perceived some Letters marked
without Ink on the side where nothing was writ, To Morrow at the same hour again. With all my heart, says he, though there were a thousand dangers in the way. Dumaiest, said he to his Man, thou laughest, but for all that, here is a business will stop our Journey to Sueden. For he no longer doubted, but in the progress of such an Ad∣venture, he should find engage∣ments sufficient to detain him. And being in this mind, he wrote to his Friends, La Chastre and Persans, to execuse himself from going with them, as he had promised, to Stock∣holm, without giving them any account of the true reason of his stay. After having sent away these Letters, he made haste to his assignation the second time, where he found the Bearer of the Parch∣ment, who, without looking on him, bid him follow her at a di∣stance, and go into the house after
her. He obeyed exactly, and af∣ter, having passed several Streets, he saw his Guide open a little Door; he went in after her, into a little Room, pretty neat; where he found himself alone with a Woman who was about Five and Fifty, dressed like a Citizens Wife. Here, Sir, said she, is a glorious For∣tune, enough to make the Paradise of a Prince. I am much obliged to you, said Villeneuse, but when shall I know the Person that is to make my happiness. There is time enough for that, said she, and in the begin∣ning of the Night—What do you mean, says he, by the beginning of the Night, 'tis now but four of the Clock; if you make me stay so long, you'll find me dead. We'll pre∣vent that, I warrant you, says she, laughing, here is Wine, and Sweet∣meats, and if you have a mind to read, there are Books for you, for I provided for you, that you might
not be tired with being alone. Villeneufe seeing her gone, What a do is here, said he? what is this to raise my desires by greater expecta∣tion? Then looking on the Bot∣tles of Wine, I am treated here right according to the custom of the Country; imagining I cannot be un∣easie, as long as I have the Bottle by me. Then looking upon the Books, he found they were the Tomes of Astrea and Polexandre, and that on the first Leaves there was writ, Josebeth. With that he as∣sur'd himself he had found the name of his Mistress. These Books, said he, are not very proper for an old Woman; They are Josebeth's, said he, and 'tis like the name of a Maid, as I wished in my soul she would be. And now the Night came on, and there being no Moon, it was extreme dark, the only thing that could draw Villeneufe from his so∣litude.
His Guide then being come to take him, she carried him three or four Houses farther, where they found a back door open, which let them into a little Garden, out of which our Frenchman was led into an Apartment where he was locked in. The Cieling, that was richly gilt, made it self be seen in the Floor; which being paved with polished Marble in Squares, of black and white, shined all over like a Glass, except in that part where there was a Turky Carpet laid under a little Summer Bed of green Sattin, lightly embroidered with Silver, with a Furniture of the same, rich enough for the Season. There it was that Villeneufe, as stout as he was, began to have his Heart beat; and though he had passed dangers enough in his life, in none of them had he ever felt such emotions as he did now. And he had reasonenough, for never did there any thing pre∣sent
it self to his Eyes, that struck them and his Heart so much, as a Person that he saw enter the Room at a Door over against him. She had on a Simarr of Cloth of Gold, tucked up on each side with a great bunch of Cherry-colour Ribband, and under it a Petticoat of so fine a gare, that discovered all the shape of her Legs and Knees: About her Neck another sort of light gare folded together like the Vene∣tian Women, that hung over her Breast, but left open its gentle ri∣sing as she breathed, enough to have kindled flame in a Stoick: Behind her Head, her Hair bound up with Pearl in great foldings, and fal∣ling down on the sides in curls, of the loveliest black in the World, which yet was not necessary to set off her complexion; the whiteness of her Skin being of a kind to dazle any Eye that beheld it. Her Eyes alone, without any
other help, had but too much power to dazle an Admirer; for they had so much Fire, but so soft and gentle a Fire, that with the briskness of black Eyes, for so they were, there sparkled too all that which the gray Eyes use to have, that's tender and moving. You may best guess what Josebeth was, when all the Wo∣men that saw and envyed her Beauty, yet could find no fault in it, but that her mouth was rather too wide; but that fault was very necessary, because without it, one could not have seen the delicatest Teeth that ever were. With all this, a certain air of youth, that hung about her, and a way and port that would have covered any faults her Person could have had, rendred her a most accomplished Creature. And this Villeneufe found by experience to be true, for at the instant that he saw her, he ran to fling himself at her Feet,
without being able to say one word, but, Oh Madam; which he repeat∣ed two or three times like a Man possessed, and so staid a great while with his mouth fastned on her hand, which the beautiful Vision had reached out to take him up. Something must be allowed, said she, smiling, for the transports of a sur∣prise, but you must not expect to be used always at this rate: And then having obliged him to rise, they began a Conversation so full of wit, and to have a reciprocal e∣steem so great, as made them wish they two had only been made for one another. The meeting of an inclination so strong and sudden; kept them not from having a Quarrel in the be∣ginning of their acquaintance: For Villeneufe, either willing to shew his wit, or else out of a braver concern which a strong passion does often raise, looking very
gravely, And what, Madam, will you say, if the first time I see you, I should take the confidence to pick a quarrel with you, with good appea∣rance of reason? I should say, an∣swered she disdainfully, and pulling back her Hand, that you were very ungrateful, and gathering from thence a belief of your ill nature and ingratitude for any further favour I might shew you, 'tis very likely I should presently put an end to our story. But, Madam, suppose my com∣plaint should only come from an ex∣cess of esteem? You might then make it, said she, with a great deal of assurance, and pray let us know what it is. Thereupon he con∣fessed he was really vexed she had sent so many several Notes a swim∣ming, considering that thereby he had been in danger to have lost her; if any other that had found them, had had better fortune than
he in coming first to the Door of the Synagogue. Truly, says she, you are very pleasant, and how should I have sent out one to you, whom I never saw? but me thinks you should rather be pleased with the success, which has given me occasion to pre∣fer you by my own choice to two o∣thers that had the same fortune at first with your self; and therefore I must come back to my first opinion, that you are a little apt to be ungrate∣ful. Villeneufe had not great diffi∣culty to appease this little anger, and afterwards asked of her with great passion, what he should do to make her happiness, as she had in∣timated in her Note. You are little too hasty, said Josebeth blushing, we do not yet know one another enough to explain that mystery. Ah, Ma∣dam, says he, quite transported, I do not so much as know whether you are already in the power of ano∣ther Man? Solomoune, said she, that
brought you hither, will inform you of my concerns; take notice of her House, and come thither Monday towards the Evening, where she will fully instruct you, and afterwards bring you hither in the beginning of the Night. Villeneufe again threw himself at her feet, and Josebeth holding down her head to take him up, inclined it a little towards his, with which he was so tran∣sported, that he cryed out, Oh, why does not all the world know my good Fortune; and why may not I cry out, I have seen her, I have seen her, I have seen her. No more of this, said she, a little troubled, and very serious, though you are a French∣man, remember you are not in France, and therefore pray no cry∣ing out of your Victory. That little heat of joy scaped from Villeneufe against his will, and without de∣sign; for though he was a French∣man, yet in that he differed from
most of his Nation, being most perfectly discreet; and thence he took occasion to make a thousand Vows both of his Secresie and Faith; to which she gave a rea∣dy belief, because she had no mind to doubt them. As he was going away, he would have left some Tokens of his liberality with So∣lomoune, but she refused them with some kind of disdain. Though it were a good way from thence to his own Lodging, yet he was at home before he thought of it; so much was he taken up with his own Reflections, among which he had some that he could not well re∣concile. He saw plainly enough that Josebeth was married, and that being, he could not compre∣hend how she had put honour into her Note she had sent upon the Water. On the other side, if it were only an amorous Intrigue, with∣out other design than that of plea∣sure,
why had she not made use of the first occasion that was so fa∣vourable to satisfie it. To think she was in a confusion, because of the odness and newness of the Adventure, was ridiculous, for 'twas an appointment of her own making, and of which she was absolutely the Mistress. A∣midst all these doubts there was one thing sure enough, and that was the merit of Josebeth; which he preferred to all that ever he had known, even to young Riparda, that was then the handsomest Per∣son at the Hague, and now is Coun∣tess of Caravas. Being so taken with the Qualities of the lovely Josebeth, he expected impatiently to have a full account of all her concerns; and being come to his Lodgings, he made a resolution, which he had never done before, to go through all difficulties for the obtaining of Josebeth. Who, for her part, was as much pleased
with him, as he could be with her. Fortune, said she, has done more for me than Wisdom; and thereupon she applauded her own fancy, which gave her more satis∣faction in one hour, than all the wise counsels of her Friends had given her in all her life: The only trouble she had, was caused by her fear that Villeneufe, for whom she already had felt so great a kind∣ness, might abate in the eagerness of his desires, when he came to know her story: But, sure that can∣not be, said she, he appears generous, and there is nothing in my story, that can occasion any thing but pity. So that she would not recall the orders she had given Solomoun to tell her life to Villeneufe. Who being ready at the hour appointed: You shall know all our Affairs, said she, and judge by that if we have a Friendship for you or no. Our Mistress, being you will have it so, was born at Metz in Lorraine, two and twenty years ago; her Fa∣ther
was one of the richest Men of that City, and of that sort that live upon the income of their Rents. Though he made an outward profes∣sion of Christianity, yet in his heart he was a Jew, being descended of the Tribe of Benjamin, as well as his Wife. She left him Widdower when he was but young, without any Child but the little Josebeth, who, though she were but six years old, was admired by all the World. I had been her Nurse, and her Fa∣ther was pleased to trust me so far as to make me her Governess, and to take the care of his House, to which I agreed, against the advice of my Friends, that I might be near a Child for whom I had so great a love. She passed for a Christian, as well as her Father, and the bet∣ter to colour the business, she was called Mary, and not Josebeth, which was the name her Mother had ordered should be given her when she was grown up. She had
not been taught any thing of Jewish Religion; in which I durst not instruct her, for fear, lest the innocence and simplicity of a Child might reveal the secret of the Fa∣mily, which was extremely zea∣lous for the Law of Moses. It had been considerable at Rome, and chose rather to leave that City, than either to go to Mass, or else to wear a Hat covered with Yellow, as Paul the Fourth ordained all those of our Religion should do, both as a distin∣ction and a disgrace. The zeal of the Family was not at all diminished in our Master, who forbare to give his Daughter a Jewish Education, only out of a belief he had, that a Husband of his own Religion would easily bring her back to it. In the mean time the poor man found him∣self decay every day, and therefore was very solicitous to provide a Hus∣band for his Daughter, lest his death might prevent the design he
had of marrying her to a Jew. He wrote therefore to a Friend of his own Tribe at Amsterdam, offering him his Daughter and twenty thou∣sand Pounds for her Portion. The young Jewish Hollander came a wooing, the Match was concluded, and Jose∣beth married before she was full fif∣teen years old. Within three Months the Father dyed, and we left Metz to come hither. And here the good Nurse stood still to cry, and Ville neufe took that occasion to ask her wherein was the unhappiness of Josebeth: Has she an ill Husband, does he not use her well? But Solomoune, who had no mind to have her discourse broke off, presently wiped her Eyes, and thus continued it. Her Hus∣band, whose name is Wanbergue, denyes her nothing, is handsome, is not above thirty years old, and has a very great Fortune, being one of those rich Merchants who are
more considerable than Lords, and send little Fleets to trade on their own account. His Father, with a∣nother Merchant, undertook to make War with a King; let me see, I think it was the King of Denmark, about the Interest of Trade, and would have carried it on themselves, had not the States forbid them. The Son is as rich as the Father, and you may see that he denies his Wife nothing, nothing that she can have either for her own Person, or the fur∣nishing her House. Has she no Gal∣lant, said Villeneufe. None, said the Nurse, and for seven years that we have been in this City, I do not think she has spoke four times to any one Man, except it be Rabby Ma∣nassas. 'Tis not that her Husband is jealous, neither indeed has he the least cause; but she has particular reasons that keep her from entering into any amorous Engagements. And what are those, says our Hero, a
little quicker than before? 'Tis in respect of the Jews, for whom Josebeth has an invincible aversion, which I think she took in her first E∣ducation. And for the Christians, they are all here given to drink, and when they have took a Cup, they tell all they know, and more too. But af∣ter all, My dear Friend, said Ville∣neufe in a cajoling way, let us come to the point, that I may know wherein consists the misfortune of lovely Josebeth, and wherein I may serve her. For that, says Solomoune, I know nothing; neither have I any com∣mission to say any more. In hopes to draw out the rest, he looked very kindly upon her, and stole into her hand a piece of Gold, to the value of ten Pound; but 'twas in vain, for he could get nothing out of her, but praises of her Mistresses wit and sweet nature. This discourse raised in Villeneufe a
great esteem for his Mistress, for he could not but think she was a Wo∣man of extraordinary merit, being her Servant said nothing to her disadvantage. The truth is, she had ordered her Nurse to say no more, and had kept to her self her own design in reserve, to see if Villeneufe should deserve a greater confidence. But 'tis also true, that the Nurse had left out a great part of Josebeth's Character, which was too delicate for such a Wo∣man to distinguish. And that was a strange fancy for Romances, which had made extraordinary im∣pressions upon her, from her very Child-hood. Another sort of Man, than her Husband, would easily have cured her of this Childishness, which filled her so much with the humour of Adventures, and the pleasure of extraordinary accidents, that she used to say, there was nothing so
dull as a plain life, without the mix∣ture of something singular to em∣bellish it. And this conceit would sometimes be so strong, that when she considered the heavy City-life she led, she was ready to seek ano∣ther to divert her. What a wretch∣ed thing is it, would she say, to do and see the same things for a year together, from morning to night the same course, so one a hundred Mile off, might know every hour in the day what I am doing. This is to be buried alive. All People have some weakness, or other, and this was Josebeth's; but there are few Women that have in recompence so many other good qualities as she had. Her youth contributed to the keeping up this humour, as well as that dull life she lead; but this fault was not without cure, and had Heaven blessed her in a suitable Husband, it would have setled her Mind, and
made her one of the finest Women in the World. Being of this hu∣mour, it was impossible that she should not come to have a great in∣difference for her Husband; and he on his side was very well pleased with any thing that kept him from paying the marks of his kindness to such a Wife: So that by de∣grees, she came almost to an intire liberty and disposal of her self; which yet only consisted in lying alone, and in having what Cloaths and Furniture she had a mind to: For in all things else, Josebeth lived with the same discretion as the other Jewish Women do: She never went abroad, but her Face was covered: When Wanbergue had Company at home, she never appeared; and no Man, but Manassas, was permitted to come into her Apartment. And in this she was so exact, that though Aunibal Sestede, the Danish Am∣bassadour, did what he could, in a
visit he made to Wanbergue, about the State of Trade, to see her, it was to no purpose. This way of living infinitely pleased Ville neufe, to see himself enjoy a happiness that other Men only wished for; and for which he was so impatient, that he pressed Solomoune to conduct him to Josebeth without any delay. He found that charming Woman sitting upon a Bed of green Vel∣vet, and though the Wax-lights, that were at the other end of the Room, sent but a little light to that side, yet he plainly saw that she looked better, and was better dressed, than the first time that he saw her. Well, Sir, said she, giv∣ing him a Chair to sit down, have you the same thoughts of poor Jose∣beth, now that you know her Story, which you had before? To which question he only answered with new adorations; and then added, Solomoune has left out, Madam, an
essential part of your story, and that is, wherein you were unhappy; and to learn it she has sent me back to you. The truth is, said she very seriously, and with a deep sigh, that is a se∣cret which I have kept for my self, and I pray God I may find that you deserve to be trusted with it. Our lovely Josebeth, that with a Childishness endeavour'd to sa∣tisfie her Romantick humour in any thing that did not appear to the World, had put on that day fine Buskins after the old Roman way, that so upon occasion she might in part of her dressing appear like some of the Heroines. They were made of Spanish perfumed Leather, of Musk-colour, cut up∣on Gold, laced up half way her Leg with Scarlet Ribband, which made several knots above the small of her Leg, where a Silk Stocking of the same colour began to ap∣pear. When Villeneufe saw that
antick fancy, he could not forbear laughing; with which Josebeth was so offended, that rising briskly off the Bed, she said to him, Oh, Sir, do you laugh, you are very far from what you think, I assure you. Villeneufe was almost mad at this unlucky accident, and did all he could to bring her back from a Chair where she sate very angry. He threw himself at her Feet, to swear he only laughed out of the joy he had, to see his happiness so far advanced. Just so I thought, said she, and it sufficiently vexes me to find the Man, that I thought Fate had sent me on purpose, should be just like other Men, who, for all their Gallantry, do in their hearts laugh at the Women who have folly enough to shew them favour. Madam, says he, for Heavens sake be so just, as to make a difference betwixt me and those Monsters,
and attribute my mirth only to the thoughts of my pleasure. 'Tis too much gayety, said Josebeth, and in an affair of that consequence, seri∣ousness looks a great deal better. With much ado he appeased her, so that at last she told him, playing with his Hair: I confess, I am ex∣treme unfortunate, and you may make my happiness, but then it must only be in the ways of Honour. The ways of Honour, Madam! why, what does that mean, you are in the power of another Man, who in all likelyhood will live as long as I. I know very well what I say, says Josebeth, and that I may be yours, without wronging my Conscience, by an easie and handsome way, which I will tell you, if I find that you are worthy of my Love. In a word, 'tis only in prospect of this design, I ran the venture of that Note which brought you hither, and do not de∣ceive your self with any other ima∣gination.
Our Frenchman saw himself cruelly disappointed of his hopes, and thought himself the only unfortunate Man, to whom ever happened such an odd adven∣ture. On the other side, the force and solidity of Josebeth's Reason ap∣peared more and more; and tak∣ing our melancholly Lover by the Hand; We will love one another, said she; eternally, and 'tis for that end that I will never grant you any thing that shall hinder us from so doing. At that word Villeneufe swore a thousand Oaths, that the goodness she should shew could ne∣ver hinder him from loving her for ever; but on the contrary would enflame him more, by adding gratitude to love. No, no, said she, you deceive your self; but were it true, that you should afterwards love me the more, you would only thereby be the more miserable, for I
should hate the sight of you, and fly from you like Death. Oh, Madam, said Villeneufe, what reason could you have to use me so cruelly, after having used me so kindly. Any Wo∣man, of Wit and Honour, would do so as well as I; having a horror for those Lovers who make them reflect on their own shame. For you must know to what excess of Love soever a Woman may be carried, she still would keep her reputation; and ma∣ny times such a Woman may shew greater concern for it than another; so that as often as she calls to mind, that in the World there is a Man that can reproach her with such a failing, she cannot think of him but with confusion; but would with all her heart see the only witness of her shame destroyed, that so she might remain the sole possessor of a secret, which, if it were possible, she would not know her self. There was so much Reason,
Sense, and Honour in what Jose∣beth said, that Villeneufe had no∣thing to reply, and yet he could not chuse but complain, though he confessed it was to complain of Reason it self. Whereupon the lovely Josebeth, smiling upon him, and believing that in his heart he did her justice, told him, I find you now so reasonable, that from this minute I take you into my service, and as I am very just in my nature, you need not fear being turned off. And to shew you that I will allow you all that I can in decency, I will not go to morrow Night to the Tents of the Synagogue, though my Husband has desired me to pass one Night there as well as the rest, but will let him go alone that I may have the more liberty to entertain you here, on condition that you do not demand any thing which I cannot grant. And with this precaution she thought she might permit a great
many things to Villeneufe innocent∣ly enough; which she the rather did, because the design she had was very just; and to carry it on, it was necessary to see him often, that she might the better know him. But, Madam, said he, if you must go pass a Night at the Sy∣nagogue, your Husband must then go with you. No, says she, he durst not though he had never so great a mind to it, for 'tis not lawful for the Jews to be with their Wives these eight days. If it be so, Madam, what should hinder me from waiting on you thither, dressed up like a Wo∣man, it will be some kind of diver∣sion, and you must have some body there to wait on you. Nay, if that were, said she, I must have two, for I cannot be without Solomoune. So 'twas agreed, to the satisfaction of Josebeth, that was pleased with the novelty, to think, that never before was there any one so attend∣ed
to celebrate the Feast of Ta∣bernacles. By this you may see what was the humour of Josebeth, and therein she did not much differ from other Women, whose Ambi∣tion is much greater than the Au∣thority they are allowed. They have so good an Opinion of them∣selves, that they would, if they could, manage the most important Affairs of State: And seeing that Pleasure is denyed them, they are desirous to shew their power in les∣ser concerns, and think they have done pretty well, if they are the occasion of any thing extraordi∣nary. But this design of Villeneufe was easie to execute; he was slen∣der enough in the Waste to pass for a Maid, especially in that Coun∣try, where Men are not of the most delicate shape; and he knew the better, the way and carriage of a Woman, having formerly in a Bal∣let
at the Hague, been dressed up for the part of a Sultan, which he performed very well: So that he resolved to go to Solomoune's, and take the Cloaths his Mistress would send him. However, when he was alone, he did a little blame so extravagant a Gallantry, and made such reflections, as some Men, especially those of his own Nation, use to do when they ob∣tain any thing easily, that they de∣sire ardently. Had he known Jose∣beth better, be would not have en∣tertained such thoughts. But not∣withstanding he came to Solo∣moune's, where he found the Cloaths very fit for him, and the old Wo∣man so pleased in putting them on, as was a little troublesome. At last they both went to their Mi∣stress, and from thence all three towards the Synagogue, where they were no sooner entred, but the Rabbin, according to the Cu∣stome,
made fast the Doors. It had no light but what came from ten Lamps, hung at an equal distance in the Isle that was betwixt the two rows of Tents; so that those who passed the Night there could use no other light but that which a little melancholy Lamp gave them; and without opening the Door of the Tent they were quite in the dark: Josebeth and her little Train had no great occasion for light, which occasioned a little dispute, for as Villeneufe would fain have opened the Door a little to let in some light that he might see his Mistress, she grew very angry, and thought he ought to be satisfied with the liberty he had, and be quiet; How now, says she, in the condition we are in, you can go a∣bout to ask more than you already have? Yes, Madam, said he, if I did not desire more than I have, I should be very ridiculous, for as yet I
have nothing. He was going on, when there was a great noise that sufficiently frighted them; for it appeared only to be raised on their account. For about Midnight all the Synagogue was alarmed with a confused cry; and at last they learnt the cause, that a Christian, in Wo∣mans Cloaths, was got into the Synagogue, on some ill design, which made them all cry out, and that they should be revenged on such an impious Wretch. We are found out, said Josebeth, and I am served well enough for being so impudent. At which Vil∣leneufe resolved to leave her Tent, to save her from any trouble; and to answer to all their questions, that curosity only had brought him thither, and if that would not serve, to force his way with a good Pistol he had under his Coat; im∣mediately he went out, the noise increasing more and more, and
leaving Josebeth's Tent, he stole a∣long and got into another Tent on the other side, which had the Door half open. He was surprized to find a light there, expresly against the orders of the Ceremony, which was in a Dark Lanthorn that one could open or shut as one plea∣ses. By this glimmering light he saw some Papers on the Table, that he took up, I know not why, and having blown out the Candle that was in the Lanthorn, he stept aside; and all this in so lit∣tle time, that he easily got out be∣fore the Person to whom the Tent belonged, (and was gone out to see what the noise meant,) could be re∣turned. In the mean time the Tumult was over, and our Frenchman, hav∣ing learnt they had found out the Author of that trouble, took heart and went back to Josebeth's Tent, that was the ninth from the Door.
We are more happy than we deserve, said she, softly in his Ear, for this noise was not made for us. A poor wretch, that formerly was of our Religion, got in, in Womens Cloaths, on pur∣pose to steal some of the Vessels of Sil∣ver that we use for Incense, and 'twas that which gave us the Alarm. Though he and I both disguised our selves to get in, said Villeneufe, yet the Thefts we intended to make were very different. All that you shall rob me off will be my Sleep, said Josebeth, and to confess the truth, I am desperately disquieted to see you here; for the time to come, pray leave me the appointment of our Rendezvous, for the first that you have made you see is very unlucky. The truth is, Josebeth was very indiscreet, with all her wit, to ven∣ture her self at that rate in a place which was perfectly at the com∣mand of a Man that hated her mortally. That Man, who was
then infinitely esteemed of all the Jews, and had the chief Anthori∣ty in the Synagogue, was called Manasses Ben Israel. Though he were threescore years old, yet he was reckoned a very handsome Man; and for his Wit, he had too much to be beloved, but that he joyned to it a certain taking way, that obliged all the World. Above all, the extraordinary life he had hitherto lead, with the reputation of great Virtue, and without mar∣rying, as the other Rabbins did, gave him a great Opinion, both a∣mong the Jews, and the several Sects of Christians that live at Am∣sterdam. But this good Opinion was ill placed; for as Hypocrisie is the general dress of the World, so was it put on by Manasses, who was one of those, that by appear∣ing to have some good, are more capable of doing ill. The Gift he had to please all People and to vex
no body, was a Charm to blind the Eyes of all those that saw his Con∣versation, without which they would have quickly found a great many things that would have in∣duced them to believe ill of him in greater matters. That general blind∣ness had given leave to the Rabbin to enjoy a most delicious life for many years, and a very great reputa∣tion at the same time. But at last the time came when he should be seen without a Vizard, and Josebeth was chosen by Heaven to pull it off. Manasses was grown in love with her beyond all bounds, and increas∣ed by the liberty his Quality gave him of visiting her every week without controul. That freedom gave him occasion enough to open his heart intirely to that lovely Woman, or at least to sound hers, and feel how such a declaration would be received. The soft Na∣ture,
and great complaisance of Jo∣sebeth gave him some hopes; the particular esteem that she shew'd him flattered his desires, and above all, the coldness he perceived she had for her Husband, seemed to promise him a favourable success. But on the other side his passion did not so blind him, but that he feared Josebeth might be of the hu∣mour of some cunning Women, who to gain themselves a reputa∣tion of Virtue, are pleased to re∣ject the offers of some old or ill-conditioned Lover, when in the same time with greater surety they accept another that is more to their mind. Besides he had a mind if possible to ingage Josebeth without changing the part he had so long acted of a Saint. This appeared almost unpossible at first, yet having thought well on the business, he believed he had at last hit upon a way suitable to his design. The
next time that he saw Josebeth, he did nothing but entertain her with the hopes he had to see their Nati∣on quickly delivered from their misery by the coming of Messias. And the next time told her, that he had found out, in reading the Holy Prophets, that the Messias was to be begot by a Man in years, famous for Learning and Piety, and that had passed all his life in Virginity. A little after he read a Letter he had received from the devout Jews in Portugal, which brought news, that a Prophetess there had foretold, that the Mes∣sias was to be born in Holland; which he confirmed by divers Quotations of the old Testament, enough to confound a young Wo∣man of two and twenty. In this fashion did our Rabbin endeavour to prepare her for his holy Intrigue; and at last raised a Report, that in a swooning Fit he had, which was
called, A Divine Extasie, Heaven had revealed to him some extraor∣dinary matter, which he could the easier do, by reason of that high esteem all the Synagogue had of him. After, having laid all those Snares for the innocent Josebeth, he went to visit her, and after hav∣ing insinuated all his former dis∣courses about the Messias, he added to all the rest with an affected hu∣mility, that an Angel had revealed it to him, that they two were cho∣sen, by Heaven, to give their Na∣tion its long desired Protector. This wicked subtilty was not whol∣ly new in this accursed Pharisie, for, according to the Tradition of the Hebrews, the several Hypo∣crites have used the same means to accomplish their wicked designs. Such was the way of those Elders, that the young Prophet confound∣ed at Babylon; and some of them had the fortune to deceive poor
credulous Women, who injured their Husbands out of pure Zeal. Of which number was Dina, a young Woman of Alexandria, who being brought to Bed of a Girl, instead of the Deliverer of Israel, which the Rabbin Simon had pro∣mised her, went to the Judge to make her Complaint of him, be∣ing more troubled for the disap∣pointment of her hopes, than the loss of her Honour. But how foolish∣ly soever the Jewish Women might behave themselves, Josebeth was not to be caught in such a Snare; she had too much wit, not to see the Cheat. Though at first she received Manasses proposition with some kind of gayety, the promise of bringing a Divine Off-spring, having nothing in it but what was very pleasant to a Woman of her Age and Humour: But seriously reflecting on his Impudence, she remembred the story she had read
of that prophane Priest of the God Anubis, who under pretext of Piety, violated the illustrious Paulina; and she was so far from imitating those Heathenish Devo∣tions, that the Respect and Friend∣ship she had before conceived for that Rabbin, were changed into a Horrour and Aversion for him, that never could be diminished. Notwithstanding, she dissembled that change so cunningly, that he did not perceive it. So that when he pressed her to discover her Sen∣timents of a business of that im∣portance, which, he said, he com∣municated to her in the simplicity of his heart, by the express order of Heaven; she seemed so surpriz∣ed that she returned no answer at all; which made him flatter himself with the presage of a happy success; thinking in himself, that the most one can hope for, from a fine Wo∣man, is to suffer the first declara∣tion
of an unlawful desire, with∣out falling into Anger and Rage. In this thought the Rabbin forgot the Divine Revelation, and began to obey the violence of his passi∣on, and approach Josebeth, in a very carnal manner, when she made him a sign, with her Eyes and Hand, that she heard her Hus∣band coming. So much patience in an occasion when she ought to have none, was not, for all that, an effect of her weakness. Her design was only to permit Manasses so far as might engage the Credit and Power he had with Wanbergue, for the obtaining some of her de∣sires. The Rabbin did not un∣derstand it in that manner, and finding, by the signs that Josebeth made him, the presence of Wan∣bergue did much retard his hap∣piness, he resolved to find some way to send him from home for some considerable time, which
was pretty hard to accomplish; for the Hollander had no business to draw him from home so much as one Night, much less to occasi∣on him any long Journey, his Fa∣ctors taking so much care of his Concerns, that he never stirred from home, except it were to go to the Exchange. Notwithstand∣ing Manasses having taken notice, that nothing was so dear to Wan∣bergue, as the interest of his Re∣ligion, resolved to make use of that Zeal for the House of the Lord, to get him to absent him∣self from his own; and it was in this manner that he effected his de∣sign. Three Months before, there was come one into Holland, a Frenchman, named Dessous; a great Mathematician, and one who had particularly applyed himself to the study of Ships, who had found out new secrets in order to the building Vessels in an extraordina∣ry
fashion. He had presented a Me∣morial to the States, and had their leave to employ what Timber and Workmen he thought fit at Rotter∣dam, but all on his own charge. The talk of this new Ingineer, and this wonderful Invention, was very fit for Manasses Project, who having his natural wit sharpened by Love, used a devise to send a∣way the Husband, that never could have entred into any bodies head. He assembled together the Rabbins and chief Men of his Re∣ligion, and after having made a great discourse about the coming of the Messias, he told them, that in the hopes of so great a happi∣ness for their Nation, they ought not to neglect any thing that might tend towards the attaining the knowledge of such a felicity. That for his part he had taken no∣tice in the Talmud, that, that King which they expected, was
to have, among other things; Ships of a most extraordinary fa∣shion, that so he might the better be enabled to destroy by Sea, as well as on Land, any force of the Unbelievers, that would endea∣vour to hinder their return into Judea; and considering that Pro∣phesie and the Report that was spread abroad of that wonderful Vessel that was going to be built, he thought the least they could do, was at least to send some Persons of Judgment and Integrity to Rot∣terdam, to inform themselves ex∣actly of what was to be learnt, and to give an account of it to the Sy∣nagogue. The great reputation that Ma∣nasses had acquired, together with that strong facility the Jews have had in all Ages, to be imposed up∣on by the hopes of their Messias, made all the Assembly applaud the Rabbins Proposition: And as
they were about to consider of the Persons they should chuse for such an Employment, Manasses cun∣ningly prevented the question, by saying, no Man was so fit for that Honour as Wanbergue. All the Company approved the choise, and Jonadab, a Rabby, was appointed to go with him; so that they pre∣pared themselves to begin their Journey the next day, and as they were going away, Manasses gave them a particular to make their In∣quiries by, to make the little Em∣bassie appear more considerable. In the mean while Josebeth looked upon this Deputation as a serious Affair, till the Afternoon, that Ma∣nasses came to wait on her, and told her, that Providence had or∣dered this absence of Wanbergue, as being necessary for the accom∣plishment of that Mystery, that they two were to perform. This Discourse, instead of working
on Josebeth in his favour, gave her a greater aversion for him than be∣fore, and made her confine her thoughts within her self; How, said she, to abuse perpetually so ve∣nerable and holy a name as that of the Messias, one while to corrupt a Wife, and then to send away a Hus∣band, and always to cover some Roguery! Whiles she was thus en∣tertaining her self, Manasses, judg∣ing by her silence, of her consent, and thinking to gain it intirely, re∣solved to attack her where she was weakest; for having marked the Fancy she had for extraordinary E∣vents, he resolved now to flatter it; telling her, that she was re∣served to be the only Person in the World, for whom that Honour was kept: And he so beat into her Ears the Terms of rare, unheard of, singular, particular, priviledges, and the like, in speaking of the glory she would have in bringing
forth the Messias, that Josebeth, who in disdain had held down her Eyes all the while, now began a little to mind what he said; and certainly, if any thing in the World could have moved her, this would. However, the inclination she had for extraordinary accidents, was not so strong as her aversion to so horrid an impiety; and her thoughts were wholly taken up, how she should escape so dangerous an Invasion. But Manassas put a∣nother interpretation on her silence, and imagined he now had wholly vanquished her: And this imagi∣nation enflaming his passion, made him forget the part he had so long acted of a Saint, and instead of that, to give himself up to all the transports a violent lustful young Man can use; which put Jose∣beth into a greater fright than ever she had been in. How, says she, is it in this manner, that you go a∣bout
to obey the will of Heaven? Is this behaviour suitable to the com∣mands the Angels, those pure and holy Spirits, gave you? Manassas, see∣ing that, took up his gravity again, telling her, that he only erred in the manner, and that she could accuse him of nothing but of exe∣cuting the Divine Command in a way something carnal. When our Fore-fathers killed the Amala∣kites they did an action good and ho∣ly, though perhaps there was mixed in their obedience, some sinful heat and anger. In like manner, the fulfilling of the Divine Revelation, will not be hindred by those transports that your beauty causes in  except, Ma∣dam, you should fail of that respect and docility that you ought to shew. In this manner did this hateful Hy∣pocrite abuse his Wit and Consci∣ence, but to no purpose; for Jose∣beth, being enraged with the repe∣tition
of his insolence and blasphe∣my, took a resolution rather to die, than to let him enjoy his de∣sires. But the Rabbin, who saw not what passed in the Heart of that Gallant Woman, began again his Batteries, thinking that she had on∣ly a mind to be overcome with force; and in this Conflict the Chamber was quickly strewed with his Cloak, his Gloves, and his Hat, whiles the poor Josebeth, armed only with her modesty and her anger, undauntedly resisted the insolence of this Monster. In this Conflict, though Josebeth defended her self very well, yet she received some blows, which are not to be endured by a Lady; the grief she had, made her at last seek that safety in her Tongue, which her Hands could not give her; but there being no body near her, she ran for succour to a new dissimulation, the most usual, and
the best Arms that Women can imploy; and speaking very softly, What pleasure can you have in open day, were it not better stay till night; that might a little hide my blushes, and take too from my sight, that Reverent Aspect of yours, which now gives me rather Fear than Love, and makes me look on you rather as my Father, than my Gallant? Manassas fancied, 'twas only a little scruple of Modesty that retained her, which with the help of the Night he should easily overcome. I will obey you, said he, and defer my joy till night, and at Eleven a Clock I will not fail to come: And you, my Dear, said he, with the voice of a soft and gentle Conquerour, prepare your self to receive the greatest Honour that e∣ver Woman had. And saying so, he went and took a little Key that o∣pened the door into the Garden which lay before Josebeths Apart∣ment,
for he meant to come into her Chamber that way, as being the most easie and commodious. She let him take it, and to be rid of him the sooner, promised to leave her Chamber door open, and that another little Gate that was in the midst of a great Balustrade of Iron, that separated a little Court from the Garden, should on∣ly be put too. With these hopes the Rabbin went away, his eyes sparkling with fire, which Josebeth was sorry to have kindled, esteem∣ing it the greatest misfortune of her life. Twice she had hid her Resent∣ment, with a Prudence not to be expected from one of her Age; but when he was gone, the affront she had received made her burst out into tears, and drown her Heart with sighs, which she did not interrupt, unless it were to curse the Synagogue, and all the
Race of the Jews. What, said she, these be the Men whom we esteem like Prophets, and adore like the Vice-Roys of Heaven here on Earth, who Preach so often, that we must not so much as look upon another mans Wife with desire! What Pro∣digies are these, said she, and lift∣ing up her eyes to Heaven, good God, is it possible that that can be thy Law, which is published by the mouth of such men, who break it with so much insolence. The extremity of Josebeth's grief and rage, hindred her from seeing, that a Religion may be good, though the Mini∣sters of it be never so bad. But that is a popular way of arguing, and though generally it does a great deal of mischief, yet now it did some good, by preparing her mind for something extraordinary. Solomoune, that came into her Chamber without asking leave, found her in this sad condition, and
did what she could to comfort her, by making new Assurances of her Fidelity and readiness to do what∣ever she commanded her: And af∣ter some talk, they resolved to have Supper made ready later than or∣dinary, that the Servants should sit up longer, that so Manassas being tired with watching about the house, might retire of his own ac∣cord. This was executed accord∣ingly, and it was now mid-night, when contrary to the custom of that Country, there appeared light in most of the Windows of the House. The truth is, the Rabbin was a little tired with waiting, for he had been there since ten a Clock, and thought the time very long; but for all that he never thought of going away, though it began to rain most cruelly, and there was not any shelter to save his new Beaver, his Point de Venice Band, and his Velvet Coat, which he had
tricked up himself withall, to ap∣pear with better Meen before his Mistress. 'Twas well for her that it was most horrible dark, that so neither the Neighbours, or any of her own Servants, might see a Man walking in her Garden at that time of Night, and in her Husbands ab∣sence: For her part, that knew he was there, she could discern him well enough, and saw, that though he looked like a drown'd Rat, yet he did not look as if he would go away. 'Twas so late, that she or∣dered her People to go to Bed, thinking her self sufficiently secu∣red, by having the door of the Balustrade, and that of her Cham∣ber, well locked. Manassas, who, contrary to his expectation, found the door first of the Balustrade shut, flattered himself with the belief, that 'twas some mistake of the Servants; and therefore being no∣thing disheartened, and seeing no
more light in the Windows, he re∣solved to get over the Balustrade of Iron as well as he could, though it was very high from the ground; yet he did so well, getting in his feet by the side of the Iron-bar that fastned the Balustrade to the cor∣ner of the Wall, that at last he clamber'd up to the top of the Ba∣lustrade. Josebeth, that saw him all the while out of her Window, pulled Solomoune, and laughing, said, See there the Patriarch of our Synagogue most delicately perch'd; is it not a pretty way of obeying Di∣vine Revelations? Poor Solomoune looked very seriously, and told her Mistress, she could not chuse but pi∣ty him: I advise you, said Josebeth, giving her a good bang, to fall a crying: Why, said the Nurse, 'tis natural to have compassion on any thing that loves us, especially a man of that consideration. 'Tis on that accompt, said Josebeth, that he de∣serves
no pity; if a man of his Con∣sideration, had done nothing but ex∣pounded the Law a Sundays, and of∣fer'd Incense on the New Moons, I should have continued my Friendship for him for ever; but seeing he forgets his Profession, and his Age, to run into the extravagancies of Love and Youth, that he laughs at his Religion, nay abuses it, the bet∣ter to destroy my Honour, there is nothing in the World that I despise so much as this Fallen Angel. Whiles they were talking, the Rab∣bin was come down into the little Court before her Chamber, very easily, because the ground on that side was raised higher than the Garden, and filled up almost half the Balustrade; he was no sooner down, but he ran to the door that opened out of the Chamber, and finding it shut contrary to his ex∣pectations, he was almost mad, and began to think, that they had
played him a trick: However, not to be wanting in any thing, he scratched a good while at the door, and though it continued raining extremely, yet he stayed a little longer, coughed, and threw little stones against the Window, till at last he had wakened Josebeth's Spaniels, that made such a bark∣ing, that Manassas, for fear he might be caught, began to climb up the Balustrade; and though it were very high from the ground to∣wards the Garden, yet he thought he might slide down without any great trouble; as indeed he might easily have done, if in passing the Balustrade, his Velvet Coat had not unluckily hung in the Spikes of Iron that were set all along on the top of the Balustrade; he did not perceive it, till the weight of his body having made the Spikes enter fully into his Coat, he found himself staid by it, dangling in the
air: and after having struggled all he could, the Coat being new and strong, he was fain to unbutton himself, and leave the Coat hang∣ing on the Iron: He durst not stay any longer, for a huge noise of laughter at the Window, and the noise the Spaniels made with bark∣ing, hearing him fall into the Gar∣den, made the poor man run as fast as he could to the Garden door, which he shut very softly af∣ter him. Josebeth was ready to die with laughing, and she thought it was some piece of Justice, that the same Man who had given her so much trouble the same day, should afford her so much diversion at night: But for all her mirth, she forgot not to send Solomoune for the Velvet Coat, which being wet through, they imagined its Master was in a fine pickle: Alas, said Solomoune, considering his age, and the cold he must needs take, it
will certainly cost him his life; and you will be, Madam, doubly the cause of his death. Let him live or die, says Josebeth, let him love or hate me, I care not, I am only glad to see my self freed from his Insolence it present, and for the time to come from his importunities; for after this usage, I suppose I shall no more be troubled with them. Manassas, by that time he came home, was of the same mind, and resolved in∣stead of making her any more of∣fers of Love, to shew her all the effects of his hate that he could: he fell into so deep a melancholly, that when the Deputies were come back from Rotterdam, eight days after their setting out from Am∣sterdam, and that they waited up∣on him to give him an accompt of their Journey, which afforded no great matter of hope, he heard their Relation with an unconcern, that very much surprized them.
All this was passed but a Month before the Adventure of Villeneufe, and without doubt it had been an excellent occasion for our Rabbin to have revenged himself on Josebeth in the Profanation of the Syna∣gogue, if he had been as lucky to have discovered, as the Lovers were indiscreet in making such an appointment for their diversion, in a place where he had so many Spies, and so much power. When Solomoune had told Villeneufe this story, he was frighted at the dan∣ger they had passed, and he con∣cluded, that both his Mistress and he must use more discretion for the time to come. He charged the Nurse to give her that advice, till he could come himself to inculcate it; and to shew her a good exam∣ple, he resolved not to stir out of the house where he was, till it was dark. Afterwards he put off his Womans Cloaths to put on his
own; but he was as long in un∣dressing, as the Ladies use to be a dressing; for every part of Jose∣beth's Cloaths that he pulled off, gave him occasion to fall into some Contemplation or other, that kept him a good while: And when he came to her Smock, as he was pul∣ling it over his head, there came in∣to it the most ridiculous fancy that ever was, which he immediately executed; for, laying the Smock at length on the Table before him, he took that part of it before, that was to be next her Heart, and wrote in it these Verses, making the Smock speak. I, Lovers, that have felt each pant∣ing heart Beat in its breast, without the dress of Art, Can safely say, that Nature did de∣sign, Your loving hearts in equal Bonds should joyn.
The things that Love make peo∣ple do, appear ridiculous to those who have not their hearts warm∣ed with that passion, but yet have much weight and mystery with the amorous themselves: this writing on the Smock was one of Loves fooleries, and yet Villeneufe was very much pleased with himself, for having found out such an extra∣vagant way of shewing his affecti∣on, and hoped that it would please his Mistress, if it were only for the newness of the invention. He gave it Solomoune, and bid her car∣ry it to her Mistress, and prayed her to insinuate slily, that this was a piece of Gallantry that had never been practised before; for though it was no great matter in it self, yet he hoped she might be taken with its singularity. And being now alone, he resolved to see what 'twas that he had stole in the Sy∣nagogue, which he had taken out
of the Pocket of his Mistresses Coat, before he sent it away. He unfolded the little Pacquet, and found rowled up in two or three Papers, a little Picture of a Lady in Mourning, that seemed to be a∣bout thirty years old, that had so fine an air, that without g the Idea of Josebeth in ones head, one could not have escaped being very much taken with it. I shall not be long in the doubt who she is, said Ville neufe, for certainly these Papers will instruct me fully. The first that he opened was a Letter, with this Inscription, For Abigal that is never at home: it appeared to be a Mans Hand; and thus it was. 'TIs hard, Madam, to come four days together, at several hours, and not find you once! to run after you in all the places where one guesses you might be, and be told at
every house, that you are but just gone thence! how is it possible for me, after this, to be so contented with my Prison, as you would have me think I have reason to be? I would give half the blood in my Veins, that you were in this of Jo∣sebeths humour, that is always at home. The truth is, your Picture would a little console me for the troubles those Eclipses give me, would to God it could console me too, for a loss I have by a Factor at Ge∣noa, of almost ten thousand pound, and a Ship of mine the Pyrates of Algier have taken. But if you are really pleased with the offers I make you of my service, and all the de∣signs I have to gain you, you must, if you please, govern your self in quite another manner. When he had done, he could not forbear laughing: This is right a Dutch Gallantry, says he, and the
true stile of Cupid writing out of a Ware-house: what tenderness of Love, and what fine Complements? I shall hate Abigal, if she be capable to use such a Brute kindly; but I shall see that by her Answer. He had it ready in the next Paper that he opened, and 'twas this. IF you could do any thing else but grumble, you would be so far from chiding, that you would be pleased to bid me joy, in being freed from the bondage, which, for two years, the Ceremony to be observed by a Widdow has kept me in: Not that I design to use my liberty in the way that you would have me; no, I pretend to spend it in Duty and Re∣ligion, as you may see by the place where I writ this Letter, which is in one of the Tents of our Syna∣gogue, where I am like to pass a night very ill, if the pleasure of enter∣taining my self with the thought
and hopes of our Love, does not help to divert me: So that I shall divide my self betwixt you and the Rab∣bins; they shall have the Ceremony, and you the Substance. The custom I have of being kind to you, draws these Expressions from me before I think on't, for you do no ways de∣serve them, and less do you deserve the Picture you ask; however I send it you, on condition, that the Mourn∣ing you see me dressed in, make you remember, that I am free to bestow my heart on him that shall make me love him most: I do not mean to con∣strain my Inclinations. This Letter, that was not finish∣ed, sufficiently shewed of what Character Abigal was; which Villeneufe easily found out, and had such a contempt for her, that throwing down her Letter, What a pitiful sort of Woman is this, the meanness of her Soul destroys the
Beauty of her Face. Oh Josebeth, my lovely Josebeth, is another sort of Creature! how graceful is she when she would be severe, and how obliging is she in that severity it self? That thought set him a-work for some time. At last he continu∣ed; As for Abigal, she must needs be an ill Woman, and this Letter is but an ill Picture of her mind. There was but one Paper more to read; and when Villeneufe had opened it, he saw 'twas a Cypher to write secretly, with a Key of Signs to speak by in Publick. The writing was not the same hand with the other Letters, and it ap∣peared to be newly done, and brought thither, in all likelihood, to be either studied, or copied. After having examined these Pa∣pers, he was a little surprized, though bred up in the Army, and the Court, two Places that do not usually give great impressions of
Piety, to have found people so im∣ployed in a place and time so so∣lemnly devoted to the Divine Worship. If the Jewish Women do perform the other parts of their Re∣ligion, said he, like this Feast of Ta∣bernacles, I perceive Moses's Law will be neatly kept. As he was in these thoughts, Solomoune came in, and he had but just time to rowl up the Papers, and put them in his Pocket: I come, said she, from wa∣king my Mistress, and never did she laugh so much in her life, as she has done on reading your Verses upon her Smock; and yet at last she began to be a little melancholly, looking on those words, Nature did design your loving hearts in equal Bonds should joyn. I wish to God, said she, sighing, that it be as true as that I think I desire we were made one for another, and that the Event may make good my thoughts, and my de∣sires: afterwards she fell into her
pleasant humour again, as you will see by this Note which she has sent you. Villeneufe took it trembling, and found these words: I thought that I had been, when I pleased, the most extravagant Crea∣ture in the World, but now your Verses have robbed me of that glory. The stuff, as well as the fashion, are equally bizarre, and the part where you have writ them, make up all: So on the whole matter, my Smock is now fit for a Romance, and from henceforwards it shall be my Holy∣day Smock; with precaution how∣ever, which I think as necessary as you can do: Therefore do you and Solomoune take your measure toge∣ther, and I shall agree to whatever you resolve on. That resolution was, that he should not see Josebeth in eight days, but that he should send his Man with a Letter to Solomounes little House every night.
As Solomoune was about to get him some Supper, he asked in a careless manner, as if it were by chance, and for want of other dis∣course, if she knew one called Abi∣gal, and whether it were the Name of a Man or a Woman: You need ask no body but Josebeth, said the Nurse, not stirring from what she was about, and it may help to ad∣vance your business bravely. But who told you any thing of Abigal? Two or three people, said he, that talked under the Window before you came in, named that Name so of∣ten, that it stuck in my memory, and I thought to ask you who 'twas. Come hither, says Solomoune, ta∣king him by the arm, do you see o∣ver those Gardens, that fine House, with the great Windows, that is A∣bigals House: But if you will swear to say nothing to my Mistress, I will tell you more? She was born at Brussels, where her Father, who was
a Spaniard, but for his Religion was a secret Jew, had a considerable Employment in the Court of the Car∣dinal Infanta, Governour of Flan∣ders. The Agent of Portugal that resided at Amsterdam, having seen her in a Journey he had occasion to make to Brussels, desired her for his Wife, and was preferred to a great many others, because he (as you know since the Expulsion of the Moors and Jews out of Spain, there remain a great many secret Jews) was of the same Religion with her Father Dom Gomez. In a little while he left her a rich Widow; and as soon as in decency she could, she took another Husband, of the same Nation and Religi∣on with her first, his name was Caladujar, whom she has already buried, and by that means is again at her dispose, and surely she is one of the handsomest Women in Holland. She pretends to know
the World better than any of our Ladies here, because she lived with her Father in the Court of Brussels; so that all things are carried with a great Air in her House, and she allows her self a greater liberty than our Women usually take: they say she loves nothing so much as her pleasure; perhaps 'tis but a scandal, for she goes devoutly to the Synagogue; but however she has that Reputation. And how are the Rabbins pleas'd with this, said Villeneufe. Among the Jews, said Solomoune, the Widows are allowed a much greater liberty than married Women, or Maids, for rea∣sons that I do not remember, and under that pretence Abigal takes a little too much: she has been seve∣ral times reproved for it, and Manas∣sas, as well as the other Rabbins, have sometimes shew'd their dislike of her way of living, but none has spoke so home as Josaphat, who is the most
learned and vertuous of them all. He preached at the great Feast of Expiation, that is the 10th day of September; and was so particular in condemning the liberty of Widows, that it was plain enough he meant Abigal. However his Exhortati∣on, did no good, through the malice of the other Rabbins, who taking an occasion to scandalize him, because he has no Beard, say, he cryes out a∣gainst Women, only because the im∣perfection of his Nature gives him an aversion for them. Besides, A∣bigal has such a way to flatter and ingratiate her self with all the World, that it takes very little no∣tice of what she does. But after all, says Villeneufe, what has Jo∣sebeth to do with Abigal? Oh, says the Nurse, that is the Secret; and yet, said she, (that long'd to tell all she knew) I can't forbear giving you this Mark of my trust, so much I esteem you. You must
know then, that Wanbergue fell desperately in Love with Abigal af∣ter her first Husband dyed. They are both much about the same age, and I cannot tell by what kind of simpathy, she loved him at the same time, so that he used all his endeavours with his Father, to have his consent to Marry her. But the good old Man, that did not like her free way of living, opposed it firmly, and did the more eagerly embrace the first Proposition that Josebeths Father made him about the same time. The happiness of possessing so fine a Woman as Josebeth, has not ta∣ken away the first love he had for Abigal; he has still continued to visit her, and, betwixt you and I, I believe he still adores her. You may easily imagine what an inju∣ry this is to Josebeth, and how hainously she takes it. 'Tis not that Josebeth values the love of
her Husband, but it cannot but out her to the heart to see another so unjustly preferr'd before her; for though Abigal be very hand∣some, yet I assure you she cannot be compared to Josebeth, either in Youth, Beauty, or Wit. Villeneufe was of Solomoun's opi∣nion, and thought that Wanbergue did his Mistress a great injury, but however he was not much troubled at it, because it advanced his de∣signs: And beginning to esteem the Nurse, as a Woman of good sense and breeding, he amused himself a little in discoursing with her. I know very well, said he, that Ladies esteem so much the Reputation of Beauty, and hold it so dear, that though they have ever some aversion for a Man, yet it can never go so far, as to make them desire, he should carry his sighs and services any where else. As much disdain as you please,
but a fair Lady will still look on the going away of a Lover, whom she did not value, as the loss of a Subject, and a diminution of her Empire, and never will she forgive that Fugitive, that, though ill used, durst ingage himself in the service of another Mistress. But dear Mistress Solomoune, con∣tinued Villeneufe, having a mind to pass away the time, let us know a little of your Concerns, and tell me a little what Company you have kept, to get so much wit as you shew in all your discourse. You laugh at me, said she, but I have read something in my time, and there have been Men in the World, that could think it worth their while to entertain me. By what I yet see, said Villeneufe, I judge you have made no incon∣siderable Conquests; but may one not know some one of the Slaves you have made. Yes, said she,
growing young again with the re∣membrance of past pleasure, I have been loved; and it would be no Romance, if I should tell you there was a time when a Marshal of France had no other inclination but for me. I was but eighteen years old, when he said I had too much wit for a Lorrainer, and he did our Family many a good turn for my sake. As he came back from an Ambassie in Switzerland, he came forty miles out of his way to see me; and he protested, that if ever he published the Sto∣ry of his Life, I should not be for∣gotten. Oh, said Villeneufe, this must be the Marshal of Ba— You are in the right, said Solo∣moune, and I was acquainted with him, by reason my Father held a Farm belonging to the Lordship of Harovel, which be∣long'd to the Marshal. One need not ask if a Lover of that Qua∣lity
had reason to complain of your cruelty? Alas, said the poor Nurse, 'twas so worthy a Man, that 'twas impossible—But you laugh at me, and I am a Fool to talk to you so, and hinder you from writing to Josebeth, before you go home. He writ a Letter full of respect and passion, and be∣sought her by eagerness of Love, that she would shorten the term of eight days, which he himself had agreed to, and let him see her at the end of three. Before Solomoune went away, he asked her, if by chance she had not something or other about her of the hand-writing of Wanbergue; for, says he, I have a fancy to know his hand. She look'd in her Pocket, and found a Note of some things that he ordered her to buy him two or three days before: Oh, this is enough, says Villeneufe; and as soon as she was gone, he took
the Letters out of his Pocket that he had stole in the Synagogue, and comparing one of them with this Note the Nurse had just given him, he found they were both the same hand. At first he did not know, whether he ought to be an∣gry or glad; for as on one side he considered, that it must needs do him service to convince Josebeth of the Infidelity of her Husband; so on the other side, the love and esteem he had for her, made him see with indignation, the brutality of a Man that could neglect a Woman of her Merit, for another that was so much her inferiour in all respects. He was thinking with himself, whether he should make his Mi∣stress acquainted with this story; For, said he, one must treat Women of wit, and that value their Repu∣tation, in another manner than one uses those that have not so much niceness and honour; for those are
alarm'd with hearing a story of a∣nother woman, and the fear of be∣ing talked of themselves, makes them preach against the vanity of the world, and renounce to a friend∣ship for six Months together, with∣out ever caring what becomes of their Friend all that while: What know I, but that when Josebeth hears, that an intrigue of another woman has been brought to light in so extraordinary a manner, she may take a fancy, and be reserved her self, for fear that her own Con∣cern may some way or other be found out too. Villeneufe had such thoughts, because he did well com∣prehend of what nature were Jose∣beths intentions for him; and therefore resolved to tell her no∣thing of the discovery he had made of her Husbands love with Abi∣gal: Immediately Solomoune came in; I shall tell you strange news, said she, who do you think I have left
with my Mistress? Why Manassas, said Villeneuse. No, 'tis not he, but I should rather have expected to have found him there, than this o∣ther Person, for 'tis Abigal, who has not been with my Mistress this three years till now, and it must be something extraordinary that brings her now. The Nurse was in the right, for Abigal was extreamly troubled at the loss of her Papers, and yet could not tell who to ac∣cuse; and though she did not use to be much concerned at any thing, yet now her indifference for∣sook her, and she could not with patience think in what Hands, those Letters and her Picture might fall. However, as 'tis natu∣ral, when one is surprized, to think it comes from them whom we have injured, Abigal who knew Josebeth had been that night in the Synagogue, did strongly suspect 'twas she that had stole her Papers.
Being big with this thought, she writ early in the morning to Wan∣bergue, that he should come and speak with her. He fell into a vio∣lent passion, when she told him the business; and when she nam'd Jose∣beth, I had rather lose one of my Ships, said he, that are coming home, than that Imperious Woman should have such an advantage over me: and at last he used Abigal as rudely, as if she had been already his Wife, and that had grievously offended him: But she that knew how to order that hasty humour, easily brought him to himself, and made him perceive, that that misfortune was occasion∣ed by her violent affection, and the extraordinary Concern she had to shew it, even when she ought to have imployed her thoughts in Devotion: And if any body had reason to be troubled, 'twas she, who had lost both her Letter, and her Picture, by the too eager desire
she had to send them to him. At last they both concluded that Abigal should pay Josebeth a Visit, and en∣deavour in her Conversation to find out what she could of the Ad∣venture. Josebeth was about to say she was not within, when she saw A∣bigal come to visit her; but the pride she took to be always at home, made her suffer that Visit, though much against her humour. She received her with a great cold∣ness, which did not wear off, though Abigal made her all the Caresses and Flatteries in the World. She commended Jose∣beth's Beauty above all the Ladies in Town; and afterwards fell to talk of the Feast of the Taberna∣cles, and of the disorder that hap∣pen'd that night Josebeth was at the Synagogue: One cannot, said Abigal, discover all the Rogueries that are practised there, and the
poor Creature that was taken, is not the only prophane Wretch, that abused the Devotion of such a holy place, and such a Solemn Feast, to have an opportunity of taking that which does not be∣long to them. Josebeth, that took her words in another meaning than what Abigal intended, was mortal∣ly frighted, and in her heart believ∣ed she was found out. However, having naturally a steddiness of mind that was seen even in her countenance, she was no way dis∣ordered; but on the contrary, she did not only detest the impiety of those people that come into holy places with ill designs, but spake with great zeal against those that imploy their thoughts in places of Devotion, to any thing but that Service which they come there to Celebrate. This discourse frighted Abigal, as much as hers had a∣larm'd Josebeth; and it had been a
pleasant thing to see those two Women fright one another, with the discourse they held, with no o∣ther design, but to keep themselves from being thought guilty. Of the two, Abigal was the most frighted, and Josebeths Answer made her colour rise, so that she could not hide it: and having stayed about half an hour longer with a great constraint, at last went away without having been able to learn any thing of Josebeth, who was a little come to her self, after the first fright that Conversa∣tion had given her; but yet had a great impatience to confer with Villeneufe upon that Subject: So that having read the Note he sent her, that Solomoune had took an occasion to give her, while Abigal was there, she wrote him another, to come to Solomoune's at the end of three days, as he desired, but that he should be sure not to come
in till it was dark night, nor go out till it was very dark. Villeneufe obeyed those Orders exactly, and left not the Nurse till past ten a Clock, having her promise that she would be there again next night at the same hour, that he might send her a Letter for his Mistress. Next night Dumarest, that had took good notice of the House, found it, and her there, and gave her a Letter from his Master. As soon as Josebeth saw it, and saw a drop of blood about it, which made her Heart beat, she opened it, and read these Verses writ in blood. Thou that hast left the Streams of Life to gain A Kiss from Cloris hand, tell her the pain, The cruel anguish, and the killing smart, That thou didst feel in passing through my Heart.
The Verses were very indiffe∣rent ones; but coming from a Man in Love, and being writ in Blood too, made them appear quite other things. But the sense of them was not plain to Josebeth, which made her send Solomoune to see in what condition Villeneufe might be: Dumarest told her, that his Master having found himself extreamly heated all night, had been let blood, but that now he was very well, and would not fail of waiting on Josebeth at the time agreed. This is a pretty cheap way of shewing ones passion, said Josebeth, laughing at the bloody Letters, and a great conveniency of taking care of health, and giving marks of Love at the same time: Oh, says Solomoune, you are too hard to be pleased; would you have the poor man give him∣self a wound indeed, that he might send you some of his blood
in a Complement; for to do so, he must be in a more despairing condition, than your goodness is like to reduce him to. Very well, said Josebeth, thou seest I have a mind to be merry; and taking a Pen in her hand, sent him this Answer. Cherish the Stream that runs with∣in thy Veins, And by thy own increase, not Cloris pains: For know that she will ever bear her part, In all the sufferings of a loyal heart. These verses were not made by Sappho, but however might pass, being of a Womans hand, that did not at all pretend to Poetry, nor Rime, except when she had a mind to fool; But Villeneufe was charm∣ed with them, and said they were
the best that ever he saw. In the mean time he had a certain Curi∣osity to see Abigal, that he might have the pleasure to laugh at their folly, who compared her to Jose∣beth. With that design he went next day to the Synagogue, believ∣ing that Josebeth would not come thither that day; and he only minded who went out and in at the fifth Tent, in which he had found the Picture and the Papers. A great many Women had passed by him that were not very likely to be what he sought; when at last he saw one, that took up his looks more than all the rest. She was dressed very plain, because the Law sorbids any finery at that Feast; but her shape was of it self so fine, and there appeared such a Majestick Air in her gate, and in the lower part of her Face, that a Vail of Gare that came to her Mouth, discovered, that made Vil∣leneufe
conclude it must be Abi∣gal. Having an impatience to know, he stopp'd a Woman that followed her, with something un∣der her Arm; just as he saw the first go into the fifth Tent, as he thought she would. If all the rest be answerable to as much of her as I have seen, she must in∣deed be very beautiful: he had a mind to see how she look'd with her long Mantle on, as she stood in her row among the other Wo∣men: she was taller by almost the Head, and held her Bough with a certain grace, peculiar to her self. As he beheld her in that posture, he could not hinder himself from making Reflexions one would not have expected from him. How true it is, said he, that Hypocri∣sie it self is a homage that Vice renders to Virtue, and a confes∣sion of its excellence: For the wicked, by constraining them∣selves
to an appearance of good, do thereby own that there is no∣thing so desirable, as a real Repu∣tation of probity: And me∣thinks Abigal her self, who I know in my Conscience is an ill Woman; yet in that out∣ward Figure of Devotion she ap∣pears so lovely, that that false appearance makes me almost for∣get what I know her to be; and I warrant you, she her self is well pleased with this shew of Religion, that by it she may keep some pretence to it. But those thoughts all ended in Josebeth, as 'tis natural for those that have a∣ny particular Fancy that governs in their Head, to reduce all things to it. I confess, said he, that Josebeth did not shew much Re∣ligion neither, in the Synagogue; but she is young, and perhaps she is not in her heart a Jew, who can tell!
As he went home, he pulled out Abigals Picture, and often looked upon it; and comparing the Pi∣cture of Josebeth that he carried in his heart, with that other which he carried in his hand; he found in the first an Air of Sincerity and Constancy, which the last did no way promise: But on the contra∣ry a Physiognomy that appear'd with something of lightness and falseness, which indeed was the true Character of Abigal. The night that brings rest un∣der its soft Wings, to all the World, brought none to Villeneufe; for the agitation of his own thoughts would not suffer him to take any. For the Passion which he had for Josebeth, which his heart told him was very different from the former amusements of gallantry which he had, the difficulties he saw to op∣pose his desires, and yet the hopes that she her self had so plainly
given him, of possessing her in the ways of honour; all this together raised a confusion in his mind, and overspread it with a darkness, thicker than that the night was wrapt in. Above all, he was cru∣elly troubled about the meaning of one part of Wanbergues Letter. 'Tis most certain, said he, that this Rascal of a Husband would fain be rid of Josebeth, that he might have liberty to marry Abi∣gal! But how can I be sure they will stop at desires only? for they have neither of them over much scruples of Conscience, and therefore they may easily go on from unjust desires to unjust acti∣ons. In a word, 'tis a Jew that hates his Wife, and writes to his Mistress of designs that he has to gain her: What can those de∣signs be; and if he should really go on to execute any of them on Josebeth, which she might possibly
prevent by having notice of them from me, and so perish by my fault, I could not in my own death find a consolation for hers. Being overcome with this fear, he took Abigals Picture and Pa∣pers, when it was time to go to Josebeth. Well, tell me, said that lovely Woman, when she saw him, is it not true that a little absence does no injury to Love, when it is such as it ought to be. I confess, Madam, he answered, that a short separation can work no change in a heart that loves truly; but 'tis as true, that all that while that heart injoys no quiet; and if it should last long, it could have no joy: For there is this difference betwixt a Hus∣band and a Lover, that the last looks upon every distance, as a danger he runs of losing his hap∣piness, which every thing threat∣ens in his absence: Whereas the
other, whose business is already done, makes him more desirable by his absence; and therefore makes a Journey on purpose, to bring back the conjugal affection more enflamed. But, says Jose∣beth, you do not consider, that when the Eyes, the Mouth, and the Ears are not taken up with the Object before them, the flame, that else would be divided into those several quarters, is all united in the Heart, and burns there so much the stronger: You may call it Singularity, if you please, but I should best like so to order Love, that desires and impatiencies should follow plea∣sures and injoyments. I know not, Madam, said Villeneufe, if the frequent occasions Monsieur Wanbergue takes to absent him∣self, produce those good effects be∣twixt you, that you seem to desire and commend: But this I know,
that you are nor the Person whose absence he mourns, but that there is another in the world, whose company he desires much more than yours. And at these words he pulled out the Picture, and the Papers, which Josebeth took with a great Concern. The first Letter she read, was that her Husband had writ, and saw there with some satisfaction the testimony he gave her of li∣ving retired, and never stirring from home. But when she came to that part of the Letter, that spake, of her being pleased with the designs he had to gain her, she fell into a great passion; and, as 'tis natural to suspect the greatest Crimes in people for whom one has an aversion, she immediately believed, that her Husband intend∣ed to poyson her, if Abigal would have him. Afterwards she read Abigal's Answer; and when she
had done, See, said she, the stile of that ill Woman: But she does not appear so wicked as her Lover; and I do not find that she would make use of the Power that Traytor gives her over my Life, though one can't be sure what her thoughts are, because her Letter is not finished, and per∣haps the Sentence for my Death would be the last thing she would have writ. There was yet one Pa∣per more to read, but she was so angry, she could not mind it; it was the Cypher, and the way of speaking by Signs; and Villeneufe had a great Curiosity to know the Author, and therefore presented it again to Josebeth, desiring her to read it. As soon as ever she saw it, she cryed out, Oh my fine Saint, he was fit to make one in this Compa∣ny. 'Tis that Hypocrite Rabby Ma∣nassas, who thought, it seems, to find more favour with Abigal than he had with me. And it was very true,
for that old Rascal, that endeavour∣ed to comfort himself for the loss of Josebeth, found no body in his Flock so fit to drive away his melancholly, as Abigal. But because her loose way of living made it scandalous, for a Man of Manassas Profession, to visit her with that assiduity that was requisite for his design, they agreed to speak to one another before the World with Signs, which that Holy Doctor was to make a List of; which he had accordingly done, and sent her, that day that she went to keep the Feast of Tabernacles, that so she might make use of the leisure time she should have in the Syna∣gogue, to study so devout a Lesson. So horrible a profanation of the Mysteries of Religion, by the chief Person concerned to observe and celebrate them, gave an occasion to Villeneufe to perswade Josebeth to leave the Communion of such Hypocrites, and come over to the
Christian Religion. You speak well for your own interest, said she, if it be true, that you love me as much as you pretend, for if I turned Chri∣stian, 'twould be in your power to marry me, if you desired it. Ville∣neufe that never heard of any such Custom, threw himself at her feet, and begg'd her to tell him how that could be. There is no∣thing more usual, said Josebeth, than that practise, which is used both in Flanders and Holland; and the manner of it is this, When a Jewish Woman has a mind to turn Christian, she cites her Husband before the Magi∣strate, that he may there declare, if he has a mind to make himself a Christian, and he has eight days given him to consider what he will do; and in that time, he and his Wife live apart: If at the end of that time he forsake the Jewish Religion, the Marriage stands
good; but if he continue obsti∣nate, to live and die a Jew, his Wife then protests she can't live with him, for fear of her Consci∣ence; and then she has paid her back the Portion she brought him, and is suffered to marry where she pleases. 'Tis but a year ago, that the same thing happened in Amsterdam, to a fine Woman of the Jewish Nation, called Dora∣zith, that afterwards married the Lieutenant Colonel of the Regi∣ment of Indersum. In a word, said Josebeth, 'tis the only way in which you shall obtain me, and 'twas this I meant, when I spoke confusedly to you, in the begin∣ning of our Acquaintance. Vil∣leneufe touched to the Heart with the Proposition Josebeth had made him, kissed her Hand which she gave him, and swore to Heaven, that he would esteem more than all the World the honour to pos∣sess
Josebeth. But Madam, said he, what if Wanbergue should have a fancy to turn Christian too: Oh, there is no fear of that, said Jose∣beth, and would I were as sure of your Constancy to me, as I am of his to the Jewish Religion, for which his zeal is very great; nay, I believe he has so much aversion for me, that he would be glad of my Conversion, that so he might be left at liberty to mar∣ry another. But Madam, all the Rabbins, and Manassas that has so great an Authority, do you think they will be quiet, and do no∣thing to hinder us? They are Un∣believers, and Unbelievers that you have injured, and do you think they will not try all ways to molest you? For that, said Josebeth, many things are to be answered. First, this is a Custom and Law established, that can no more be questioned: And then you know, that in this Common∣wealth
there is no violence or disorder suffer'd, and though all Religions are here permitted, yet the Jews are the least favoured by the Publick of any other: And then, you little know what sort of people Manassas and his Brethren are, if you think they will concern themselves out of zeal, to keep me in their Religi∣on: Alas, 'tis Policy not Devo∣tion governs them, and they aim at nothing but their Interest. If people of ordinary condition come to them, for the expound∣ing and interpreting the Law, they declare it in its utmost ri∣gour, that so they may get the Reputation of Precise and Holy Men; but if men of Quality want another Exposition, they can explain it quite another way, that so they may maintain them∣selves by their Authority and Fa∣vour. 'Tis the same in matter of
Reputation; for though a Man have neither real honour, nor honesty, and a Woman give just occasion to all the Town to talk of her, provided they go to the Feast of Tabernacles, and hold a Bough devoutly in their hands; if they do but speak well of their Spiritual Leaders, and say they deserve esteem and respect, all is well; their Con∣sciences shall be quiet, and our Rabbins will send them to Hea∣ven, without ever changing their Life on Earth: And on the o∣ther side, if one does not blindly admire all they Preach, and take care to court their favour, one shall be cryed down for the great∣est Atheist in the World. All this is plain, in their carriage to me and Abigal. Because I never shew'd over much care to please them, they have done all they can to injure me, but to no purpose,
because my way of living has given them no occasion to fasten on; however they have often said, that the small respect I paid the Priests, was a certain sign I had no Religion in my heart: And as it lies in their power to make some sort of distinction in the Synagogue, they have there taken occasion sometimes to shew their little spleen; but seeing that I laughed at their little tricks, they were pleased to find that Wanber∣gue had some Intrigue, and have done what they could to favour her and him, on purpose to vex me: Nay, they let me know, that one of the Rabbins themselves, Marezul by Name, had been em∣ployed to carry Love-Letters be∣twixt them. On the other side, Abigal living in that liberty she takes, has yet so much of their favour, that upon all occasions they justifie her actions, and cry
her up for a Woman of Piety. Whiles she gets so much indul∣gence by submitting to their pride; she calls them her Ora∣cles, and adores their Persons, kisses the bottom of their Gar∣ments, and often sends them considerable Presents. And my treacherous Husband too, says Josebeth, for the same reason, ob∣serves the same method, to gain those Mercenary Wretches. He often invites them to Dinner, and then I must take an extraor∣dinary care to treat them splen∣didly. And the other day, Wan∣bergue and Abigal, agreed to send a Present of fine Cloath to Ma∣nassas, that he, and the rest, might appear handsomly drest at the Feast of Tabernacles: so that with these Precautions, both he and she live how they please, un∣der the protection of these base Hypocrites. Seeing 'tis so, Ma∣dam,
said Villeneufe, why do you make any scruple to leave a Party, where there is neither Ho∣nour, nor Religion, and to come into a better way? I have had thoughts so to do, a great while, said Josebeth, and the first Edu∣cation I had in the Christian Re∣ligion, gave me a great Aversion for these Rabbins. At last they both agreed that Villeneufe should, next day, go a∣way with all haste to Louvain, that he might have the Opinion of the Doctors of his own Religion about marrying Josebeth; and that in the mean time, Josebeth should live with her Husband, as she had done before. As Villeneuse was on the way, he could do nothing but admire the goodness of Josebeth, which she had shewn him in this last Conversati∣on: For according to the Rules of a great Passion, he should have been
so transported with the offer she made him of marrying her, that all his Reason and Wit, should have been given up intirely to his Joy: he ought not to have thought of any thing but that Felicity, and having once got his Mistresses word, not have troubled his head with think∣ing of other Obstacles. And yet, instead of such an obliging Tran∣sport, he had coldness enough to reflect on the offer she made him, and to propose a thousand difficul∣ties against his own happiness; in a word, he looked as if he was ma∣king a bargain, and that he would be assured of all things before∣hand. A proceeding that had no∣thing in it, of gratitude, or tender love, and yet Josebeth had had sweetness, and goodness enough to bear it patiently, and calmly answer all his Objections. However, he thought, that in all this he had done his duty; and in reality, he had
in this shewed the greatest token of his kindness that was possible. I have now, said he, experiment∣ed the difference there is, betwixt a love of Gallantry, and a love of Mar∣riage; for formerly, whenever I in∣gaged my self in a Ladies service, 'twas to follow my present inclina∣tion, without ever troubling my self with the consequence that might happen. But now I well found by another temper of my heart, that Josebeth, my lovely Josebeth, gave me Chains that were to tye me all my Life; and the happiness of pos∣sessing her appeared so unlikely, that I could not but dispute, to be assured of its reality. With these thoughts he got to Louvain, and immediately made his case known to the Doctors there; who, in a Writing under their hands, gave their Opinion, that the Marriage of a converted Jew, whose Husband would continue
still in that Superstition, with a Christian man, was good and va∣lid: They brought several Citati∣ons out of the Canon Law; and at the bottom Sign'd it, Siunich. Wauverne. Loyens. Those good men would not let Ville neufe go, without taking occa∣sion to give him wholesome in∣structions, telling him, that Marri∣age was not ordained to please the Lust of the Flesh, but that he ought to propose to himself a higher and Nobler End, without which— But our Lover having got that which he came for; cut off that Grave Discourse with a Reve∣rent Bow he made them; and ta∣king this Declaration which the Secretary of the Colledge, M. Nau∣landt gave him, he went to take Horse, to go back as fast as he came. But his return was not so
soon as he intended; for as he was going away, he was stopped by an Officer, and some Souldiers, and carried away Prisoner to the Go∣vernour of the Castle, Dom Hen∣riques de Carrero. That Spaniard, whom such a Place made very proud, used Villeneufe at first very rudely; letting him know in an unhandsome manner, that he took him for a Spy, as indeed Dom Hen∣riques was informed that he really was; for the War then continued betwixt France and Spain, and the people of Louvain had an extraor∣dinary hatred for the French, ever since the Marshal de Breze besieged their City, who, after having spent a great deal of time, and a great many men, destroyed all their Country, out of rage, that he was forced to raise his Siege: So that having taken notice of Villeneufe, as he went up and down the Town about his business, with an air, and
way that made them take him for a French-man: Those who had no∣thing else to do, were glad to do a French-man an ill turn, and went and told the Governour, that he looked like a dangerous Man. 'Twas to no purpose that he com∣plained in Dutch of the injury that they did him, for the Governour with a Spanish Gravity, without so much as hearing him, made a sign they should carry him away; and a∣way they had him into a Chamber that was not extraordinarily well furnished. The Officer that had the charge of him, stayed with him in the Room to entertain him, and told him at last, that though his Excellence was most exact in do∣ing his Duty, yet he knew how to treat Gentlemen. The Prisoner presently smelt what he would be at, and therefore took out a Gold Watch he had about him, and de∣sired him he would present that to
his Excellence, as a Token of his Respect. He thought from the first that it would cost him something to get out of their Clutches; but he thought now, after this Present, he should quickly have his liberty: And that thought making him a little more easie, he could not but laugh at the Title of Excellence given to Dom Henriques, who was indeed a Gentleman; but of those Gentlemen, that after having ser∣ved a long time, in recompence have the Government of some Pri∣son in the Low-Countries; where minding nothing but to scrape to∣gether a little Money, they turn Pyrates on the Land, and make Slaves of all that come near them, and all for the security of the E∣state. This Gentleman had extra∣ordinary reason for what he did, which was, the smallness of the Pay, both for himself, his Souldi∣ers, and for the repairs of the
Works which fell down every day: so that Dom Henriques looked upon the Imprisonment of Villeneufe as an extraordinary good Fortune, and re∣solved to use it accordingly. Our Prisoner was much surpri∣zed, when the Officer came back, and told him, his Excellence had accepted the Watch; that he was going to Brussels, and promised him on the word of a Gentleman, he would do what he could in his behalf with the Council of State. How, said Villeneufe, almost mad, with the Council of State! what a business you Spaniards make of no∣thing? You French-men, said the Officer very gravely, taking him by the hand, are too hasty, and you ought to render thanks to his Excel∣lence, for the care he takes of you: For I had not yet told you, Seignior, continued he, smiling so much as shewed his nasty teeth, that his Ex∣cellence has given Order to have
you removed to a better Chamber, and be permitted the use of the Ca∣stle to walk in. I have seen a great many Prisoners of State in my time, but I never saw any have so much favour shewn them at first, as you. Whiles the Officer was talking on this manner, Villeneufe walked up and down the Room, stamping with his feet, looking up to Hea∣ven, and raving like a man out of his Wits; so that he only heard the last words the Officer said, to whom he answered with a wild look, You have a mind to make me mad with your favours, and your Excellencies, that are as ridiculous one as the other. Zounds, said he, quite distracted, thinking to lay his hand on his Sword, forgetting they had took it from him, because it had a Silver Handle. The thought that he was disarmed, and a Pri∣soner, softned him a little; he turn'd away from the Officer with∣out
speaking a word, and went to the Window in such a horrible me∣lancholly, that he eat nothing all day. At night they carried him into another Chamber, a little neater, that joyned to Dom Hen∣riques Apartment: But that Ac∣commodation did him no good; he could think of nothing but Jo∣sebeth; and when he considered, that she might have an ill opinion of his stay, he had not patience to endure that thought, and he had rather have died, than have lain under her suspitions; for he was to have been absent but four days, and now he could see no end of his stay. This made him rail anew a∣gainst the Spaniards, whom he ne∣ver had much loved; and he came to make particular Curses against Dom Henriques. He remembred to have read in the Spanish History, that ever since the Moors left Spain, there stayed behind them a
Race of Jews, that took Baptism that they might injoy their Estates, and Offices; they call them Mar∣ranes, who for all their Christiani∣ty, from Father to Son, keep a hid∣den zeal for their Religion. With∣out doubt, said he, this cursed Go∣vernour is one of that Race, and ha∣ving found my business hither, by my Papers which he has seized, he is inraged to find I have been the occa∣sion of Converting a Jew, and is resolved to be revenged on me for the wrong I have done his false Re∣ligion. But after having given a little vent to his Passion, he began to cast about how he might gain his liber∣ty; at last resolved to ingage the Marquess of Trechateau, Grand Marshal of Lorain, that was then at Brussels with Duke Charles. In his youth he had made a friend∣ship with him in the Accademy, and though afterwards their inga∣ging
in different Interests had hinder∣ed them from having any Conversati∣on, yet he hoped the Marshal had not quite forgot him. And in that he was not deceived; for the Marshal was generous, and so well employed the Credit of Duke Charles, that he obtained Villeneufe's liberty; 'twas not without leaving something be∣hind him, and the Officer that had took his Sword at first, would needs change Swords with him, that he might, he said, preserve something in memory of so fine a Gentleman. Villeneufe was fain to leave his own, which was of value, and had his in change, that had a handle looked like the Circles of a Sphere: 'twas with some difficulty too, that the Spaniard parted with it, for it had been kept in his Family ever since the Wars of Charles the fifth. Ville∣neufe, that feared some other trick, made all the haste he could to get away, and reckoned it for a good
fortune to part with them at so ea∣sie a rate. He had been absent from Amsterdam ten days; and that long separation that he could not foresee at parting, gave him the greater impatience to see Josebeth; and that impatience was increased, when his Man told him Solomoune had been two days together to see whether he was come back; and at that very instant the Nurse came in, looking so ill that he could hardly know her: We are undone, said she, and Josebeth is lost. At these words, her sighs stopt her breath, and her grief so seized her that she could not speak. Villeneufe, more struck with that News than if it had been a Thun∣derbolt, as soon as she was come to her self, begg'd her to speak plainer. Oh, said she, Josebeth, our dear Mistress Josebeth, is now in the Power of the Rabbins, and they will certainly take away her life.
But what is the matter, said Ville∣neufe, what has she done, for Gods sake tell me what it is? You must know then, said Solomoune, crying, and wiping her Eyes, that Wan∣bergue, as false as Joab, or, as you Christians say, as false as Judas, took a fancy three days ago, to rise out of his own Bed very early in the morning, to go to Josebeth, contrary to his custome, with a pretence of kindness and love, but in truth for a worse end. She, poor Creature, that was tired with your absence, and found her only comfort in hav∣ing before her Eyes the tokens of your friendship, had on, by ill fortune, the Smock where you had writ your Verses; for it was far enough from her thoughts, that her Husband, that had passed six Months without ever troubling her with his Caresses, should that night have a fancy to play the Gallant: So that Brute, leaping in∣to Bed, and flinging off the Cloaths,
saw something writ upon her Smock, he would have drawn the Curtains to see what 'twas; but she hinder'd him, which was the worst of all: for Wanbergue, guessing by her resi∣stance that there was something of importance to be discovered, would needs see it, and was so angry, that he was like to beat her for going to conceal it. After having tired her with strugling, he did not only read your Verses, but pulled the Smock off her back, and carried it immediate∣ly to Manassas, to consult what was fit to be done. You may guess, if that cursed Rabbin was not overjoyed to have in his hands an opportunity to be revenged on Josebeth. Yester∣day he called an Assembly of the chief of the Synagogue; but all their Counsels are kept so secret, that 'tis impossible to know what was done there, only thus much, that Jose∣beth must appear before them again this Afternoon. They are Devils,
said the Nurse, without Conscience, and Honour, and you shall see that they will put her to death: and then she fell into so cruel a passion, that they thought it would kill her. All that the Nurse had said was very true; and the Jews took an extraordinary care to conceal the business, that it might not be Town∣talk, for never was there such an occasion for railery; and that hap∣pen'd by the malice of Manessas, who being resolved to ruine Jose∣beth, brought out her Smock into the middle of the Synagogue, in the presence of all the Doctors and Levites, who were to read the Verses: One of them held up the Smock, and read the Verses a∣loud. Afterwards they gave the Smock about from one to another, very gravely to be looked on. The Old est of them could scarce keep in his laughter; and when it came
to Rabbin Recabith, who was very Ancient, 'Twas never heard of be∣fore, said he, that such a shame fell upon a Daughter of Israel. Every one said something, and it was pleasant enough to see forty grave Doctors in their Gowns, all peer∣ing upon a Smock, with as great Solemnity, as the people did at Rome, when the Vest of Julius Cae∣sar was exposed to their view by Anthony. Their resolution was to have Josebeth come before them the next Afternoon, which was the day that Villeneufe came to Town. He was mad to think he had occasioned such a misfortune to his Mistress; he cursed Wanber∣gue and Manassas above all the rest, and swore solemnly to make them pay dearly for it, if any thing happened to Josebeth. But, said he to the Nurse, is there no way to speak with Josebeth? Alas, said she, I know not where 'tis they keep
her, nor can tell where 'tis she is to appear this Afternoon, which they keep secret, for fear they should be disturbed in their judgment. I have heard, says Villeneufe, that the Jews have no power of Judicature among the Christians, nor power to put any one to death: That's true, said she, but yet they are suffered the liberty of exercising a great ma∣ny of their Ceremonies, and some of their Ceremonies cannot be perform∣ed without passing judgment; and I understand this now in hand, is of that kind; And so under pretence that the Customs of our Law must be fulfilled, the Sentence of the Rab∣bins must be executed; and if they go farther than they ought, they will come off for a good sum of Money: In the mean time, a good Fine does not bring back the dead. You are in the right, said Villeneufe, there∣fore let us try all ways to prevent those Butchers. I have a Friend a∣mong
them, says the Nurse, who does not hate Josebeth, as the others do, and he will give me notice, I hope, as soon as he can. But were it not better for me to go immediately to the Magistrate, and make com∣plaint,—said Villeneufe. No, by no means, said Solomoune, for 'tis Jo∣sebeths advantage, that they can never convince her of any Intrigue, or lay any Man to her Charge, and this way you would discover all, and give the Rabbins a just occasion to triumph. Oh God, said he, the Ver∣ses on the Smock, do they not give suspitions enough: They are but su∣spitions, said the Nurse, and she has wit enough to take them off. 'Tis true, the Verses made the Jews be∣lieve there were some secret Gal∣lantry, and therefore they feared that some Party might be made to take Josebeth our of their hands. Wanbergue cover'd the hate he had for his Wife, under the great re∣spect
he was bound to bear the Law, and hoped by that means, either her Death, or a Divorce, would give him liberty to make a new choice. He deceived himself for all that in his hopes, for Abigal had not so much desire to marry him, as she had, and cared for no other ingagement with him, but that of a great Friendship. 'Twas difficult to guess at the cause of his Inconstancy, which was the present misfortune of Josebeth; for the Envy that Abigal bore to the Reputation and Beauty of Jo∣sebeth, made her chiefly sollicitous to rob her of her Husbands heart; and now that she saw her hum∣bled, she ceased to be her Rival, her vanity being satisfied with her Enemies fall: But the malice of Manassas, and the other Rabbins, was not so easily satisfied, for they looked on her as a person that had never respected them as they desi∣red,
and therefore resolved to make use of this occasion to ruine her, who was like to have a con∣tempt for them as long as she li∣ved. However, to make a shew of Religion and Justice, they had locked up Josebeth in a place which the Magistrates had given them leave to assemble in: 'twas a kind of great Warehouse, that held a great deal of their Goods, where they used also sometimes to meet about their Affairs: There are some Chambers there, where they use to punish the offenders of their Law with great secresie, that they may not give occasion of scandal to the Christians. Here 'twas they met to consult about Josebeth, whom they sent for from the Chamber where they had kept her. She came in to them with a serene Air, and an assured Counte∣nance, behaving her self with the courage belonging to Innocence.
They shewed her her Smock, and asked her what those Verses meant, and who 'twas made them, and why she would not let her Husband see them? She called up∣on Wanbergue, who was there, to witness to the truth of what she was going to say; and then an∣swered them very calmly, that the coldness of her Husband, and the little enjoyment she had had of his Company, made her seek diversi∣on in reading of Romances, which served to fill her fancy; and ha∣ving some of those kind of Adven∣tures in her head, she had writ those Verses that were proper e∣nough to amuse a Person of her Age. That she had made those Verses only to please her self, ha∣ving as much Poetry as that came to: And she had done what she could to keep her Husband from reading them, that he might not jeer her about them, as he used to
do. She confirmed her Innocence by the retired life she had always led, and dar'd them all to name the Man with whom they could reproach her. Where is my Gal∣lant, said she, what is his name, where does he live, that I may see him, and then I will ask no favour? But if there be no such thing, then let justice be done me on those that take occasion from a foolish and harm∣less fancy, to accuse me of falseness and treachery. We do not condemn you for any thing, said Manassas, who was President in that Assem∣bly, but you ought not to be angry, if being in doubt, we follow the prescriptions of the Law in such oc∣casions. Rabbin, said she, you know best, if Josebeth be a person of Vir∣tue or no. He feared some such an∣swer, and therefore was gone a∣bout to take the Voices, which all agreed, that Josebeth should take the Waters of Jealousie. When
they had pronounced that Sen∣tence, she sat down quietly to see the Execution; which according to their present Custom was on this manner: If any man was jealous of his Wife, he was to come be∣fore the Priests, to tell them the reasons of his jealousie; and if they were judged sufficient, he was suffer'd to try the virtue of his Wife in the presence of the chief of their Nation; the way was this, a Priest wrote upon a piece of Parchment these words, Let the Woman who has been false to her Husband perish; and when the Woman had consented to the Curse, they shaved off from the Parchment these written words, and gave her the shavings to drink in a Glass of Water, with so won∣derful a success, that if the Wo∣man was innocent, that Drink on∣ly increased her Beauty; but if she were guilty, as soon as she had
drank the Water, she felt most hor∣rible pains all over her Body, her Belly and her Thighs swelled, and so she dyed in a dismal manner. Thus it was when anciently this Law flourished in Judea; but since that Law has been abolished by the Maker of it, all those Won∣ders cease, and there remains no∣thing but a Curse on that unhap∣py People. Manassas knew very well that alteration; for the Rabbins of Mi∣lan and Lisbon, confess that the Waters of Jealousie have lost their virtue. They do indeed attribute this loss, to the Dispersion of their Nation, and not to the Abolition of their Worship; imagining that if they were again established in Judea, that mysterious Water would have the same effect now that it had formerly. But they do own, that in all places else those Waters do not work as formerly.
Notwithstanding Manassas, who was resolved to make those Wa∣ters serve his design, maintained their virtue, and backed his opini∣on with a many reasonings, and Ex∣amples, which made all the other Rabbins join with him in the same judgment. The Water then was made ready; and when that de∣vilish Monster had took the Glass, to say over it certain Prayers; du∣ring which, the other Rabbins held their Eyes fixed on the Ground, he put into it a little Powder, which one could not discern from the shavings of Parchment and Ink, that were in the Glass, and thick∣ned the Water. As soon as the Prayers, and all the Ceremony was over, they let Josebeth come in: The indignati∣on she had to see her self reduced to that extremity, brought a red into her Cheeks, that so raised her beauty, that those wretched Do∣ctors
could do nothing but look on her. Manassas, with a counterfeit compassion, exhorted her not to ex∣pose her self to a certain danger, if she knew her self guilty; but ra∣ther to gain the favour of God and Men, by a sincere Repentance. That impudence of Manassas took away Josebeths patience; Give me, Hypocrite, said she, give me the Glass; this proof of my honour is more agreeable to me than that o∣ther you lately put me to. And at that instant they heard a terrible cry at the Door. However, she went on, holding the Glass in her hand; Then you all agree, said she, that this Drink will make the Adul∣teress dye, but that it hurts no body else. To which they having all assented, by a nod of their head; she asked for another Glass; and having poured the Water out of one into the other, several times, that it might the better mix; she
put half of it into one Glass, and half into another, and presented them both to Manassas: Seeing this Water, said she, hurts none but the Adulteress, pray let us drink it together, and take which Glass you please. That which you de∣sire, said Manassas, very gravely, would alter the order of the Ce∣remony, and that we can by no means consent to; for we must not pass our set bounds. You can, said Josebeth, more easily pass a Ba∣lustrade of Iron, than any Ceremony of your Law. At these words the Rabbins looked strangely at one a∣nother; and Manassas, to divert them, rose up again to take their Voices upon this new Matter; when the cry was so violent at the Door that one of them went to see what was the matter, and finding it was only a Woman, that said she had something of great conse∣quence to tell them, he let her
in. Josebeth quickly perceived it was Solomoune, with a Velvet Coat in her Lap, which so surprised Manassas, that he was ready to speak down dead, not being able to speak one word. Solomoune made use of his confusion to beg leave of the Rabbins to speak, who seeing an extraordinary concern in her Face, bid her declare her business. She threw down the Velvet Coat be∣fore them, to be examined like Josebeth's Smock, and then told them all the Adventure of Manas∣sas the rainy night, with his pas∣sing the Balustrade, and leaving that Coat behind him, with so many Circumstances, and such an Air of truth, as was not to be re∣sisted: However, those Rabbins would not seem to credit her, not to bring a dishonour on their Reli∣gion; but yet Josebeth had so much cause to suspect the effects of Ma∣nassa's hatred, that they agreed he
should drink the half of the Wa∣ter. While they were on this de∣liberation, Manassas retired, under pretence of praying, but indeed to consider with himself what he was to do: At last he resolved rather to hazard the loss of his Life, than his Reputation; and having taken a Cordial he always used to carry about him, he came to them, saying, it was fit to use all sort of Complaisance: You may see, said he further, turning to Josebeth, by my condescention, how little I have deserved the ac∣cusation you have brought against me. Instead of Answer, she took both the Glasses, and gave them to Manassas to chuse which he pleas∣ed: He took off one, invoking e∣ven then, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. And afterwards Josebeth drank off the other, and lifting her Glass up, as an Offering to Heaven, cryed out, Let the in∣nocent
be saved, and the guilty pe∣rish; and so drank off the Water, which she really believed was a Potion of Death. And she was not deceived, though she had no other ground for her suspicion, than the hatred she knew Manassas bore her, and that was enough, for there is no rage so great, as that of Love contemned. And now that wicked Man, who ever since the affront he received at the Balustrade of Iron, had been seeking an occasion to be revenged, thought he had at last found one for his purpose; for as soon as ever Wanbergue had brought the busi∣ness before him, he imagin'd the Waters of Jealousie would serve to execute his malice, both effectu∣ally, and secretly: And he had an extraordinary satisfaction, to think that Josebeth should receive her death from his hand, for he then resolved to poyson the Water he
should give her to drink: It had been difficult for another to have had a Poyson that would not have shewed it self, by changing the co∣lour and taste of the Water; but he knew too well that Nation, that is famous for the secrets of Poyson, to want one at his need. He wish∣ed only that Solomoune could have been obliged to pledge her Mistress, that so he might not have left in the World a Witness able to re∣proach him for his loosness. Josebeth had so much reason to fear this practice, that she used the more vehemence to obtain the or∣der from the Rabbins that he might drink it with her, that so she might draw that Hypocrite into the same Snare he had laid for her. Her Wit ended not there; for see∣ing that Manassas, after having drunk the Water, dismissed the As∣sembly, she imagin'd it was chief∣ly for himself, that he might in
time go and take some powerful Antidote, and therefore did all she could to detain the Company. 'Tis very fit, said she, that I should stay some time here before you, that you may judge of my Innocence by the ef∣fects of your Water. That fearful Water, said Manassas, does not al∣ways work presently, and sometimes its Operation is suspended by the Di∣vine Goodness, that would give time for the Sinner to repent. I have heard though, said Josebeth, out of your Books, that as soon as the guilty Woman had taken it down, it immediately made her Countenance change, and her body swell. While she was discoursing in this manner, they heard a terrible knocking at the door, and a mighty cry to o∣pen it. At this noise they all turned their eyes towards Josebeth, believing that noise was made for her sake, and they began to fear the effects. You look pale, said she, is
this your zeal for Zion, for which you so often protest that you would lay down your lives? But above all others, Manassas fear increased, knowing in his own Conscience, the Merit of his Actions. The Rab∣bin Eliezer, who was one of Solo∣mounes Friends, had given her ad∣vice, that they intended to con∣demn Josebeth to drink the Waters of jealousie, and that the Sentence would be immediately executed; which made the faithful Nurse im∣mediately run to some Christian Ladies, who knew Josebeth, beg∣ging them to implore the assistance of the Magistrate, and do what they could to save so fine a Wo∣man; and having given advice of what passed to Villeneufe, she ran her self to the Council of the Jews, endeavouring by accusing Manassas, to gain time for her Mi∣stresses deliverance: And it was the Officers, those Christian La∣dies
had sent, who with a crowd of people were at the door, which sufficiently frighted the Jews, who had reason to believe Josebeth would not save them from the fu∣ry of the people. In this apprehen∣sion, the Rabbins came to her, and besought her to have pity on them. Those submissions which she knew were extorted only by fear, did not work much upon her, and she was not resolved what to do: On one side she saw the Ju∣stice of punishing such Rascals, and on the other the glory of par∣doning those whom she had the power to destroy. In the mean time, the noise without increased, and seeing they did not open the door, a young Seaman that was more zealous than all the rest, cryed, Break down the Doors; which was executed in a moment. That was no sooner done, but the furious people broke
in with a horrible disorder, and in the Head of them that young Sea∣man, that was Villeneufe disgui∣sed in that manner, to conceal the concern of his Love. He had a great Hatchet in his hand, ready to cut the Rabbins to pieces, if they had done any harm to Jose∣beth. She that knew him imme∣diately through his disguise, sigh∣ed for joy, when she saw him; and hearing the people cry out with a furious tone, Where are these Jews that would murder a Christian, she ran to the door of the Chamber where the Rabbins were, and hold∣ing her Arms across it, that no bo∣dy might go by her, Christians, said she, that will be my Brethren very quickly, for Gods sake forgive these poor Wretches; and being you are come hither for my sake, con∣tent your selves to see me triumph over them. The admiration they had of so much goodness, stopt
their fury; and they that just be∣fore breathed nothing but threats and ruine to the Jews, sent up no∣thing to Heaven but praises of Jo∣sebeth. But those acclamations were redoubled, when after having beckned to them with her hand, that she might be heard, said aloud to her Husband, whom she saw in the Crowd, Men here Wanbergue, I here declare to you in the presence of all these good People, that I re∣nounce the Jewish Religion, and am resolved to turn Christian; there∣fore consider what you will do: for if you persevere in your own Doctrine, I pretend, according to the Law, to have the Marriage dissolved betwixt us. The Hollander half frighted out of his wits, said, that she should suddenly know his mind; and so got out of the Crowd as fast as he could, for fear the People should do him a mischief. Josebeth ought not to have made
that Declaration any where, but before the Magistrates; but she made so much the more haste, to oblige Villeneufe, whom she had before her Eyes: and in truth it was the only way to make amends for his sufferings the eight days past. But his joy did not so take him up, as to make him neglect his busi∣ness; for seeing Wanbergue go out, fearing it might be to do something against the Interest of Josebeth, he went out too; but just at the Door, met the Sindike of the Town, with orders from the Magistrate to take Josebeth into their protection: And as he was speaking, the chief Wo∣men of Amsterdam came also; they looked upon Josebeth as one of the chiefest Ornaments of their Sex, and disputed who should have the pleasure to entertain her: But at last Madam de Gere got the Victory, and carried Jo∣sebeth
in triumph to her House. The joy this strange change caus∣ed was not general; for while the Christians sung Victory, and ran from all parts to see Josebeth: The Jews bewailed that day, as one of the most unfortunate they had seen of a great while. Josebeth was not the only cause of their sorrow; for it was increased by another loss very considerable; and that was the death of Manassas, whom they looked on as a Pillar of their Church, and the glory of their Nation. He was taken with an ill fainting twice in their Meeting-Chamber, and they had got him to life again; and believing it was only occasioned by the fright he was in for himself and the other Rabbins, they thought his sick∣ness was nothing. But when the Clamour was over, and the Rabble gone; the Rabbins went
to his Chair, where they thought he was asleep, and found him dead: one cannot imagine the Lamenta∣tions they made. And their af∣fection for him was so blind, that instead of thinking his death pro∣ceeded from a Natural cause, they attributed it to his zeal for Religi∣on, and the trouble he had for the affront it had suffered by Jose∣beth. 'Tis true, his death proceeded not from a Natural cause; and 'twas his zeal, but not for Reli∣gion, that had caused it; for it was the Poyson that he had pre∣pared with so much warmth to give Josebeth, that had killed him for all his Cordial: For when he first resolved to destroy Josebeth by the Waters of Jealousie, he did so little think of sharing the danger with her, that he had pro∣vided no preservative for himself:
So that seeing himself ingaged in honour to make the tryal with her, he made use of the time he pretended to spend in Prayer, to take down an excellent Cordial he always carried about him, but it was no perfect Antidote against the power of Poyson; however he thought that might secure him. But it fell out otherwise; for whether it were, that the Cor∣dial was not of a quality to resist that Poyson, or that his Age had not the force to bear the Conflict, or that his fear kept the Cordial from working; 'tis evident that cursed Hypocrite gave himself that deadly blow that he intend∣ed for another, and ended his days more quietly, and with less pain than he deserved. And upon quite different ac∣compts, Josebeth, that took the same water, had a different desti∣ny:
For, having taken a just jea∣lousie, by that part of Wanbergue's Letter where he mentioned all designs of obtaining Abigal, that she was in danger to be poyson∣ed, she had used her self every morning to take a wonderful An∣tidote: So that Youth being for∣tified by so excellent a Remedy, easily overcame the Venom of the Poyson. The joy she had to see her self out of danger by the Rabbins, and the Poyson, was followed by ano∣ther, every whit as great; and that was the Declaration of Wan∣bergue, that being resolved never to leave the Law of Moses, he permitted her, being she was turn∣ed Christian, the liberty to chuse another Husband: And afterward consigned her all her Portion, and her Jewels, with greater honesty than one would have expected.
The impatience he had, to be at liberty too, to follow his inclinati∣ons, made him more easie, than otherwise he would have been: and this was a good effect of his love to Abigal, that had before pro∣duced so many ill ones for Josebeth. For his business was no sooner ended with Josebeth, but he made his pretension openly to Abigal, who yet was not much disposed to subject her self eternally to a Man, who before he had her, used her so imperiously as he did. How, said she, he does already find fault with my company, thinks I am too expensive in my Cloaths and House; if he has al∣ready so much Confidence, what will he do when he is my Master? She made these Reflexions, as soon as the misfortune of Josebeth had de∣stroyed her Envy; and all joyned together, made her carry her self
very coldly to Wanbergue. But be∣ing governed only by her passion, and vanity having the chief sway over her, when she saw Josebeth come out of her troubles with Ho∣nour and Triumph, she was posses∣sed with her former Envy again; and seeing what Declaration Wan∣bergue had made, having her head filled with Emulation, she thought it would be a great ad∣vantage to her to marry Wanber∣gue, who chose rather to have her for his Wife, than Josebeth. To this reason that vanity made, she added others of weight: For the Estate her other Husband left her, could not be taken out of Am∣sterdam, because if she died with∣out Children, it was to be im∣ployed for the Publick Good of the Portugueze Nation: So that she saw her self confined to Amster∣dam, without the liberty of pas∣sing
her life at Brussels, which she so much desired. And to stay a Widow all her life, was against all sense; she wanted a Husband to secure her Reputation, and that free humour which she could by no means constrain; and be∣ing to marry, where could she have such a Husband as Wanber∣gue? his Rank and Fortune could much better, than any other, maintain her in that great Splen∣dour that she had always lived in. All these Reasons overcame the repugnance she had at first to mar∣ry Wanbergue, and made her ac∣cept him for her Husband. This Marriage help'd to console the Rabbins for the loss of Manassas, and Josebeth, as well by the Pre∣sents the new married Couple made them, as by the feasting at the Marriage, to which they were all invited.
Villeneufe did not possess Jose∣beth so soon; there being more Ceremony required to fore-run that happiness: to accomplish which, he was by his Friends in the Court of Brussels, invited thi∣ther, by the Arch-Duke Leopold, who then govern'd the Low-Countries. That Court was then full of Devotion, in imitation of the Arch-Duke: For that Prince, who was also, according to the Custom in Germany, Commenda∣tory Bishop of Passaw, had inter∣woven with Secular Splendour a mixture of Piety. He himself wore a little Band, and plain Cuffs, and said every day his Of∣fice with Father Chiflet, who had care of his House as well as his Soul. This strictness passed through all the House, the very Pages being as exact to say their Prayer, as to do their other Exer∣cises.
All about the Palace was written good Sentences, to put the Courtiers in mind of their du∣ty: And it was pleasant enough to see his Officers and Courtiers joyn together, with Books in their hands, making at least as if they said their Prayers: and this shew of Devotion was absolutely necessary for any man that meant to make his Fortune; and by the neglect of it, the Count Salazar, that had more Wit than Cunning or Devotion, had like several times to lose his favour. One day, as he was coming into the Pa∣lace, he cry'd to the Guard at the door, Deo Gratias, which is usu∣ally said to the Porter of a Con∣vent: and being in the Privy Chamber another time, where there was a Gentleman who was to raise a Troop of Horse: Sir, said the Count, without doubt you
will have your Commission, if you are but well versed in the Divine Service. The Arch-Duke had chid him for it several times, but he could not hold for his life; and find∣ing a Colonel that was turning over his Prayer-book, he ask'd him what is Trump to day? in∣stead of asking what was the Of∣fice of the day; which so incen∣sed the good Prince, that he forbid Salazar the Court. This pleased the Spaniards ve∣ry well; but the Flemmings, who are the better Christians, cared not for so much shew and Cere∣mony. But this being the Face of the Court, made it the pro∣perest place for Josebeth to own her Conversion in. The Arch-Duke himself desired to be her Godfather, which made all the Court talk of nothing but the
Divine Grace; nay, at last they attributed her Conversion to the Piety and Prayers of the Arch-Duke. The Arch-Bishop took care to have her instructed in the Princi∣ples of Religion; but there hap∣pened a dispute betwixt him, and Seignior Rosetti, his Holiness Internunce, that then resided at Brussels; for he pretended, as re∣presenting the Pope, to whom on∣ly it belong'd to open the Doors of the Church, that Josebeth ought not to be Baptized, till she had appeared before him. To please all Sides, the Arch-Bishop, who had as much Civility as Knowledge and Piety, gave or∣der that Josebeth should wait on the Internunce some days before her Baptism. At last, when the day for the Solemnity was come, they set up
a Tribunal for the Arch-Bishop without the Porch of the Church; and when he was set upon it, in his Pontifical Habits, Josebeth was brought out of a House hard by, to go to him. She was dressed all in White, and a Gare on her Head of the same colour. The Count of Swartzembourg, High-Cham∣berlain to the Arch-Duke, led her by one hand, and the Countess of Bossu, called by some, Dutchess of Guise, by the other. She appear∣ed so lovely, that the Ladies of Brussels began to be allarmed with her Beauty; but her Counte∣nance eased them again, for there appeared so much discreti∣on and modesty, that they hoped she would not go about to take away any of their Subjects. She kneeled before the Prelate, and having answered several Questi∣ons he put to her, the Arch-Bi∣shop
of Malines lead her into the Church, which till then had the Door shut. Then she was over∣joyed to see her self admitted there, and was perfectly satisfied, when she saw the Arch-Duke ready to do her such an honour, who na∣med her at the Font, for himself and Madam de Bossu, Maria Leo∣poldina. Solomoune was Bapti∣sed at the same time, and Ville∣neufe would needs be Godfather. This Ceremony being over, Villeneufe, who foresaw that Jo∣sebeth's beauty would quickly bring him a great many Rivals, begg'd leave of Josebeth, and the Arch-Duke, that the Arch-Bishop of Malines might finish his Fe∣licity, which was performed with an Universal Joy, all the Court e∣steeming Villeneufe very worthy of so extraordinary a Woman. He was used with extraordinary
kindness by the Arch-Duke, but however desired to return into his own Country, bearing with him Marks of the Duke's bounty, and a great Reputation of Virtue. By the means of his Friends, he made Interest enough to obtain a small Government on the Fron∣tiers of France, where he tasted all those singular joys that spring from a reciprocal affection. FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by Richard Ton∣son at Grays-Inn-Gate. THe Courtiers Calling; shew∣ing the ways of making a Fortune, and the Art of living at Court. By a Person of Honour. Price 1 s. 6 d. The Portugal History, or a Rela∣tion of the Troubles that happen∣ed in the Court of Portugal in the Years 1667. and 1668. In which is to be seen that great Transacti∣on of the Renunciation of the Crown by Alphonso the Sixth, the Dissolution of his Marriage with the Princess Maria Frances Isabella of Savoy; the Marriage of the same Princess to his Brother the Prince Don Pedro, now Regent of the Realm of Portugal, and the Rea∣sons alledged at Rome for the Di∣spensation
thereof. By S. P. Esq; Price bound 3 s. The Art of making Love, or a Guide for Ladies and Gentlemen in the Affairs of Love. Price 1 s. A Treatise concerning Statutes, or Acts of Parliament, and the Ex∣position thereof. By Sir Charles Hatton, late Lord Chancellour of England. Price 1 s. The Life of the Valiant and Learned Sir Walter Raleigh, Knight, with his Tryal at Winchester, in O∣ctavo. Price 2 s. 6 d. Marches Actions for Slander and Arbitrament; and also certain Queries, with the Books cited Pro and Con; very useful for Students in Law. By J. M. of Grays-Inne, Barrister. Price 3 s. Reports, or new Cases, taken in the 15, 16, 17, and 18. Years of King Charles the First. By J. March of Grays-Inne, Barrister. Price 3 s. 6 d.
Transactions in Chancery, both by Practice and Presidents, with the Fees thereunto belonging, and also Special Orders in ordinary Ca∣ses. By William Tothill, late one of the Six Clerks. Price 1 s. 6 d. Pleas of the Crown; being a brief account of whatsoever can be found relating to that Subject. Price bound 2 s. 6 d. Mr. Rimer's Examination of the Plays of Rollo Duke of Normandy, the King, and no King, and the Maids Tragedy, in a Letter to Fleet∣wood Sheppard, Esq; Price 1 s. 6 d. An Historical Discourse of Par∣liaments, in their Original before the Conquest, and continuance since; together with the Original, growth, and continuance of these Courts following, (viz.) the High Court of Chancery, Kings Bench, Common Pleas, Exchequer, Dutchy, and other Inferiour Courts. Price 1 s.
The Heroine Musqueteer, or the Female Warrier, in four Parts; con∣taining many true and delightful Adventures of a French Lady, in the late Campagnes of 1676. and 1677. newly Printed. Price bound 3 s. Plays Printed for Rich. Tonson. Don Carlos, Prince of Spain, a Tragedy: the second Edition; act∣ed at the Dukes Theatre. Price 1 s. Titus and Berenice, a Tragedy; with a Farce called, The Cheats of Scapin: acted at the Dukes Thea∣tre. Price 1 s. Friendship in Fashion: A Come∣dy, as it is acted at the Dukes Theatre. Price 1 s. All three writ∣ten by Tho. Otway. Anthony and Cleopatra: A Tra∣gedy written by Sir Charles Sidley, Baronet, acted at the Dukes Thea∣tre. Price 1 s.
Circe: A Tragedy, by Charles Davenant, L. L. D. Price 1 s. act∣ed at the Dukes Theatre. Cytherea, or the Enamouring Gir∣dle: A Comedy written by John Smith, Gent. Price 1 s. The Siege of Babylon: A Trage∣dy, by Samuel Pordage, Esq; as it is acted at the Dukes Theatre. Price 1 s. Edgar, or the English Monarch: A Tragedy, written by Tho. Rimer of Grays-Inne, Esq; Price 1 s. Sir Patient Fancy: A Comedy acted at the Dukes Theatre, and written by the Author of the Ro∣ver. Price 1 s. Brutus of Alba, or the Enchant∣ed Lovers: A Tragedy acted at the Dukes Theatre, written by N. Tate. Price 1 s. The Counterfeits: A Comedy as it is acted at the Dukes Theatre. Price 1 s.
FINIS.
