a3341 17513581 106533
An Answer to a Printed Protestation made by some of the Societies of the Inns of Court, against Dutiful Addresses: with Thanks to His Majesty for his most Gracious Declaration to all his Loving Subjects. Written by an Old Cavalier. GEntlemen, I admire not that you disagree, By Discords you have gotten many a Fee: You now make known averseness to a thing, When Loyal hearts do strive to treat their King. I do admire your Reasons, you should rather Maintain those Laws (perverted) kill'd his Father. Those noble good Laws which your studious care Hath made you know, should have a double share Of Loyalty and Duty, and not Passion, T' affront a Loyal zeal in such a fashion, (As to protest against it:) be not furious, Heats against Duty may become Injurious. If the true matter may be freely spoken, The Bond of Unity 'tis you have broken, By your opposing Duty, in a thing Consisting with the Laws; to thank their King For's condescending Favours, which doth flow From his pure Goodness, which doth always shew Bountiful Encouragements to your Profession; And must he be requited with Transgression? Can you but know that from the Kingly Powers, Your Rise and Honours have had Sov'raign showrs Of bountiful Immunities from the Crown? Which Lawless persons fain would tumble down. The King hath promis'd, and doth still declare, To maintain the Laws against them that dare Abuse them; may you not fairly repose In quiet, but create your selves new Foes Amongst your selves, as though your learned Skill Was thus to Rant, and vent your furious will? Is't to be thought unwise if chat you bring A thankful Offering to so good a King? A King that is so jealous of th'abuse Of Laws, that he punisheth the profuse
Disturbers of its peace, and doth command A due Obedience throughout the Land: And your Societies he doth maintain, To your great Honour, and exceeding Gain. Then should it be your Duty to give Thanks, Not to oppose him with your vainer Pranks, More looking like a Conventicle Fry, Then from a learned grave Society; Which should be Leaders on in such an Action, But your high Walls I see can't keep out Faction; A Leprosie so spread beyond its border, And it is strange it should beget disorder In persons of great Parts and Education, Should thus become Disturbers of the Nation, Or Animators in this evil day, Where Lawless persons labour to bear sway; Controul the Laws in force, make them as Flax, And turn it to their use like Nose of Wax. Let them have care that Hemp be not their merit, A Tribute due to men of such a Spirit. Consider it again this long Vacation, The ill Example you have shewn the Nation: Other Societies, and of the Gown, Have paid most Loyal Duty from their Town; Corporations have abounded with Addresses, And must yours be the only sowr Messes? Must the King still have such unsavoury Diet? Nothing of pleasing Tast, lest it disquiet Your squeazy Stomachs? you of your Profession Should cherish Duty, not think't a Transgression For to be grateful; your President is ill, Y' encourage Slighting, and do Duty kill. Consider it anew, return to Duty, Then will you give Societies a Beauty Which will look lovely, not like Janus Faces, Look both ways, to your very great disgraces. Remind your Educations and your Birth, For Princely Powers can Honour you on Earth: Powers Divine I'me sure pays Gratitude, Rejects th'ungrateful, passionate and rude Opposers of due Reverence to their Prince: From such Societies, God keep me thence. LONDON: Printed for N. T. 1681.
