A526 12304838 59218
THE Present State OF THE JEWS: (More particularly relating to those in BARBARY.) Wherein is contained an exact Account of their CUSTOMS, Secular and Religious. To which is annexed a Summary Dis∣course of the Misna, Talmud, and Gemara. By L. Addison, one of his Majesties Chaplains in Ordinary; and the Author of the late Revolutions and present Customs of the King∣doms of Fez and Morocco. Alius alio plura invenire potest, nemo Omnia. LONDON: Printed by J.C. for William Crooke, at the Green Dragon without Temple-Bar; and to be sold by John Court∣ney Bookseller in Sarum. 1675.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE SIR JOSEPH WILLIAMSON, Principal Secretary of STATE, and one of his Majesties most Ho∣nourable Privy Council. Right Honourable, THat Generousness which pardo∣ned my first Address (of this Nature) to your Honour, has onely ser∣ved to Embolden a Second. It faring with Scriblers, as with those Votaries who never forsake the Saint they once finde Propitious.
If the ensuing Discourse treated of Maxims of Rule, there would need no Apology for its Dedication to a Person whose Prudence and Vertue have gi∣ven Him the blessing of his Prince's Favour, and the Reputation as well in Forrain Countries as his own, of an ex∣cellent and profound States-man. But what is here devoted to your Honour, is of a different, and (per∣haps) of a much inferiour Character. The following Papers containing only a plain Account of the present Customs and Religion of the Hebrew People, Collected in some of those Hours the Employment would spare me, which for several years I underwent, abroad in the publick Service of our Reli∣gion, and in a Latitude that yielded no few opportunities of making these Observations. That I have hereunto prefixed your Name, it was not for Shelter against the Common Enemy, Rudeness and Censure; nor onely to take this occasion of tel∣ling
the World how much I am obliged by your Favours▪ For though I am thereof truly sensible; yet this way of acknowledgement was never greatly welcome to those Generous Persons, who are no less obliged by the bene∣fits they bestow; than by those they re∣ceive. But besides all this, pardon me, Sir, that I take this opportunity to make Publick Recognizance of your Honours Eminent Bounty to (our Common Mo∣ther) Queens Colledge in Oxon. To which Antient Nursery of Loyalty and Good Letters, though your pious Libe∣rality be already magnificent; yet they who know your Temper, believe that what you there have done, is but an Earnest of what you intend to do. For which a Thankful Posterity will for ever Celebrate and Bless your Name. But I dare not give my self the Liber∣ty of expressing so much as a short Elogie, upon a Subject that is able to justify the largest Panegyrick. For
when I consider that you are one of those Publique Spirits, who under our Gratious Soveraign assert the Indivi∣dual Interest of Church and State, I can∣not hope the Grand Affairs of your Eminent Place should spare Minutes enough to peruse a longer Dedica∣tion. That your Honour may long Live Exalted in your Prince's Favour, and Prosperous in your Negotiations, to the Encouragement and Promotion of true Learning, Piety and Vertue, shall be his incessant Requests to Heaven, and at all those Devotions cannot forget to be Your Honours most humble, and most obliged Servant, LANCELOT ADDISON. From Milston, neer Ambrosbury in Wilts, Jan. 28. 1674/5.
TO THE READER. I Shall not offer at any thing of Apo∣logetick in behalf of the ensuing Discourse, but freely leave it to the Tri∣bunal of the Reader, whom I acknow∣ledge to have an unquestionable Autho∣rity to Acquit or Condemn it. As to the Account it gives of the Jews, I conceive there is not any so mo∣dern, nor in many things so particular and true; this being the Result of Con∣versation, and not of Report. And as to its Composure, it is neither so exact as to deserve Commendation; nor yet so faulty as to need much excuse. If it may do good to some, and no hurt to any, the Author has got his ends of its Pub∣lication.
BOOKS Newly Printed by W. Crooke. THe Primitive Institution; or, a seasonable Discourse of Catechizing; wherein is shewn the Antiquity; Benefits and Necessity thereof; together with its suitableness to heal the present Distempers of the Church of Eng∣land. By L. Addison, one of his Majesties Chaplains in Ordinary, and the Author of this Book. Homer's Odysses translated into English by Tho. Hobbes of Malmsbury, with a large Pre∣face concerning the Vertues of an Heroique Poem. By the Translator. A Discourse of the Dukedom of Modena, shewing the Manner and Qualities of that People. Brevis Demonstratio: The truth of Christi∣an Religion Demonstrated by Reasons the best that have yet been out in English. The Court Leet and Court Baron. By Kit∣chin. The 5th Impression. The Flower-Garden: Being an exact way to Plant, Set, and Sow all sorts of Flowers. By W. Hughes.
THE INTRODUCTION. THough the Jews inveterate ob∣stinacy against the Truth, hath justly render'd them the object of the Divine Displeasure; yet their Primitive Ancestry, Reli∣gion and Privileges, ought still to secure them a great measure of Regard. For this people, if any under heaven, may bold∣ly glory of the Antiquity and Nobless of their Descent. There being no Nation can prove its Pedegree by such clear and Au∣thentique Heraldry as the Jews. For though a ridiculous Vanity hath tempted some to date their Original before that of the world, and others with great assurance have made themselves sprung from their own Soil; yet the Jews, by an unquestionable Display through all periods since the Creation, can prove their Descent from the first man. So that all other
Nations must have recourse to the Jewish Re∣cords, to clear their Genealogies, and attest their Linage. And indeed their Progeny would be suf∣ficiently renowned if it were derived no high∣er than whither their present Appellation doth entitle them. For the Jews have their Name from Judah (Jacob's fourth son by his wife Leah) who notwithstanding the degeneracy of his Descendents, was a Prince of a brave Nature and great Eloquence. An Essay of the former we finde in his endeavour to have saved his brother Joseph; and it was a fair intimation of the later, that he was chosen Orator to his Brethren. Over whom he ob∣tain'd a Soveraignty, and from whose Loins many Princes, Generals, States-men and Pro∣phets have descended. And what is yet more remarkable, to Judah was made the famous Promise, That the Scepter should not depart from his Tribe, nor a Law-giver from between his feet, until Shiloh came. Though I am not ignorant how it is the Opinion of some learned men, that the continuance of the Scep∣ter, or Soveraign Power, was not so fixed in Judah's family, as to exclude all the rest. For at least after the Captivity, there were several of the other Tribes who attain'd to Kingly Honour among the Jews. And there∣fore they understand Jacob's prediction of the whole Hebrew Nation, which he foresaw in
process of time would derive their Name from Judah; and that they should never to∣tally loose the visible Being of a Kingdom or Common-Wealth, or all form of Government among themselves, until the coming of Shi∣loh, or the Manifestation of Messiah in the flesh. And we find the truth hereof abundantly at∣tested by the event. For notwithstanding that the form and state of the Jewish Government was often changed, its lustre obscured, and its puissance and Grandeur lessen'd and impaired; yet they were never totally without a Scep∣ter till they were intirely brought under the Ro∣man yoke; which hapned about the time of our Saviour's Nativity, and a little after his Crucifixion. When the unbelieving Jews were so altogether inslaved by the Romans, that they retain'd not the least footstep of a free State, but the Kingdom was utterly taken from them. And though this ought to be reckon'd for a Misery in their Fortune, yet it was no debasement in their Genealogy. For Affliction (according to the Jews own saying) may be a very great inconvenience, but no dis∣repute. But if from the Jews Ancestry we look in∣to their Primitive Religion, they will be found to be no less happy in this, than honourable in the other. For it immediately (as all true Religion) had God for its Author, and was attested by such numerous and apparent Mi∣racles,
as made its truth unquestionable, and the people (to whom it was first revealed) formidable, among all to whom the know∣ledge thereof did arrive. And though for ma∣ny years the Jews have been most vile adulte∣rers of that Religion which was delivered them in greatest purity, yet it must needs be reckon'd for no ordinary priviledge of the Hebrew Nation, to have received the first Re∣ligion of the World, and that too immedi∣ately from the Almighty, and comprised in a Breviary of Ten Words, containing an exact Mo∣del of Holiness and Vertue, and more true Wis∣dom than all the Volumes that ever since have been Compiled by meer humane industry and in∣vention. And together with this excellent Religion (which they have so foully depraved) they received other Priviledges of no inferiour concernment: for not only the Adoption, Covenants and Promises did first belong un∣to the Jews, but also from their Fathers, as concerning the flesh, Messiah came. And when we have cloth'd their present infidelity with the most aggravating Circumstances, yet we must confess our selves beholden to them for the preservation of that inestimable Jewel, The knowledge of the one true God, when the rest of mankind was involved in the belief and adoration of many false Deities. To the Jews likewise we stand obliged for
the Original History of the Creation, and that with indubitable integrity they have delive∣red to us the infallible Memoires of all those passages which hapned before and after the Deluge. Of which the faint glimpses, retain'd by other Nations, were wrapt up in Stories so notoriously fabulous, that they were fitter to evidence the vanity of the Pagan Rhapsodies, than to confirm a Truth of so great an impor∣tance. Now seeing that they have been the cha∣nel of so many benefits to the rest of Mankind, they ought to be the matter of our thankful Reflection, and not of our obloquy and re∣proach. Nor have we been less benefited by their de∣plorable miseries, than matchless priviledges: seeing that their fall was our rise, and their diminution our riches. But if the cutting off of the Jews (the natural branches in St. Paul) was the occasion that the Gentiles, like Ciens were grafted in their place; and because of their pride, contumacy and unbelief God hath dealt thus severely with them, we ought not therefore to insult over their Infidelity, but hasten their Conversion; not to triumph in their down-fall, but to labour their restaura∣tion. Being ascertain'd, that if they abandon their obstinacy and unbelief, God will revoke their Rejection, and receive them again into favour. And if we may relie upon St. Paul's Eleventh to the Romans, the fall of the Jews
ought to make us careful of our own standing, and also to endeavor their recovery; which later Christians pretend both to hope and de∣sire. And to this end I ever labour'd to ma∣nage that conversation, which for several years I held with the Jews in Barbary, who are the subject of the ensuing Remarks. In which I have taken care for nothing, but to prove my self a faithful Reporter of matter of Fact, without using any other Art to please either the Severe or Curious, but plainness and Truth.
CHAP. I. The present Condition of the Jews in Bar∣bary; their Places of Residence, Pro∣fession, Apparel, Stature and Com∣plexion, &c. WHen I looked into the great number of Jews in Barbary, and saw how they were lorded over by the im∣perious and haughty Moor, I could not but resent their Condition, and wish their Deliverance from that direful imprecation, His blood be upon us and our Children. One effect whereof may be seen in their present Con∣dition under the Moresco Government; which is no other then a better sort of slavery. For even in those places where they have permis∣sion to inhabit, they are not only Tributary, but upon every small disgust, in danger of Eject∣ment. Insomuch that they cannot promise to themselves either any durable Settlement or Security. Indeed their calmest state is suffici∣ently stormy; and when they seem to enjoy the greatest peace, they are vilely Hector'd by the Moors, against whom they dare not move a finger, or wag a tongue in their own defence
and vindication; but with a Stoical patience support all the Injuries and Contumelies to which they are dayly exposed. For in the midst of the greatest abuses, you shall never see a Jew with an angry countenance, or ap∣pearing concern'd; which cannot be imputed to any Heroick Temper in this People, but rather to their customary suffering, being born and Educated in this kind of slavery. By reason whereof, they were never acquain∣ted with the sentiments of an ingenuous and manly Usage. It is very common with the Moresco-Boys to rally together, and by way of pastime and divertisement, to beat the Jew∣ish Children: which later, though they should far exceed the former in numbers and age, yet dare not give them the least resistance or oppo∣sition. The Moors permit not the Jews the possession of any warlike Weapons, unless in point of Trade. And herein they do not so much re∣strain, as gratifie their disposition; for they seem generally inclined to a great averseness to every thing that is Military: being as de∣stitute of true Courage, as good Nature. Nor doth this their cowardly humour at all render them unfit for the Musters of their expected Messiah: for though they believe that his ap∣pearance shall be Warlike, and that he shall lead all their Enemies Captive, and triumph in the Spoils of Esau; yet they imagine there
shall be such a general surrender of the Edo∣mites, that there will need no Valour by dint of Sword to subdue them: and that this sub∣mitting themselves to his rod, shall be an infal∣lible Testimony of the truth of his coming. The Jews in Barbary generally decline living in the Country, not out of any dislike of a ru∣ral Conversation, but because it doth not yield sufficient opportunities and safety for Traf∣fique. For this being their general Profession, they can with more convenience and advan∣tage manage it (as we say) in good Towns: And in these they live in a heap, seldom (or not at all, if it be in their power to avoid it) mingling with the Moors. And the Apart∣ment of the Town where they have permis∣sion to inhabit, is from them Called the Ju∣deria, or Jury; which in some places in Bar∣bary is so contrived, that the Moors can lock it up at night. Merchandize is their common Profession, wherein they are notoriously dextrous and thriving. And as their Dexterity may be im∣puted to their continual practice in Trade, so their Thriving therein to their Frugality in living. For both in Diet and Clothes, they seem to design nothing but Sustenance and Co∣vering. And in this plain and frugal way of living, they greatly symbolize with the Moors, who (as I have observed in another Discourse) take no care for sumptuousness or delicacy.
When 'tis said that Merchandize is the Jews general Profession in Barbary, it is not to ex∣clude their darling Brokage and Ʋsury, in which they are very serviceable both to Christi∣ans and Moors. And indeed the latter do sel∣dome use them for any other purposes, unless in sending them upon hazardous Messages, or to Collect their Maritime Imposts, in which they know them to be more exacting than any else they can imploy. 'Tis true, the Moors entertain but a very mean esteem of this people, being taught by Tradition, which age hath made Authentique, that they are an anomalous issue, and not like other men descended from Adam; and that the end of their Being was to serve the Musulmin: which Opinion the Jews sufficiently deride, and give it no other confutation, but the citing of Oba∣diah, which Prophesie they wholly apply to their Condition, upon the coming of their Messiah: when all Edom, that is, all Mankind who are not of their Religion, shall become their Hewers of Wood, and Drawers of Wa∣ter. The next thing which I promised to remark concerning the Jews, is their Apparel, in which those who have been born and bred up in Barbary, differ little from the Moors. For first, they wear little black brimless Caps, as the Moors red; which they seldom move in greet∣ing one another. They likewise, as the Moors,
go slipshod, and wear linnen Drawers and Vest, over which they put a loose Garment, called a Ganephe, which differs only in colour from the Mandilion, or Albornoz, which the Moors bestow upon the Christians when they are redeemed from slavery. This Ganephe is a black square piece of course Hair-stuff, closed at the cross corners, and all round it is a large Thrum, which at first sight looks like their Re∣ligious Fringes, whereof we shall have occasion in due time and place to discourse. The Jews in this Continent much resemble the Spaniard and Portuguez in their Stature and Complexion, but are much different in their nature and disposition, as being more flexible and sequacious, especially in things whereby they may reap advantage. In point of Civil Government, they indifferently submit to any that is able to secure their Interest; and boggle at no servile obeysance that may be con∣ducive to their worldly ends. They are not peremptory in intitling themselves to any pecu∣liar Tribes, yet they generally believe that they are the remains of Judah and Benjamin, toge∣ther with a few among them of the Family of Levi: whom they conceive to be won∣derfully preserved, that they might not be destitute of competent persons to officiate in the Synagogues. There are not any to be found among them who publickly own the Samaritan Schism, in
rejecting all books of Scripture, but the Pen∣tateuch of Moses. Of which Sect there were some not long since (saith a great Traveller) who worshipt a Calf at Sichem, or Neapolis. Nor are there any to be met with who adhere to the Old Bible, without Talmud-Traditions. There are likewise none among them who are known by the peculiar Denomination of any Sect, such as were the Assideans, Phari∣sees, Sadduces, Essenes, or Gaulonitae of old. For however their private judgments may dispose them, yet they are careful to preserve an outward Unanimity in their Religion; and are signally vigilant to avoid Divisions, as looking upon those among Christian Profes∣sors, to be an Argument against the truth of the things they profess. And that the differences in matters of Religion, which are so offensive∣ly visible among Christians, may be reckon'd for one impediment of the Jews Conversion, we may in another place have occasion to demon∣strate.
CHAP. II. The Moral Conversation of the Barbary-Jews: the ingredients of their Reli∣gion; their backwardness to Disputes: their Creed, occasion, Author; with a short Paraphrase thereof, &c. REsearching in the Conversation of the Jews here treated of, it seem'd to be very re∣gular, and agreeable to the Laws of a well-civi∣lized conduct: For setting aside the Artifices of Commerce, and Collusions of Trade, they can∣not be charged with any of those Debauches which are grown into reputation with whole Nations of Christians, to the scandal and contra∣diction of their Name and Profession. Forni∣cation, Adultry, Drunkenness, Gluttony, Pride of Apparel, &c. are so far from being in re∣quest with them, that they are scandalized at their frequent practice in Christians: And out of a malitious insinuation, are sorry to hear that any of their Nation should give a Name to, and die for a people of such Vi∣ces. But how commendable soever they may be for their Sobriety and Temperance, and
other domestique observances, yet that where∣in they ought to be chiefly Orthodox, they are the most erroneous, namely their Reli∣gion. For however they may pretend the pre∣sent Judaism, or that sort of Religion and Worship which they now profess, to be con∣tain'd in the Law and Prophets; Yet to those who duely consider the ingredients thereof, it will appear to be patcht up of the Tra∣ditions of the Masters, and the Opinions of old Philosophers; which are indeed so artifi∣cially interwoven with Scripture, that this last to an unwary Surveyor may still seem to be pre∣dominant. The truth of which assertion will be manifested when we report the particulars of their Religion. But whatever it be com∣posed of, there is but small hope, as things now stand, to have it Reformed: for the Bible, the Rule of all Reformation, though it be not denyed the Peoples Reading, yet the giving the sense thereof belongs only to the Masters, in whose interpretation of the Text, the Vul∣gar upon pain of Excommunication are bound to acquiesce. And this was told me as an Ar∣canum Judaismi by Rabbi Aaron Ben-Netas, a person not unlearned in their Law, and one who wanted nothing but Christianity to render him acceptable to equal Esteemers; to whose free Communication I owe many of these Re∣marks. Though these Jews are sufficiently taught
to Evade all those Scriptures which relate to the Truth and Establishment of Christiani∣ty, yet they are not forward to enter into Disputes concerning them. And if it so hap∣pen that they are forced thereunto, they will not be confined to the Laws of Disputation, but usually confront Text with Text, and never directly answer the Objection, but set up another against it. But as to their decli∣ning of Disputes about Religion, it seems very wary and prudent; for when any thing con∣cerning Christianity is the matter controver∣ted, they are generally so fiery and cholerick, that they cannot refrain from an ill-bred rail∣ing; and those blasphemous contumelies, which are even detestable to common Ingenuity and Candour, are usually vented by the Jews in their arguings about the Gospel. Against which they are train'd up in an unmanly hosti∣litie: it being a part of their first Institution, to imbibe a malitious prejudice against Christia∣nity. And the better to manage this ill sea∣soning, there is not a passage of the Old Bible any way relating to the proof of the Messiah's being already come, but it is so perverted by the Glosses of the Rabbins, that the common people are not able to arrive its genuine intent and meaning. And what is more observable, and not less to be deplored, even the meaner sort are so versed in these spurious glosses, that scarce any can be met with who is not pro∣vided
of one evasion or other, to elude the plainest Text that proves the Advent of Christ to be already past. Nor need it be matter of wonder to hear that the very common Jews are so well skilled in what we now speak of; seeing that it is the first and last of all their Instruction, to understand and defend their Religion, in a direct opposition to Chri∣stianity. And the better to facilitate the peoples un∣derstanding of their Religion, and to prevent the dangers that may accrew by leaving them to the hazardous Toil of Collecting their Prin∣ciples out of Moses and the Masters, they are provided with two Systems or Abridgments thereof; the one containing the Rule of their Actions, to wit, their book of Affirmative and Negative Precepts; the other the substance of their Faith, or the things to be believed, namely their Creed: which consists of thirteen Articles, and commonly called, Sepher Ikka∣rim, or the Book of Fundamentals. They greatly glory in the immemorial Tradition of this Creed, and of the joynt agreement in the meaning thereof, ever since they were a people. 'Tis true, the committing of it to writing they grant to be but of a late date; and that Moses Ben-Maimon (a Corduba-Jew, who died about the 1104 of Grace) foresee∣ing the dangers that would hardly be preven∣ted in the present Dispersion of the Jews,
which might come upon a meer Oral Tradi∣tion of (so great a Depositum) their Creed, caused it to be ensured in writing; and in this condition it now remains. But Rabbi Joseph Albo, another Spanish Jew, and a most viru∣lent blasphemer and indefatigable impugner of Christianity, not being content with Ben-Maimon's division of the Jewish Creed into thirteen Articles, reduced them to three, and called his Antichristian Exposition there∣of, by Maimon's Title, Sepher Ikkarim; which he writ 321 years after the others death. Now because this Creed is the sum of the present Judaism, we will here insert it, with the common and received sense and meaning of every Article. ARTICLE I. I Believe with a true and perfect Faith, that God is the Creator (whose Name be bles∣sed,) Governor and Maker of all Creatures, and that he hath wrought all things, worketh and shall work for ever. By this Article they assert and believe the Divine Essence. That God is the cause of causes. That by him the whole Creation is preserved and sustained. That when he pleaseth he can reduce the World to no∣thing,
as he raised it thence. That he hath an absolute Power and Empire over all things. That his being is so perfect, that he needs no aid nor assistance, nor is liable to diminution or change. ARTICLE II. I believe with a perfect Faith that the Crea∣tor (whose name be blessed) is one, and that such an Ʋnity as is in him, can be found in none other: and that he alone hath been our God, is, and for ever shall be. By this they affirm the Unity of God. That he is not like a common Nature running through divers kinds and individuals. Not compounded like Bodies of integrant parts. That he is so one, as that he can neither be di∣vided nor multiplyed. But how true soever this Article may be in it self, or plausible in this Exposition: yet the Jews manage it to pull down the Christians faith of the Trinity; which they maintain to be an assertion of a triple Godhead. ARTICLE III. I believe with a perfect faith, that the Crea∣tor (whose Name be blessed) is not Corporeal, nor to be comprehended with any bodily proper∣ties:
And that there is no bodily Essence can be likened unto him. Here they declare their faith of Gods in∣corporeity; and that he is so pure a Spirit, and simple a being, that none of those things can be said of him which are of bodies. And by this Article they confirm their in∣fidelity of the Incarnation of the second Per∣son of the Trinity: because thereby they ima∣gine, that according to the Principles of Christianity, God must become a body, to whom all corporal proprieties are utterly in∣compatible. ARTICLE IV. I believe with a perfect faith the Creator (whose Name be blessed) to be the first and the last, and that nothing was before him, and that he shall abide the last for ever. Though this is their faith of Gods Eter∣nity, yet from hence they despise and deride that fulness of time wherein (according to the Christians) God was manifest in the flesh, and the Word was made man. ARTICLE V. I believe with a perfect faith that the Crea∣tor
(whose Name be blessed) is to be worshipt, and none else. Here they protest against Idolatry: and exclude all sorts of Creatures from being the object of Divine Adoration. But their chief design is by this Article to deny and con∣temn the Christians invocation of Christ, as a Mediator and Advocate. ARTICLE VI. I believe with a perfect faith that all the words of Prophets are true. By this they declare how God out of his meer good pleasure, chose some out of Man∣kinde, whose understanding he purified and enlighten'd above others, and gave them the spirit of Prophesie: Causing their understand∣ings closely to adhere unto his. And then God spoke by them, and revealed unto them that way wherein he would have men to walk. ARTICLE VII. I believe with a perfect faith that the Prophesies of Moses (our Master, may he rest in peace) were true. That he was the Fa∣ther and chief of all wise men that lived
before him, or ever shall live after him. In this Article they intend not so much to magnifie Moses, as to lessen Christ. And the blindness of their malice is herein so great, that they have here made that an Article of their Faith, which they ought to make the contrary: for while they place so much confi∣dence in Deut. 18.15. it is wonder to see them believing so contrary to their hope. ARTICLE VIII. I believe with a perfect faith that all the Law which at this day is found in our hands, was delivered by God himself to our Master Moses (Gods peace be with him.) On this Article they build the Divine Au∣thority of the Law. But much dispute a∣bout the manner of its delivery: whether God gave it Moses in writing, or he writ it from Gods mouth. ARTICLE IX. I believe with a perfect faith that the same Law is never to be changed, nor any other to be given us of God (whose Name be bles∣sed.)
And it is upon the supposed immutability of the Law that they hope for the rebuild∣ing of the Temple and Hierusalem; their re∣turn to Canaan, and the restauration of all the Mosaical Ritual, which is the chief Pil∣lar of Judaism. The latter part of this Ar∣ticle is wholly to decry the Gospel, or the Law of Christ. ARTICLE X. I believe with a perfect heart that God (whose Name be blessed) understandeth all the works and thoughts of Men: As it is writ∣ten in the Prophets, He fashioneth their hearts alike: he understandeth all their works. ARTICLE XI. I believe with a perfect faith that God will recempence good to those who keep his Com∣mandments, and will punish those who trans∣gress them. In this they believe a final retribution of good and evil works: That every one shall have as he deserves. ARTICLE XII. I believe with a perfect faith that Messiah
is yet to come: and although he retard his coming, yet I will wait for him till he come. In this Article the Jews declare their assu∣rance of the coming of the Messiah. That there is no set time for his coming. And up∣on this account they forbid all curious inqui∣ring concerning the hour of his Appear∣ance. And they still use that old Rabbinical Execration— Let their Spirit burst who count the times. ARTICLE XIII. I believe with a perfect faith, that the dead shall be restored to life, when it shall seem fit unto God the Creator; whose Name be bles∣sed, and Memory celebrated world without end. Amen. I do not find that they strive much to crook this Article to any evil purpose against Chri∣stianity: but that it is a bare affirmation of the Resurrection. Of which the Jews retain ve∣ry extravagant Opinions, as will shortly be dis∣coursed. In these thirteen Articles are comprised the Jews Credenda, wherein they exhort and oblige all of their Communion to live and die, as they hope for any comfort in the fu∣ture
State. And notwithstanding that many of these Articles may be capable of a good construction, yet according to the present received interpretation thereof among the Jews, they are not so much a system of Ju∣daism, as a cuning and malitious contradi∣ction of Christianity. And the suttle Ram∣bam (who is said to have first committed them to writing) seems rather to have designed the Jews confirmation in an ill opinion of the Christian, than any instruction in their own Religion. And that they might imbibe a more implacable hatred against the Christian Faith, the crafty Rabbi so composed (for he is thought to have been the Author there∣of) the Jews Creed, that it might one way or other wholly confront the Christians. Not doubting but that they would hardly be induced to embrace a Religion, which they saw was so greatly opposite to that of their first Catechism, and wherein from their infan∣cy they had been taught to expect an happy immortality. Now this which we may suppose was but the Design of Maimonides, is become the ge∣neral practice of the Jews in Barbary. For I have heard from one (whose understand∣ing in their Religion had got him the Title of a Master,) That there was not an Article of their Faith which they did not under∣stand in a sense wholly opposite to Christia∣nity.
And taking a freedom to rail at our Religion (in which they are all well gifted) he instanced in the Eleventh Article, as seem∣ing to bear the least ill-will to Christianity, and from thence warmly beat down all thoughts of Redemption; with great assu∣rance protesting, That he would have none to pay his debts, nor any but himself to sa∣tisfy divine justice for his sins: That he did not expect the felicity of the next world up∣on the account of any Merits but his own: That he was certain whosoever lived pi∣ously and kept the Law, could not miss of being happy: or arriving the bliss to come upon his own leggs. With a deal more of the like stuff, even too hainous to be inserted. But wishing this poor obstinate people an happy rescue from such impious thoughts, I shall close up this Chapter with observing, that the Jews give their Creed a double note of Respect above any other part of their Religi∣on. For though I do not find this Creed set down in their Common Service-book, yet in honour thereof they begin their Mattins with it, and utter it in a hollow tone differing from that wherein the rest of the Office is chanted.
CHAP. III. The Barbary-Jews Opinion of the Tri∣nity, Angels, several States of the Soul, the Law, Merit, Purgatory, Resurrection, last Judgment, end of the World, &c. NOtwithstanding that the Jews are very unanimous in the literal Profession of the same Fundamentals, yet they are not so well agreed in any Exposition thereof, as that which most opposeth Christianity. That the Jews in Barbary are in many things differing from the sentiments of the Jews in other parts of the world, and that too in points of no in∣feriour concernment, may be seen in the fol∣lowing particulars. And in the first place, both the Jews and Moors accord in exploding the Trinity, which they look upon as an Hypochondriacal ima∣gination of the Christians, whom they ac∣cuse of Polytheism, out of an ignorant con∣ceit that we make every Person of the blessed Trinity a distinct Deity. Nor are they more malitious and blind in the utter denyal of the blessed Trinity, than extravagant in
their opinions concerning the Angels. 'Tis true, they all accord in dividing them ac∣cording to their Natures and Imployments, into good and bad. The good Angels (they say) are imployed in Messages of Com∣fort, as were those who brought Abraham the glad Tydings of his Wives Conception and time of Childbirth. Other Angels (they hold) are sent upon Errands of Destruction; and they commonly place the instance in those who came to Sodom. They likewise opine that there is another rank of Angels, to whom is committed the protection and safe∣guard of particular persons; and they give an example in the Angel which appeared with the three Children in the Babylonian Furnace. But beside these more general Objects of the Angels Imployment, the Jews allot two of them to every individual person of their own Nation. Whereof one is a good Angel, and stands at the right hand of every Jew, to register his good Actions, and to set down the particulars wherein he doth well. And at the left hand of the same Jew stands a bad Angel, and keeps an account of whatsoever he doth amiss. And when the Jew dies, these Angels bring in accounts of all that he hath done when alive. And the good An∣gel pleads in behalf of the deceased the good deeds, as the bad Angel doth the con∣trary.
And according to the accounts these two Angels give in of his behaviour, the de∣parted Jew is punisht or rewarded by ano∣ther sort of Angels appointed for that pur∣pose. But not only two Angels are thus allow∣ed to every one of the Jewish Religion, but also (according to the Doctrine of the Barba∣ry Jews) there is a distinct Order of Angels which is intrusted with the Care and Patro∣nage of the whole Hebrew Nation, and who are always ready to prevent those who would hurt them; like that Angel who would not let Balaam curse their Fore-fathers, when Balak had sent for him to that end. They hold likewise that every Governor has an Angel to assist him in Governing the people, and another to suggest to him what will be happy or otherwise. For they think it to exceed the power of one and the same Angel to assist the publick Magistrate both in the Counsel and Execution of what is fit. And the reason of this Opinion is chiefly drawn from the difficulty of right Govern∣ing the various humours of the many. In∣deed they are so liberal of the Angels ser∣vice, that they prostitute it to meaner Offi∣ces than can well be mention'd. For there is scarce any thing done among them in which they do not interess the Ministry of those ex∣cellent Spirits.
Next to Angels they place rational Souls, to which they assign a fourfold State. The first is that in which they were created. For they are strongly of opinion that all Ratio∣nal Souls were created at once, and placed in a certain Region, whence, as out of a com∣mon Store-house, the several bodies in their proper times are furnished, as they are ready to receive them. And if the Souls offend in this State, their punishment is to be sent into infirm and unhealthy Bodies. And this pre-existence of Souls they chiefly found in Eccles. 4.3. The second State of the Soul is that of its Conjunction with the Body, which they esteem no better than an Imprisonment, where∣in it lives as a Bird in a Cage, and where it contracts that pollution which is afterward to be cleansed in Purgatory. The third State of the Soul is that of its Se∣paration from the Body, wherein it continues until the final Sentence, and is happy or o∣therwise according to what it has done in the body. And when at the Resurrection the Souls are again united to their Bodies, then they enter into their fourth and last State, which is as durable as Eternity. Their next singularity of Opinion respects the Law of Nature, which alone they affirm to be obligatory of all Mankind. And to those who observe this Law, they promise
the World to come, which (in the phrase of the present Jews) is all one with Eternal life. But when the Jews grant this hope to all Mankind, yet they reserve a peculiar priviledge to them∣selves, to whom alone God gave the Law of Moses; to whose due observers there belongs a greater Glory & Happiness than to any other. There are some who have imagined that this Opinion of the Jews concerning the uni∣versal possibility of being saved by the Law, doth favour their fancy, who maintain an in∣differency in the external profession of Religi∣on, and that a man without scandal may joyn himself to the Worship of the place he resides in. And this Opinion was by some Beaux E∣sprits of France zealously promoted, till it re∣ceived a Learned Confutation by Sieur Moses Amyraldus, a late Professor in Saumur. But the practice of the Jews in Barbary sets them far distant to any such conceit, there being no people under Heaven more averse to communicate in the Rites of other Nations than they. And if they could have been re∣conciled to the opinion of Indifferency, and ac∣commodated themselves to the Religion of the Places and Countries where they came to reside, the Jews might have obviated many exiles and penalties to which a contrary ex∣tream hath so long and often exposed them. And yet it cannot be denyed but that there are several Jews who make use of a scandalous
complyance in this particular. Of which sort are many of those who coming within the cognizance and power of the Papal Inquisi∣tion can joyn themselves to a Crucifix and Rosary, as well as to the Zizith and Tephil∣lim. And I am assured that some Jews have have gone herein so far as to enter into Holy Orders, and the profession of a Religious life, who yet coming to places where the Jews have publick Toleration have joyned them∣selves to the Synagogue. And of this we have a very late instance of two Jews who in Spain having for several years professed the Religion of Saint Domi∣nique, coming to Legorn in their Fryar Habits they instantly changed their Cowle for a Ganephe, and of idle Fryers became prog∣ging Jews. Another Jew (of my acquaintance, who for about five years had Studied Phy∣sick at Saragoza in Spain) being asked how he could comply with the Religion, he mer∣rily made this reply, That his complyance was only the work of his Nerves and Muscles, and that his Anatomy told him nothing of the heart was therein concerned. Another Jew who in Malaga counterfeited Christianity so well as to be intrusted with the Sale of Indul∣gences, having made a good Market thereof in Spain, came with what he had left to a Christian City in Barbary, where his Indul∣gences being all bought up by the Irish and
others of the Papal perswasion, he declared his Religion. The Papists who had bought his Indulgences impeach him to the Gover∣nor for a Cheat, and clamour to have him pu∣nisht according to demerit. The Jew plead∣ed the Laws of the free Port, that he had neither imported nor sold any thing but his professed Merchandise, and therefore desired (and obtained) the Liberty and Priviledges of such as traffick'd to that Port. I report no∣thing but matter of personal knowledge. That there are many such Temporizing Jews, especially in Spain and Portugal, I have been assured from their own mouths: and what is more observable, some have ventured to affirm that there want not Jews among the very Judges of the Inquisition; which may be one reason why of late so few are convict of Judaism by that dreadful Tribunal. But what kindness soever these Temporizers may bear to the Doctrine of Indifferency, I am sure the Barbary-Jews bear it an irreconcile∣able enmity: for they are so far from com∣plying with other Religions, that they will not so much as eat of the meat which is dress'd by one of a differing perswasion; nor drink in the same Cup after a Christian or Moor, till it be washt. The Jews (now spoken of) considering the many irregularities to which through temp∣tations and humane Frailties they are hourly
liable, conclude that the most vigilant and wary among them cannot live without contracting some stain and pollution, which must be clean∣sed ere they can enter that place of rest, where∣of they esteem the Holy of Holies to have been a figure. But lest the doing away of this pollu∣tion should by any means be thought a work of the Holy Ghost, whom by way of Derision they call the Christians Sanctifier, they have resolved upon a Purgatory for this purpose. Wherein all the Relicks of Uncleanness, which Repentance had left uncleansed, are to be done away. How the Jews Purgatory differs from that of Virgil, Cicero, and Plato, it will not be worth our travail to set down. Yet I can∣not but observe that they speak herein much after the manner of those Platonists, who as∣signed a punishment to every sin, yet held that all such punishments, whether now or hereafter, did only tend to purge the Soul from her Enormities. S. Aug. Civitat. Dei, lib. 21. cap. 13. Neither would it more avail our present purpose to compare the Jewish with the Papal Purgatory; which how much soever they may differ in other Circumstan∣ces, do sufficiently harmonize in vain and groundless extravagancies. The Papists, 'tis true, have much disputed the place of their Purgatory, and were not resolved therein till Saint Patrick obtain'd the Key and open'd the Receptacle. But the Jews without con∣troverting
the scituation thereof, unanimously agree, except a few that place it in transmi∣gration of Souls, that it is in Hell. From whence they can never be deliver'd but by the power of the Kaddisch: which is a Pray∣er that being for the space of a year repeated once a day, by some surviving Relation of the party in Purgatory, is able thence to deliver him. And therefore if the dying person leave any behind who will be so courteous as to repeat the Kaddisch, he need not fear that the pains of Purgatory shall endure above a year. And indeed the Jews generally hold that there shall none of them stay above twelve months under this purgation, though they have dyed never so impenitent or de∣void of Remorse: and that they shall not tarry there above seven dayes, if at their De∣cease they were penitent and sorrowful for what they had done. Now if any ones Sins are so great and many, that a years Purgatory will not atone them, then the Soul is to return into a Body to fi∣nish the Penance. And to support this Opi∣nion, these Jews hold a transmigration of the Soul from one body to another, but without changing of the Species or the Jewish Nati∣on. And by this transmigration (they hold) that the Soul shall satisfie in the second body what it had done amiss in the first, and so successively till it come to the seventh: where
it is sure of a Sabbath, and rests from its pe∣nance and satisfaction. And if the Soul in all the seven bodies has sin'd more than it has sa∣tisfied for; yet having suffer'd what was ap∣pointed, God (they say) in mercy gives it a release. But the portion of bliss allotted to this incompleat penance, is far less than that of the Soul which has made entire satisfacti∣on. And they so greatly magnify the peni∣tent, that they think him of greater value than one who never sin'd: and that one day spent therein is more worth than Eternity. But a man would think the Jews needed not load Repentance with such great Enco∣miums, seeing that the future bliss may be attain'd for thirteen Moons durance in Pur∣gatory. To the expiation of those faults whereby the neighbour is injured, the repentance of the offender and compassion of the offended is strictly required by the Jewish Casuists. The Jews in Barbary entertain no thoughts of Merit in a Papal sense, but smile to hear any should be so vain as to imagine they can do more than the Law requires. They hold that all reward proceeds from Divine Boun∣ty, and that obedience is the only thing looked upon in mans service; and that eve∣ry one shall receive according to their obse∣quiousness to the Law. But that we may not imagine the Jews to design the Christian any
kindness by this Doctrine, we must observe that all hope and promise of future Reward is confined to themselves, and that to those who are not of their Religion they allow nothing but a total perdition of their Be∣ing. Both the Jews and Moors are of Opinion that the infernal Torments shall have an End: and that the faln Angels after many years of punishment shall be received to mercy. Which (saith St. Aug. Civit. Dei, lib. 21. cap. 17.) was the judgment of some tender hearts among the Old Christians: and gives the Ex∣ample in Origen, whom for his Circumvolu∣tion and Rotation of bliss and misery the Church did Excommunicate. And to carry this remark a little further, some of the Ma∣sters are of opinion, that when God, after the Resurrection, shall take accounts of mens a∣ctions, he will not to magnifie his power and justice condemn any one to endless tortures, but that it is more agreable to Gods nature and the dayly expresses of his Providence to save all. And notwithstanding they place the punishment of the Christians in a sort of Annihilation, yet to any of their own Na∣tion they hold no other misery shall remain after the last Judgment, but a lesser measure of Happiness. As to what relates to the Consummation of the World, the Jews do not place it in a
confused Destruction of its present order and beauty, but in its restauration to that purity and perfection, which (say they) it possessed at the Creation. And that every part of this lower World shall attain that perfection, whereunto it was at first designed: and that seeing he is the inexhaustible Fountain of all Goodness, that God will at last invest the Creatures with happiness according to their Capacities. And though in lesser matters, opinions of no ordinary extravagancie may be better in∣dured, yet it is hainous to see them so loose in their judgment concerning that Universal Article, The Resurrection of the Body; which they will not permit to go beyond their own Tribes; for they plainly affirm that none shall be capable of the Resurrection, who do not die in the Communion of the Synagogue. And that this may not be thought the senti∣ment only of the less cultivated Jews in Bar∣bary, we find it to be the general position of their Masters: Who affirm that there are four priviledges so peculiar to the Hebrews, that no other Nation can thereof communicate. And these are the Land of Canaan, the Law of Moses, the Gift of Prophesie, and the Re∣surrection. And that this last might not be looked upon as a meer Talmud-fancy, they deny the Resurrection to all but themselves, up∣on the account of Esay 26.14. They are dead,
they shall not live: they are deceased, they shall not rise. But while they utterly expunge out of their Creed the Resurrection of other Nations, it were well if they agreed concerning their own Rising. For some of their Masters have expresly held that both the bodies and souls of wicked Jews shall be totally annihilate, and that the Resurrection shall only be of such Jews as have lived godly. Some again hold that all the Jews shall rise again, but to dif∣ferent Conditions; for the perfectly just up∣on their Resurrection shall be instated in an undefeisible happiness: next, those that have died in utter impenitence shall according to some of their Rabbins, rise to be cruciated in Gehenna: and a middle sort between both these shall at the Resurrection for twelve months space be punished in Hell. But to speak truly, these are the private opinions on∣ly of their Masters; for the Common people plainly acquiesce in the literal sense of the thir∣teenth Article of their Creed. Before we dismiss this Chapter, it may not be incongruous to observe that the Jews in Barbary much dote upon the judgment of Rabbi Solomon Jarchi, who held that Israel's Command to Joseph to carry his bones into Canaan was not only because he foresaw that the dust of Egypt should be turned to Lice; or for fear that the Egyptians should idolize
his Carkas: but because that those who are buried out of Canaan should have a very troublesom Resurrection. For the Jews believe that the Resurrection shall be in the Holy Land, whither all of them that are bu∣ried in other Countries, must incessantly rowle through the dark caverns of the Earth, that they may rise there and be possessed of their final rest. And however this may seem an Opinion too vain and absurd for men even of ordina∣ry parts to maintain, yet it is at this day a prevailing Doctrine among these Jews: who greatly desire to be buried in Canaan, to the end they may escape that toilsom rowling through the Earth, which those must under∣go, whose hard lot it is to be buried out of the Holy Land. But to avoid this inconve∣nience, as many of them as are able, endea∣vour to return to Palestine when they grow old, that they may have an easie and com∣pendious Resurrection. And upon this ac∣count the Jews in Barbary imagine their con∣dition to be much happier than those in Northern Countries, because they are nea∣rer to Canaan, and therefore have a less way to tumble under ground for the Re∣surrection. We have already taken notice that some Jews place their Purgatory in a Transmigra∣tion of the Soul to seven bodies; and dis∣coursing
one of them who was of this opinion, and shewing him that by this Doctrine at the Resurrection either seven Bodies must have but one Soul, or six Bo∣dies must have none: he made light of the objection, saying, That at the Resurrection all the seven Bodies should be set together, and the six that had it first shall come to the se∣venth Body, wherein the Soul is then placed as a Candle in a Candlestick, and that all the Bodies like so many Tapers shall be lighted thereat: for the Soul shall communicate it self just as a Lamp its flames, &c. But I have been too tedious in these misce∣laneous extravagancies already, which I hope to make some amends for in the succeeding Accounts; wherein I shall endeavour to be as succinct and orderly as the subject will give leave. CHAP. IV. Their Opinion of Matrimony and Coeli∣bate, their Espousals, Dowry-Bill, &c. NOtwithstanding that all civilized Nati∣ons in the World agree and consent
that Marriage is a State of Honour and San∣ctity, and one of the ancientest Institutions which any Tradition doth report: yet none are so warm Assertors thereof as the Jews in this Clime. Who do not only contract Mar∣riage early, but infinitely extol it above Single-life, and hold it a Condition more sutable to Nature, more advantageous to Mankind, and more acceptable to God. Insomuch that they admit not any unmarried Sect a∣mong them, but on the contrary look very jealously upon such of their Nation as ei∣ther Marry not at all, or long defer it. And on this account their Espousals are very early, their Daughters being usually be∣troth'd at ten years of age; and if rich, are Married when very young. And when they have once enter'd this Solemn State, they are religiously careful to express all faithfulness to their husbands. And indeed the whole Nation of the Jews are such great Enemies to a treacherous Bed, that if they had li∣berty they would certainly punish Adultery according to the letter of Levit. 20.20. And in further testimony of the great e∣steem the Jews have of Wedlock, they reckon it among the affirmative Precepts, which they make obligatory of their whole Nation. Besides they are generally taught by the Masters, that every Male coming to years of maturity is bound to take a Wife
of his own Family or Tribe, for to preserve and encrease it. There are some among them who allow of no other end of Matri∣mony but Propagation, and account them, naughty persons who therein do project any other satisfaction. And the Rabbies tell them, that augmenting and preserving of their Fa∣milies include all other purposes of Marriage whatsoever. Their manner of taking of a Wife, which is next to be consider'd, is sufficiently order∣ly and decent. For when any Male is dis∣posed to Marry, he enquires among his kin∣dred for a Virgin to whom he may be join∣ed in this Sacred Bond, for the maintenance of his Name and Family in Israel. And be∣ing informed that there is such an one, he acquaints himself with her Age, Complexi∣on, state of Body, &c. and after this begins to drive the bargain with the Virgins Rela∣tions, who if they like his Condition and Proposals, admit him to visit her. But the Virgins Relations are very cautious that the Visit be short; for should the Match not suc∣ceed, the familiarity of such an interview will much tend to the Damsels disparagement. But if the parties like one another, and the friends agree about the Dowry, then the man has liberty to make her presents, in imi∣tation of Gen. 24.53. (which was also a Cu∣stom among the Grecians, as Suidas in .)
And these he sends by the hand of some dis∣creet Female, who ascertains the Virgin of the reality of his intention and good will. After the parties have given all proper as∣surance of one anothers good liking, and thereof certified their Relations; these pre∣sently call for a Master, who at the Damsels house draws up the Articles of Marriage and Covenant of Dowry. In which is set down all that belongs to the intended Bride, the particulars of her Night-dress not being o∣mitted. And a Bill of particulars being de∣liver'd to the Bridegroom, by vertue there∣of he has power at the day of Marriage to call for and recover whatsoever is therein specified. I enquired, but could meet with no Form hereof, nor could I perceive that it was any thing but a bare Envois of the goods belonging to the Bride, Signed and Witnessed. But besides this on the womans part, there is also a Dowry made by the man; which varies in quantity according to the plenty or nearness of his fortunes. David we find being but poor, gave for his Wife so many skins of the Philistins: but Sechem being a man of wealth, was willing to give as much for Dinah as ever they would demand. Of old (they say) that the Dowry of a Virgin was fifty Shekels, which sum is constantly
set down in the present form of their Matri∣monial Letters, or Dowry-bill. And this they collect from Exod. 22.17. compared with Deut. 22.29. In the Dowry-bills made to Widows, but half the sum is given in Bar∣bary, which they give to Virgins. The Dowries being settled, they pass to the affiancing; wherein the Woman is gi∣ven to the Man, by some of her near kindred in this form of words;— Behold, take her after the Law of Moses: And the Man replies, Be thou unto me a Wife according to the Law of Moses and Israel. There is but one form of Dowry-bill, or Matrimonial Letters in present use among all the Jews, whereof we have a Copy transla∣ted by Cornelius Bertram out of the Babylon-Talmud, and another in Buxtorfs Gram. Chald. p. 389. betwixt which there is some small va∣riance; but the sum of both amounts to the ensuing Copy. A Copy of the Dowry-bill now in use a∣mong the Jews in Barbary. UPon the sixth of the Week, the fourth of the Month  in the year  of the Creation of the World, according to the Computation which▪ We use here at Arzila, a Town situate on the Sea-shore of Barbary, the
Bridegroom Rabbi  the Son of Rabbi  said unto the Bridewife  the Daughter of Rabbi  Merchant in Al∣cazar; Be unto me a Wife according to the Law of Moses and Israel; and I according to the word of God, will worship, honour, maintain and govern thee, according to the manner of Husbands among the Jews, who do faithfully worship, honour, maintain and govern their Wives. I also bestow upon thee the Dowry of thy Virginity amounting to fifty Shekels, which belong unto thee by the Law. And moreover thy food, thy rayment, and sufficient necessa∣ries, as likewise the knowledge of thee, accord∣ing to the Custom of all the Earth. And these words being thus pronounced, the Virgin from that time forward becomes the mans Wife. To this form of [honouring and worshiping the Wife] some think the Scripture alludeth, 1 St. Pet. 3.7. And that due Benevolence spoken of 1. Cor. 7.3. is that is here called —knowing of the Wife accord∣ing to the Custom of all the Earth. Though 'tis true, the Jews by the same phrase express both Death and Marriage. But to return, this Dowry-bill at the day of wedding is deli∣vered into the custody of the Bride, who thereby is impower'd to challenge from her Husband Food, Apparel, and the Right of the Bed. And according to the Law, Exod. 21.10.
If the Husband take him another Wife, he cannot withhold or diminish from the for∣mer the Food, Rayment and Duty of Mar∣riage. CHAP. V. Of other Ceremonies relating to their Marriages. AMong the Ancient Jews there was ever a competent time intervening betwixt their Betrothing and Marriage; which Cu∣stom they deduced from the answer given by Rabecca's friends to Abraham's servant, when they desired that the Maid might not depart presently, but remain after the Espousals ten daies, Gen. 24.55. which yet seems rather to imply the Mothers unwillingness so soon to part with her Daughter, than any legal intervention of time between the affiancing and confirmation of Marriage. But how∣ever the old Jews were perswaded in this particular, the modern of whom we now treat of, think it very disagreeable to the na∣ture of Amours to use any protraction of their Accomplishment. And therefore they stay no longer for Marriage after the betrothing,
than is sufficient to make preparation for so great a Solemnity. For after the Dowry-bill is finished, the day of Marriage is ap∣pointed: and in the interim the Bride pre∣pares her self for the Celebration: And for eight daies useth bathing. Upon the Mar∣riage-Eve at the going down of the Sun, she has her Tabila or Cistern filled full of pure water, whereinto she is put by two discreet Matrons, who are very diligent that not an hair of her head appear above water: for if any part about her remain uncover'd with water, she the second time must be put into her Tabila. For this Bath (they say) ought to be very exact, because it is to supply what∣ever was defective in the other circumstances of the Brides preparations. When she comes out of this cold Wash, her hair with great curiosity is tied up, and her person secluded from the eyes of all men, it being not al∣lowed for her Father or Brothers to look up∣on her, till she be delivered to her Hus∣band. In some places, as I have been told, the Bride goes to this Bath through the Streets, accompanied with several women who dance and sing as they pass, and name the party that is shortly to be married. But this is a freedom would be very scandalous to the Jews neighbourhood in Barbary; besides, the modesty to which from their infancy the wo∣men
here are inured, will not in the least ad∣mit of this liberty. The dressing of the Brides hair when she comes out of the Bath, (which was but now intimated) though the common people may look upon it as a meer act of handsomness and adorning; yet their Masters teach it for an instance of Religion, and as a thing very acceptable to God. And those words— And brought her unto the Man, Gen. 2.22. they thus expound: And God brought Eve to Adam, after the same manner that a Bride is brought to her husband, that is, elegantly dres∣sed, with her hair curiously curl'd and plated; and with joy and dancing. Upon the day of Marriage the Bride puts on her wedding-Garment, and adorns her self as sumptuously as her fortunes will allow, and in an apartment by her self, spends the time until the usual hour of Marriage, in Fasting and Devotion. And though they have no Canonical hours for this Solemnity, yet it is most usually kept toward night; which some gather (from St. Matt. 25.1.) was the custom of the Jews in our Saviours time. Though the Parable (think others) relates ra∣ther to the Marriage-feast than the Marriage it self. The Bridegroom likewise spends several hours in private Devotion before the Marri∣age. And recommends his Condition unto
God, begging happiness upon his wedlock. After these private Devotions are ended, he goes to the Service of the Synagogue, whence he usually returns accompanied with some choice friends, who straightway con∣duct him to the chamber, where the Bride sits in a chair on purpose to receive him, having a Virgin on each hand, as her atten∣dants. And she changes not this posture, till some Rabbi (or other aged Jew, skilful in the Law) reads the Dowry-bill with an audible and distinct voice; and the Bride∣groom hath put the Kedusim or wedding-Ring (of pure Gold, and without a Stone) on the Brides thumb, or third or any finger of her right hand, and called all that are pre∣sent to attest it; upon which the Rabbi saith unto the Bride, Thou art Married or Sancti∣fied to this Man with this Ring, according to the Law of Israel. And these Ceremonies be∣ing finished, the Rabbi saith a Prayer, which is called the Nuptial-Blessing (the form follows presently) and then takes a glass crowned with Wine, which having blessed and tasted of, he gives to the Bridegroom, who with a suddain violence breaks it, in memory of the Destruction of the Temple. And this being done, he takes off the Brides Vail, and giving her the right hand sits down by her; and having entertained her with a short dis∣course, serious or otherwise as he best affects,
they have a Collation, and retire to their lodg∣ing room. And these are the antecedent and conco∣mitant Rites of Marriage in present practice with the Jews I now discourse of, to which I will annex two Forms of Blessing used by the Rabbi at this Solemnity. The forms of Blessing used by the Rabbi at the Consummation of Marriage. BLessed art thou O Lord our God, who hast created Mirth and Gladness, the Bride∣groom and the Bride; Charity and Brotherly Love, Rejoycing and Pleasure, Peace and So∣ciety. I beseech thee, O Lord, let there sudden∣ly be heard in the Cities of Judah and Streets of Hierusalem the voice of joy and gladness; the voice of the Bride and the Bridegroom. The voice of Rejoycing in the Bride-chamber is sweeter than any Feast, and Children sweeter than the sweetness of a Song. Another. BLessed be the Lord our God, King of the World, who hath created Man after his own Image, according to the Image of his own likeness, and thereby prepared unto himself an everlast∣ing building; blessed be thou O Lord who hast created him.
In the apartment whither 'twas said that the new Married retire after Collation, there are two Beds made upon the floor (accord∣ing to the Eastern Custom) to one of which the Bridegroom betakes himself, after he has received those tokens mention'd Deut. 22. But first of all he useth this Mystick O∣raison. BLessed art thou Adonai, our God, King of the World, who planted the Walnut-tree in the Garden of Eden, the Book of the Valleys: suffer not a stranger to enter into the sealed Fountain, that the servant of our loves may keep the seed of Holiness and Purity, and may not be barren. Blessed be thou Adonai, who hast chosen us in Abraham, and in his seed af∣ter him. The Marriage-Feast begins next morning after the Marriage, and lasts precisely eight daies. During which time the Bridegroom stirs not abroad, but the Neighbours come and pray with him at his own house: nor doth he for the same space any further accompany with his Bride than at meal-time. Eight daies by a New Leviticus being allowed her for Purification after Marriage. And the Sab∣bath which happens in this time they keep with more than ordinary festivity and mirth, because somewhere in Scripture (they say) that the Sabbath is called a Bride.
In some places, we are told, that the young Men who wait upon the Bridegroom at the hearing of the Husband giving the Missal Tob, or wishing happiness to his Wife, break certain small Earthen pots which for that purpose they hold in their hands. And there∣by signifie their good wishes of prosperity and health to the new-married couple. As for the Custom of the young Mens keeping the Bridegroom Company for the eight daies that he keeps within-doors, they found it upon the Story of Sampson's Wedding, Judges 14.2. They also have an odd Custom, whereby the New-Married during their eight daies separation, are obliged to send girdles (a very mysterious utensil among all the Jews) one to the other. That which the Wife sends has a Silver-buckle, but that which he returns has a buckle of Gold. The Jews in Barbary usually keep their Summer-Marriages in Bowers and Arbors, which resemble, and perhaps are in stead of the Chuppa Canopy or Covering said to be in use among the Jews of other Countries. And the Guests at the first entrance of these Bowers say, Baruch Habba, blessed is he that cometh; which they apply to the Bridegroom coming thither to his Bride. And to his coming out of the same Chuppa they allude the 4 and 5 verses of the Nineteenth Psalme. At the Wives first meeting of her Husband
she walks thrice about him, because the Scripture saith, A woman shall compass a man, Jer. 31.22. And the Man walks once round the Woman; but no Text is offer'd at to ra∣tifie this Custom. In some Countries the Guests bring with them handfuls of Corn, which they cast at the New-Married, say∣ing, Increase and Multiply. By which they also wish them Peace and Abundance. If the Bride be a Virgin, they give her Wine in a narrow Cup; if a Widow, in a wide one: for excellent reasons, no doubt. While the Banquet which immediately follows the Mar∣riage is preparing, the Company have store of Hens set before them, ready dressed, which when The Couple have tasted, they tear in pieces, and devour with strange scuffling and disorder: But without any other My∣stery than to make the New-Married pa∣stime. This Counter-scuffle being over, the Bride∣groom takes a raw Egg, which he casts at the Bride; intimating thereby his desire that she may have both an easie and joyful Child-birth. The Marriage-day is taken up with these Ceremonies, which they conclude with a Supper and a Dance. In Barbary the Jews admit no Christians to be present at their Marriages, unless such as are their Slaves. And for this they quote Prov. 14.20. For they are of opinion, that
to invite a Christian, or any who are not of their Faith, to these Solemnities, is so displeasing to the good Angels, that they force them to leave the Company. And thereupon those bad Angels enter, which cause quarrelling and dis∣orders, to the troublesom and dangerous in∣terruption of their Mirth and Disports. Now these are the chief of the Matrimonial Rites in present use with the Jews in Barbary; besides which, there are several others of a Miscellaneous Nature, which for their seldom practice with these Jews are here omitted. CHAP. VI. Their Opinion of Sterility: their Lilis: their Rites of Child-birth. HAving taken this short view of their Mar∣riages, the method will not be unnatural, if in the next place we look into the fruits thereof. For we may conclude that Chil∣dren are esteemed by the Jews no small bles∣sing of Wedlock, seeing that in all Ages they have thought the barren Womb not only to be a reproach but a Curse; and that to want Chil∣dren is to be civilly dead, according to the old Jewsh Proverb,— A Man childless is live∣less.
And indeed the Jews now, as of old, have such an high value for procreation of Children, that they place it among those keys which God keeps in his own hand: and who therefore is said to remember Rachel and open her womb, Gen. 30. And if having Children be a token of Gods remembrance, the Jewish women are seldom forgotten. For they are so generally fruitful, that she who proves otherwise is said to have no Ma∣zal in the Firmament, or to have been mar∣ried under no good Planet. And as the Jewish Women in this Coun∣try are fruitful in Children, so they are lau∣dably decent in their Travails: observing therein such orderly deportment as is agree∣able to all well civilized humanity. 'Tis true, the Rabbins (who too much play the Poets with all their Rites) have not forborn even those of Child-birth: but have devi∣sed several fabulous Stories and impertinent Rites concerning it. A taste whereof we shall here insert, for the satisfaction of the In∣quisitive. And in the first place the Rabbins have ap∣pointed that the Father of the Family, or any other religious Jew in his stead, upon the approach of Child-birth, shall draw se∣veral Circles in the Chamber of the impre∣gnate, as also upon the doors both within and without, on the walls, and about the bed,
Inscribing every Circle with these words, Adam, Chava, chutz Lilis: that is, Adam, Eve, be gon Lilis. The meaning of which Conjuration depends upon the right under∣standing of what is meant by Lilis. Now the Jews are not unanimous in their account hereof; yet the best we could collect take as foloweth. When God had made Adam, and saw that it was not good for him to be alone, he crea∣ted a Woman, and gave him her for a Wife; and she was called Lilis. But being no soon∣er brought unto Adam, than she began to brawle and contend, and would not acknow∣ledge that power over her wherewith Adam was invested. And when he advised her of her subjection, and that she ought to obey his commands; she insultingly replyed, That subjection arose from inequality, and there∣fore could have no place between them who were equal by Creation. And in this pelting and quarrelsom humour they lived so long, that Lilis foreseeing little likelyhood either of its ending or amendment, she named The most Holy Name, and thereupon was imme∣diately rapt out of Adam's sight into the Air. Adam seeing this suddain departure of his Wife, is said thus to have addressed himself unto God. O King of the World, the Wife which thou gavest me has forsaken me. Hereupon three
Angels (Senoi, Sanfenoi, and Saumangeloph) were commanded to pursue and bring her back, and to threaten her with severe pu∣nishments in case she refused. The Angels pursuing overtook her at the Sea (wherein afterwards the Egyptians were drowned) which then was stormy and tempestuous. But Lilis refused to return, and pleaded that she was not made to be subject to any Man, but that the design of her Creation was to molest and destroy the Male-Children for eight daies, and the Female for twenty after their Birth. But the Angels not approving her rea∣soning, they endeavoured to force her to re∣turn; but perceiving in her a shreud resist∣ance, they agreed to dismiss her, upon this Condition, That she should never hurt any Infants wherever she saw their Names writ∣ten. And to this end, the Jews use to write the Angels Names in a Table or Parchment, and to hang them for Amulets about their Childrens Necks. As to the inscribing of the foremention'd Circles with Adam, Eve, chutz Lilis, they imply that if the Mother bring forth a boy, God would not give him such a brawling Wife as Lilis, but one like Eve, who would be mild and peaceable, loving and obsequi∣ous, and such an one as may build his house in Peace. But enough of this story. But
the chief intent of these Circles is to fortifie the Chamber appointed for the Teeming wo∣man against all Haggs and Goblins. When the great Belly finds her pangs to be near, she calls some discreet Matron to as∣sist her delivery; but she must be one of their own Religion. For nothing but in∣superable necessity can induce them to ad∣mit either Christian or Moorish Women to be at their Travails, out of a jealousie that some mischief may befal the Child. Nor is this the fancy only of the suspicious Mo∣ther, but a strict prescription of their Ma∣sters, who in no case but that wherein neces∣sity gives a Dispensation, will give leave that a strange Woman should be Midwife to a daughter of Israel. When the Woman is brought to Bed, the joy and festivity is according to the sex that is born. At the birth of a daughter they use but little exultation, because she cannot sup∣port the family, which is extinct without Males. Whence they have a saying, The Family of the Mother is not called a Family. And the Hebrew word for Woman is fetcht from a root signifying forgetfulness: because the Fathers Family is forgotten in marriage of a daughter. But if the Woman be delivered of a Boy, there is great joy in the Family, and the Fa∣ther in testimony thereof presently begins
the Feast for his Sons Circumcision, which is never deferr'd beyond the eighth day, unless want of health in the Child prevent it. The first seven daies after the Childs Nativity are wholly spent in festival Entertainments, at which none can be a Guest who has not past his thirteenth year. Neither must there be fewer than ten at this Feast. Upon the Eve of the Circumcision, the Women visit their Gossip, with whom they usually pass the whole night in mirth and freedom; On purpose to console and recreate the Mother, that she may not be over-troubled for the pains of her Sons Circumcision, as also to prevent those mischiefs to which they imagine Childbed-women are very liable the seventh night after their Delivery. CHAP. VII. Of the Rites of Circumcision and Purification. CIrcumcision has so peculiar a veneration among the present Jews, that if all other parts of their Religion were to be changed, this like Mount Sion, would stand immoveable. And though many other Nations (of old)
and at this day the whole profession of Ma∣humedism, use Circumcision; yet none but the Hebrews embrace it as a Sacrament. Con∣cerning the figurative Circumcision of the Heart, Lips and Ears (whereof the Scripture makes mention) there is no considerable disagreement among Christians or Jews; nor is their harmony less about the literal Cir∣cumcision: for both grant it to be of Di∣vine Institution, and appointed both for a signe and seal of the Covenant God made with the Jews, as St. Paul (Rom. 4.11.) in∣terprets Moses (Gen. 17.11.) But the dis∣coursing of this point belongs not to this place, whereby the Method we have propo∣sed in this Treatise, the modern Rites of Circumcision are plainly to be recount∣ed. And in the first place, the Jews of whom I now write, are very conformable in their observation of the time appointed for the celebration of Circumcision. For where they enjoy the free exercise of their Religion, they never defer it longer than the eighth day. But they Circumcise indifferently at home or the Synagogue. Though for the greater pa∣rade, the wealthier Jews seldom neglect to car∣ry their children to the Synagogue. The chief Officer at Circumcision is the Mohel, or he that Circumciseth, who is not bound to be of the Priesthood; for any
has liberty to Circumcise who has skill there∣in. The Rich admit none to perform this office upon their children, who have not been bred thereunto, and long make it their Pro∣fession. And it is usual to serve a sort of Apprenticeship to gain the Art and Credit of a skilful Mohel. To this end, those who herein intend to be Artists, deal with the indigent Jews to Circumcise their Sons, gi∣ving their Fathers money for so doing: and having gain'd a competent skill and expe∣rience, they set up for Circumcisers. Who are easily discerned to be of that Profession by their Thumb-nails, which they keep sharp and long, as a badge of their Calling. And from one of these Mohels I received this fol∣lowing account of Circumcision, according to the Use of the Synagogue in Fez, the place of his Practice and Abode. The time intervening between the Childs Birth and Circumcision is spent in fre∣quent bathing it; which with more than ordinary Circumspection is washt at the time it is presented to this Sacrament. Of which it is altogether incapable, if the least filth be left about it. So that if any natural Eva∣cuation happen as it is brought to the Mo∣hel, or before the Prepuce be taken away, he cannot proceed in his Office till the Child be new washed.
The morning is the usual time of Circum∣cising; out of this supposal, that the flux of blood is then least, and the child will be most patient: but this they do not by the advice of the Rabbi, but Physician; it being no rite of their Religion, but a rule in their Dispen∣satory. Upon the day when Circumcision is ce∣lebrated, there are two seats set close by the Ark in the Synagogue; the one for Elias, whose presence they still expect at this So∣lemnity; and another for the Baal-Berith, or Godfather. By these two Seats stand the Mohel, and the Jews that are invited. Then the child is brought in Parade, with several boys, whereof one carries a Torch of twelve lights, denoting the twelve Tribes of Israel: another brings a dish of Sand; another the Circumcising Instrument (which is of Wood, Stone, Iron, &c.) Oyl, soft Linnen Rags. In some places they have a Cordial ready, in case the Child should faint. And when the Men in the Synagogue have sung the Song of Moses as it is extant Exod. 15. and have Notice that the Women have brought the Child to the Door of the Synagogue, the whole Company stands up, and the Baal-Berith goes to receive and bring in the Child to the Congregation, who receive him with this Acclamation, Blessed is he that cometh: which they understand either of the Child,
who is so happy as to come to Circumcision; or, of Elias, whom they believe to come a∣long with the Child, and to take his place by the Godfather, to observe and testifie that all things concerning Circumcision were duly administer'd. When the Congregation are setled in good order, the Godfather holds the Child to the Mohel, who gives God thanks that in Abra∣ham he gave them this Sacrament, and there∣by signed and sealed them for his peculiar people. Then he takes away the Foreskin, and in the interim the Father praiseth the Lord that he gave Abraham a heart to ful∣fil the Law of Circumcision, and preserved him to see this his Son Circumcised. The Foreskin being cut off, the Mohel casts it into the dish of Sand, with no less mystical intimation, than that the Seed of the Child should be numerous as the grains of that Sand; and that the Nation of the Jews to whom God gave this Sacrament, might still verifie what was observed of them Numb. 23.10. But I rather think it to reflect upon Abraham's bles∣sing, Gen. 22.17. When the Mohel has thus disposed of the Prepuce, he prays that the Child may live and see his Sons thus initiated into the Co∣venant; may keep the Law, and do good works. Then he takes a cup of Wine, and blesseth God that he hath created the Vine,
and given it a power to exhilarate and nourish: then he dips the little finger of his left hand thrice in the Wine, and lets it drop into the Childs mouth; and having tasted of it himself, reaches it to the Congregation. This done, the Mohel again gives thanks, that God sanctified the child in the Womb, and has brought it to the Foederal Sacrament. He prayes likewise that the children of this child may obey the Law. Then he takes the Infant from the Baal-Berith, and delivering it to the Father, giveth it a Name; praying for him, that by that Name there given him, he may quickly be healed, live prosperously, be a joy to his Parents, and beget children who may be zealous Assertors of the Law. And thus far I have transcribed my old Mohel, who assured me that the whole Ri∣tual of Circumcision was summarily contain'd in what is now set down. They have such a great esteem for this Sacrament, that they still enjoyn it under its old penalty, That Soul shall be cut off from his people, Gen. 17. Which some interpret of Excommunication, or the bodily death of the Parents who out of contempt or neglect of the Institution, omit the Circumcision of their Males: and others understand it of those who at years of Maturity took not care to per∣form that themselves, which through their Pa∣rents negligence was omitted in their infancy.
And though the party delinquent herein incur this penalty, yet these Jews do not so expound the precept of Circumcising the eighth day, as if it admitted of no relaxati∣on. For in case of the childs sickness, they generally hold that its Circumcision may be put off till seven daies after its recovery. And those likewise who are born where there is no Toleration of their Rites, do not incur this censure, if they take care to be Circumcisied when they come where their Religion is Tolerated. And they prove from the first Institution of Circumcision, that Age can priviledge none from under∣going it: Abraham being ninety years old and nine, when he was Circumcised in the flesh of his Foreskin, Gen. 17.24. And I knew one Jacob Israel Belgara, who being born in Spain, and a long time Student  Physick at Saragosa, coming to Barbary, Anno Dom. 1667. was Circumcised in the fortieth year of his Age. And they are careful not to de∣lay the first occasion of being Circumcised, because every moment of such delay is a di∣stinct breach of the Commandment. 'Tis true, instances of the Parents negligence in this particular is very unusual; they being so far from omitting this Sacrament, that they are but too rigorous in exacting it. But if any omission happen herein through the Parents default, then the Masters of the
Synagogue have power to convene and Ex∣communicate▪ (or to cut off from the Com∣munion of the Synagogue) the offending party, and to take and Circumcise the child. If a child die ere the eighth day, it is Cir∣cumcised at the place of burial, but without any furder Ceremonies than giving a Name, and praying that God would be mindful of it in the day of the Resurrection, and to give it life among those who are Circum∣cised. Now they Circumcise the child, to make it capable of Jewish Sepulchre, and to prevent all mischief that might otherwise befal the uncircumcised in the future State. For they are not yet argeed whether or no Circumcision be of absolute necessity to the life to come. Those who adhere to the ve∣ry letter of its Institution, make Circumcisi∣on so requisite to the obtaining of future hap∣piness, that they deny those who want it, a∣ny portion in the Resurrection; misunder∣standing Ezek. 28.10. But others think there is nothing dangerous in the want there∣of, but its contempt. And in the Christian Church the Council of Braccara ordain'd that those who despised their Baptism, and died in that opinion, should, as guilty of their own eternal death, be buried with Self-Murthe∣rers. But all we have hitherto mentioned con∣cerning
Circumcision, is to be restrained to those who are born in the Jews Religion. For as to the admission of Proselytes unto Judaism, Circumcision, Baptism and Sacra∣fice were in ordinary course required. But these old Articles of Proselytism are not ex∣acted by the mordern Jews. For Sacrifice has been utterly out of use ever since the Destruction of the Temple. And lest the shame or pain of Circumcision might deter any from proselytizing, they are taught not rigorously to exact it. And there Moses E∣gyptius tells them, that many Proselytes were admitted into the Jewish Communion with∣out Circumcision. Moses's Father in Law they hold to have been the first Proselyte of Justice, who upon his turning Jew had his Name Jether changed to Jethro. But after him there were many made Proselytes of the Gate, without Circumcision, of which Mr. Selden gives several instances. But how∣ever they dispense with Sacrifice, and speak warily of Circumcision, yet Baptism is a constant initiatory of the Proselyte, which has nothing common but the water with those dayly Baptisms of the Jews, reflected upon by Tertullian, lib. 6. de Baptismo, cap. 15. I confess Barbary affords but few of these Proselytes: for though there are frequent examples both of Jews and Christians turning
Moors, yet very seldom are any met with who turn Jews; which made me less inqui∣sitive after the present manner of receiving Proselytes. And as to what relates to the antient Form of Proselytism, enough is to be seen in Mr. Selden, lib. 2. cap. 2, 3, 4, &c. de jure Naturali & Gentium juxta Disci∣plinam Hebraeorum. If any Proselytes hap∣pen among them, we may presume they con∣form to the Rites herein used by the Jews of other Nations. Of which we have this summary Account in Leo. Modena, a Vene∣tian Rabbi: Historia de gli riti Hebraici, Part 5. lib. 2. Si alcune volesse farsi Hebraeo, primo sono tenuti tre Rabbini, o persone di Autoritá interrogarto settilmente, che cosa lo move a far questa Rissotione, &c. that is: If there be any that hath a mind to turn Jew, there are three Masters, or persons of Authority appointed warily to examine him what cause moved him to this resolution, and whether any worldly interest had a hand therein; to the end they may admit him as they ought. Next, they denounce and make known unto him the great strictness of the Law of Moses, and that the Jews are at pre∣sent an abject, vile, and despicable people, and that upon this account it is better for him to continue as he is. And if after all this he continues his purpose, then he is to Circumcise himself; and as soon as he is whole,
he bathes himself all over in water in the presence of the three foresaid Masters: and after this, he is accounted as good an Hebrew as the rest. At the Circumcision of the Pro∣selyte they use this Form of Prayer. Blessed be thou O God and King of the World, who hast sanctified us with thy Pre∣cepts, and commanded us to Circumcise Pro∣selytes, and to take from them the Blood of the Covenant. Because according to thy Prophet (Jer. 33.25.) unless by the Blood of the Co∣venant neither Heaven nor Earth should re∣main. Then the by-standers say, As thou hast brought him into thy Covenant, so guide us in thy Law and good Works, and bless us with protection and safety. Now because some other Nations have gotten a Traditionary Custom of Circumci∣sing, without turning Jews, or undertaking any degree of Proselytism (as all the Mahu∣medans:) It is therefore resolved among the Jews, that if any such become a Proselyte, though he cannot be Circumcised again, yet on the eighth of his Proselytism, some blood must be fetcht of that part, which they call the Breaking of the Skin. But they are so ingenuous as to confess that this is none of
the Laws of Moses, but an Institution of their own. And having thus briefly viewed the Ri∣tual of Circumcision, that which remains of this Chapter shall be filled up with this short Account of their Purification after Child-birth. And the Law of this Ceremo∣ny is, Levit. 12. from which they in no wise decline, unless in the number of dayes; for notwithstanding that but sixty six dayes are appointed by the Law for the Purification after the birth of a Daughter, yet in Bar∣bary the Jews observe seventy six: but for a Son they keep close to what the Law has herein appointed. During the time appoint∣ed for Purification, the Child-bed woman abstains from all intimate communion with her Husband: who is not permitted so much as to touch her finger, or clothes, or to eat and drink with her out of the same dish or cup. And at the end of these dayes allot∣ted to her Purification, she returns not to the free conversation of her Husband, till she has been wholly washt, and put on all such accoutrements as are used in token of purity. And that there might be no collusion herein, she must prove by the Testimony of two credible Matrons that all things con∣cerning her Purification were duly observed. In the Bibliotheca Rabbinica there is Menti∣oned the Sepher Naschim, where the whole
Ceremony of Purification is set down. The reasons why a different number of dayes are observed herein for a Boy and a Girl, are to be seen in Estius's Notes upon Levit. 12. whi∣ther I refer the Reader. CHAP. VIII. Of the Jews Polygamy: Divorce: A Copy of their Bill of Dismission, &c. POlygamy respects both Sexes, and is of two sorts; whereof the one is a having of many Wives or Husbands at once, the other an having many successively. Concerning which the Jews at no time have raised any considerable controversie, saving that they have always refused the woman to have a plurality of husbands at once. Though they denyed her not a liberty of a second Mar∣riage, when by Death or Divorce they were freed from the first. Among Christian Authors this Point has been deeply controverted; and Tertullian was equally against both these sorts of Poly∣gamy; putting but little difference between having many wives at once, or by succession▪
lib. de Monogam. But others granting the lawfulness of successive Marriages, have yet wholly exploded the licence of many wives at one time, unless where Divine Revelation gave toleration. Mr. Grotius saith there was no restraint herein until the Coming of Christ. l. 2. c. 5. §. 8, 9. de jure Belli & Pacis. But as to what herein relates to the Jews Polygamy, has ever been so far from an ill name among them, that it has been reckon'd for one of the chief Priviledges confer'd up∣on them by Divine Prescription. So that if we be herefrom abstemious, it is not out of Conscience, but worldly Interest. The Gemara Babylonia (as Mr. Selden writes) makes it lawful for any Jew to take as many wives as he can maintain: that is, according to the Barbary-Jews, Any one may take as many wives as he can find with meat and cloth, and the right of the Bed. For to all these he obligeth himself in his Marriage-Letters. And what the Jews herein pretend unto by Divine Law, other Nations pra∣ctice through evil Custom. For Tacitus (de moribus German.) saith, That they used Polygamy as a mark of Nobless and Gallan∣try. But the Jews of whom I now write, though they greatly magnifie and extol the con∣cession of Polygamy, yet they are not very
fond of its practice. For they are generally abstinent herein, not out of Religion but po∣licy, as finding one wife at a time enough for their maintenance and government. Be∣sides, if they find any grievance in being al∣ways confined to one Female, they have a present remedie in Divorce or Concubi∣nage. Of which we must now speak a lit∣tle. Now as touching Divorce, there are seve∣ral things thereunto required, which being all contain'd in the Sepher Kerithuth, need not any particular enumeration. And in this Sepher Kerithuth, or Book of Cutting off, (so called, because the wife thereby was cut off from her husbands Family) I have met with three several Copies hereof, one taken out of Moses Kotsensis, where, saith the citation▪ there is another. A second Copy hereof is col∣lected out of Maimonides, and extant in the end of Burtorf's Caldee and Syrian Gram∣mar: and a third used in Barbary; among which there is little difference but in circum∣stances. A Copy of the Bill of Divorce. UPon the  day of the Week and  of the Month  and Year of the Creation of the World, according to the ac∣count
which we Hebrews use at Tituan in the Kingdom of Fez, governed by the puissant Muley I Joseph—Ben Rabbi have desired of mine own accord, without any Compulsion, to cut off, divorce, dismiss, and cast thee out; thee I say, thee my Wife Fati∣ma, the Daughter of Rabbi Ben which has been my Wife heretofore. But now I cut thee off, divorce, dismiss, and cast thee out. And be thou cut off, divorc'd, dismiss'd, and cast out from me. And be at liberty, free, and Mistriss of thine own self, to go to Marry whom thou hast a mind to; and let none be refused for my name, from this day forward for ever. And this shall be to thee from me a Bill of Di∣vorce, and the Epistle of putting away ac∣cording to the Law of the twelve Tribes. This is done before two or more Witnes∣ses, who attest it by subscribing thereunto their Names. CHAP. IX. Of the Jews Concubinage: of their Marrying the Brothers Wife. THose secondary Wives which were of old among the Jews, our English Tran∣slation
renders Concubines, Gen. 25.6. And Tertullian (speaking hereof in the first Chap∣ter of his Book De unis Nuptiis ad Ʋxo∣rem) affirms that not the Patriarchs alone, but also our Ancestors had a right not only to Marry, but also to use Matrimony vari∣ously: and that there were Concubines, before the Law we read of the Concubines of Abaham, Nahor, Jacob, &c. And out of Philo we are told by Mr. Selden, that the primary wives were called the just, and the se∣condary Concubines. A Learned man of our own Nation (in his Annotations upon the New Testament) seems to incline to another Opinion: for he saith that the Matrimonial Laws of the Jews forbad a servant, or Gentile woman to be∣come wife to a Jew, but that she was cal∣led a Concubine. Whether or no this might be so by some new Institute of the Masters, I have no just occasion here to enquire: But I am sure the Egyptian Agar, who was Abraham's Concubine, is called his wife, Gen. 16.3. And that both she and Kethu∣rah were called both his Wives and Concu∣bines; but Sarah bore only the name of his wife. August. Civitat. Dei, lib. 17. cap. 34. But grant that the Concubine by (some late Rabbinick) Matrimonial Laws of the Jews, was not called a wife, yet she was far from the ill character of an Harlot, nor was con∣jugal
association with her any more unlaw∣ful than Polygamy, which was practised a∣mong the Patriarchs, and is still allowed of by the Modern Jews. And yet if we grant Concubines the Title of Wives (and Con∣cubinate to be Marriage) yet betwixt them and the primary wives there was and is still no small difference and disparity. For the first sort of wives were taken by Matrimoni∣al Patent, or Dotal Covenant, with solemn Espousals, and had a power to receive all such presents as might testifie both the hus∣bands Affection and the Contract: but Con∣cubines were taken without any of these Ceremonies or Assurances. Next, the pri∣mary wives were the Governesses of their husbands Families, but the Concubines live therein as Servants, and equal to the for∣mer in nothing but in the right of the Bed. In the third place, the children of the first wives had a right to succeed to the hereditary Estates and Titles of their Fathers, but those of the Concubines were secluded all succes∣sion therein, and instead thereof receive por∣tions, Gen. 25.6. And some think that it was upon this account, that Jephte being the Son of a Concubine, was denyed to co-in∣herit with his brethren. Agreeable unto this Custom is the Matrimonium Morgengabicum in some Countries, where the second wife and her children are not taken in to a right
of the husbands Estate, whereby the woman can have no part thereof for a Joynture, nor the children for their inheritance, but only certain portions are assigned them by Com∣pact; which are called Morgengab, or Marri∣age-Gifts. But not to pursue the Laws of the old Jewish Concubinage (whereof enough is to be met with in Mr. Selden;) Our present task is to state the present use thereof among the Jews in Barbary. Who are generally here∣in very abstemious: but when they make use of it, 'tis with such Rites as have been alrea∣dy mention'd. And we may easily imagine the unsettledness of their Condition to be the main reason why they are so reserved in the use of this priviledge. People of an Ambulatory state being usually very careful not to multiply their lumber. The next thing to be accounted for, is the Marrying or refusing of the Brothers wife who is dead without Issue. A custom which is at this day in request and practice among these Jews, according to its first Institution, Deut. 25. But if the surviving Brother re∣fuse (as he may) to raise up seed to the de∣ceased, then they proceed to a very solemn separation, which is after this manner. The man who refuseth to pay this debt unto the dead, is bound to take two well-reported Jews of the Neighbourhood, and
with them to go to his Brothers widow; to whom he declares his resolution of not re∣ceiving her in Marriage, or of not perform∣ing unto her the Duty of a husbands Bro∣ther. This being done before the two cre∣dible persons whom we just now mention'd, the widow accompanied with the same wit∣nesses, and three more, makes her address un∣to the chief of the Synagogue, who upon the receiving of her Petition, appoints a day of hearing; and both the parties according to Summons being present, the chief of the Synagogue propounds several questions. And first he demands of the widow, How long her husband hath been dead? whether three months be fully passed since his death? for so much time is required to clear her from be∣ing with child by her late husband. Next he demands, Whether her husband left ever a brother behind him? whether the man who is there present be his full brother, and whe∣ther he be a single man? After this the Ma∣ster demands their Age, and whether she thinks they are compotent for generation? and whether the surviving Brother and the Defunct had both one Father? These Proposals being directly answer'd unto by the woman, the Master turns to the man, and asks him, whether the woman there present was his dead brothers wife? and, whether he will Marry her, or suffer his
shooe to be pulled off? If he there declare again his refusal to Marry her, they present∣ly execute the Law: and having first put and tyed a shooe on his right foot being bare, the slighted widow looseth it with her right hand, and saith, calling the Synagogue or Congregation to witness it, This my hus∣bands brother refuseth to raise up seed unto his brother. And then pulling off his shooe, she contemptuously spits in his face, saying, So shall it be done to the Man, that will not build up his brothers house. Then the Ru∣lers of the Synagogue, with all that are pre∣sent, pronounce these words: The shooe is taken off. And from that time forward she is at liberty to Marry to whom she pleaseth. It is required that all this be transacted when the woman is fasting; and though not in Barbary, yet in some other Nations, she loos∣eth the shooe with her teeth. I have been informed that they have a Ritual of the whole process, and a prescript Form which they call, The pulling off of the shooe: And that a Copy hereof is given to the woman, which serves her for a Testimonial that her Separation was legal, and that she may joyn her self in Wedlock to whom she has a mind. But if possible, the parties so accommo∣date the matter betwixt themselves, that it seldome comes to this extremity. For this mode of Separation is generally looked up∣on
as reproachful and contumelious. An Example of the Libellus eductionis Caleei, I could by no endeavour yet obtain; which I impute to the great cautiousness of the Jews in communicating any thing of this Nature to strangers, lest it should reflect upon their Religion, or be misconstrued to their Re∣proach. CHAP. X. Of the Institution of their Children: the time and manner thereof. HAving already treated of the Jews Mar∣riage, with its several appendages, and viewed their Childbirth and Circumci∣sion: the Method cannot be unnatural if we next enquire into the Education of those children, by whom they hope to preserve Their Name in Israel. And indeed the care of the Jews is very laudable in this parti∣cular, there being not many people in the World more watchful to have their children early tinctured with Religion than the pre∣sent Hebrews. And there needs not many other reasons to be given of their unshaken adherence to their present Faith, than that
they are therein so timely and deeply groun∣ded Nor is their diligence herein more com∣mendable than their orderly Method; for as soon as their children are able to pronounce, they are taught such Sentences of Holy Writ, as seem to favour their Religion, and to in∣fuse into them the feeds of Piety and Ver∣tue. And to this purpose they frequently make use of Solomon's Exhortatory: Catechize a Child in the way that he should walk when he is young, and his old age will not depart from it. Now because the Jews in Barbary usually speak Moresco, the Language of their Nati∣vity, and a sort of Spanish which inables them for Traffick; lest they should fall into an utter oblivion of the Hebrew Tongue, they are careful that the Rudiments be in that Speech. And to facilitate their Childrens Learning thereof, they usually teach them Hebrew for the Utensils of the House, Terms of Traffick and Negotiation, &c. And by this Order they furnish the Children with a Nomenclature of Hebrew Words; and all this before they ad∣mit them to Syntax and Construction. Hence it is that in speaking Moresco and Spanish, they so intermingle their first Vocabulary, that thereby it is not easie to be understood. But still the main Design of their early Instruction is especially spent in imprinting Religion
upon the tender minds of their Children. And because the Sabbath is appointed for the more Solemn Celebration and Instruction in Religious Rites, and ordained to be one Cha∣racter, whereby the Hebrew people is distin∣guished from all other; for these Reasons the Jews are signally diligent to implant into their Children a singular reverence thereof. And to this end they employ the Morn and Even of this Queen of Feasts (as the Masters call the Sabbath) in teaching their Children several pious Forms of Saluting their Pa∣rents and others. In which Greetings they permit not their Children to use the Name of God, till they are seven years old, that they may retain the greater veneration for that Name which is Holy and Reverend. And therefore the first Salutations of the Children are plain∣ly, I wish you a good Sabbath: May you have a good day, &c. When their Children are grown up to be fit for such Conversation as Talk and Play, they permit them not the least Society with the Mahumedan Children, but strictly forbid them their company; that hereby they may timely possess them with an averseness to∣wards all Mahumedism. And this they pra∣ctice out of a consideration that there is so great likeness between many of their own and the Moresco Customs, that a Child may be easily induced to a promiscuous imbibing
of either. And as for the Divine Mysteries of Christianity, the Jews represent them to their Children in such monstrous shapes, that they are fitter for their affrightment than embrace∣ing. Besides, they teach their Children that Christian Religion is so utterly destructive of their Ceremonies, that they ought to a∣void all fellowship with those who profess them. When the Jews have taught their Children some decent Modes of Salutation, and im∣printed them with an awful Reverence of Gods Name, and the Essays of hating all Re∣ligions but their own; Their next endeavour is to instruct them in the Elements of Book-learning. Where the first Lessons are about the Name and Figure of the Hebrew Letters: in which they use this Method: First, upon a smooth stone or board they cast two or more Letters of the Alphabet, and acquaint the Child with the Name and Figure thereof. And when the Child is able to pronounce these Letters, they proceed to more, according to the capacity and towardliness of the Scho∣lar. And so forward, till the whole Alpha∣bet be run over. When this task is finished, the children are taught to joyn the Letters into short and easie Sillables; and having at∣tained to read a little, they are put into the first Book of Moses, and so pass through the whole Pentateuch. In teaching their Chil∣dren
to write they use as the Spaniards, a Plana, which is a draught of very large Let∣ters upon a fair Paper, which they imitate up∣on a thin Paper laid thereon. When the Parents have at home pretty-well grounded their Children in these prelusory Rudiments, they send them to School; and every Morning before they go thither, it is the Mothers Office to provide them something to eat, which is sweetned with Sugar or Ho∣ney; which serves them both for Beakfast and an Instruction. For at giving the Child the sweet Morsel she useth these words; As this is sweet to thy Palate, so let Learning be sweet to thy mind. And she gives directions how to behave himself at School, as that he is to use no filthy words, but such as he reads in the Law: because God loves clean Lips, pure, wholsom discourse, and that all communica∣tion ought to be agreeable to the Divine Word. Next, that the Child must not spend his time in idle talk to his own hindrance, or his fellows. With other such directions as a Mothers Care and Affection shall sug∣gest. They have a saying very common among them, That there is no fruit at Autumn, where there is no budding in the Spring; which they apply to the Education of their Children, whose riper years they hope to have pious and well-governed, when their tender minds
are duly instructed in Religion and Vertue. And much to this purpose may be met with in their Homilies. At five year old the Children go to School, where they spend five years in Learning the Pentateuch; and at ten year old they are put (if they prove towardly) to read the Mischua and some choice parcels of the Talmud; which contain the Body of their Institutes. Du∣ring the time that boy is learning the five books of Moses, he is called Ben Mickra, the Son of the Law; and when he is thirteen year old he is Ben Mitzva, the Son of the Precept: for now the youth receives the Passover and is purified. For until he comes to be a Son of the Commandment, the Father stands charg∣ed with his Miscarriages. But at thirteen year old the Lad being supposed to be able to discern Vertue from Vice, and Good from Evil, he is bound to answer for his faults. Therefore the Father having before a Syna∣gogue of ten antient Jews declared that his Son whom he there produces has been well Catechized in the Law, and understands the general Decisions of the Mischua and Tal∣mud, and that he can repeat the dayly Pray∣ers, he lets them know that he no longer chargeth himself with his Crimes, but that he leaves him to answer therein for himself, and to be punished if he shall be delinquent a∣gainst the Commandments. Where note by
the way, that by Commandments here must not be understood either the Decalogue or the Ritual of Moses, but those 313 Precepts into which they have resolved their Reli∣gion and the Bible. Drusius (in Exod. 26.) observes, that the Jews old manner of Instru∣cting was by Interrogations and Questions, or Catechism. By which present Method there is no youth under Heaven can at thir∣teen years old give so exact account of the Rites of their Religion as the Jewish. I meddle not here with the special places which were of old appointed for the Educa∣tion of youth, because those ancient Gebaoth or Colledges, Houses of Doctrine, and Hills of the Teachers, which the Divine writings often mention, are now faln under a fatal Devastation. Neither doth it concern the present Subject to reflect upon the Mishne, or Colledge in Hierusalem, where the Repeat∣ing of the Law was Studied: this being also extinct. Only I observe at this day the Jews in Barbary, like their neighbour Moors, are wholly destitute of Places for liberal Educa∣tion; and therefore when any of them in∣tend to Studie Physick or the like, they re∣pair incognito to the European Universities, and more especially to those of Portugal and Spain. But to return: The Jewish Fathers are not more careful in the Catechism of their Chil∣dren,
than the Mothers in their Nurserie. In which they do not follow their own delicacie, but the prescriptions of their Masters: who appoint that the Nurse (who is always the Mother, unless some unavoidable necessity in∣terpose) eat such Viands as yield good nu∣triment, to the end that the child may the sooner grow up, and come to the publick Worship, and take the impressions of their Religion. And the Mother who is diligent herein, is said To walk in the wayes of the Lord: (for so they are taught to understand Deut. 28.9.) who feeds his Creatures with a asonable and liberal hand. They have very odd conceits about the Situation of the Mo∣thers Breasts, which they use as natural mo∣tives of affection and tenderness toward their Infants. And to imprint in the woman a greater averseness to nurse their children at anothers Bosome, their Masters tell them strange Stories of several men who have been miraculously enabled to give their children suck upon the death of their wives. During the time of Nursing, the women are not permitted to go with open Brests, nor to keep Fasts, nor to expose their tender Sucklings to the Sun or Moon. Neither when the Child is able, do they permit it to go bare-headed out of doors, because on a time one of their Masters seeing a child in this posture, pro∣nounced it unlawfully begotten, and that his
Mother was either menstruous or unchaste in her Embraces. The Jews usually Girdle their children as soon as their bodies will endure it; and when they are grown up none of them go ungirt to the Synagogues: for if they should do so, they think that not only thereby the benefit of the Prayers is forfeited, but also the Divine displeasure is provoked. Hence is that saying, Ʋngirt, unbless'd. Albeit I know the Jews use to Girdle their children, lest from the in∣tuition of their own nakedness, they should imbibe an immodest Confidence. CHAP. XI. Of their Synagogues: the Officers thereof: time of their Election: Hours of Prayer. THe Synagogue in the N. T. is often taken for any place of publick concourse: But its usual acception is either Civil or Ec∣clesiastick. In the former acception it de∣notes the place of their Consistories and Ju∣dicatures; in the later the House or Room where the Law and Prophets are read and ex∣pounded, and the whole System of publick wor∣ship performed.
The Rulers or Chief of the Synagogue, or such as negotiated their Mysteries, were dif∣ferent from the Rulers of the Consistory or Judicature. But we are here to speak of the Synagogue as a place wherein they tolerated the publick Exercise of Religious Solemni∣ties. Which Toleration the Jews in Barba∣ry purchase with their Coin. For it is usual with the Moresco Governours, when faln in∣to any Exigence of Moneys, to shut up the Jews Synagogue, out of certain experience that its Redemption is the readiest Sub∣sidie. In this part of the World, the sense of their Ambulatory condition will not permit the Jews to be at the pains and charges of Erect∣ing new Synagogues. But they hire Houses or single Apartments proportionable to their Number, to assemble in. In whose Furniture they seem to neglect all other Ornament and Sumptuousness but cleanliness and decency. But as if they vyed the store of Moresco Moschs, they strive much to have their Syna∣gogues numerous. And in this they do not recede from the practice of their Ancestors, who had four hundred and eighty Synagogues at once in Hierusalem. So Sigonius, de Rep. Hebr. lib. 2. c. 8. And in other Provinces and Cities (as we read in the Acts) there was the like plenty. And the numerousness of these Holy Houses may easily be granted, seeing
that a very few make up a Jewish Congre∣gation. For they have a Tradition, that where∣soever ten men of Israel are, there ought to be a Synagogue. Of old, the Jews wrote the Entrances of their Synagogues with devout and cautionary Sentences, as Buxtorf hath observed in several Pages of his Abbreviatures; which Custom is wholly out of fashion with the Jews here discoursed of: which seems chiefly to be im∣puted to the uncertain tenure of the Houses which they hire for Synagogues, and not to any dislike of the practice. For doubtless the Inscriptions now spoken of were very laudable, as directing those who enter'd in their deportment in the Divine Worship. Of old, the Walls within as well as Entrances of the Synagogues were written with Sentences tending to the same purpose: As, Enter the House of the Lord thy God with humility: Be attentive in time of Prayer; Think upon thy Creator, &c. To every Synagogue there belongs six Offi∣cers; first the Summas, or Sacristan, answerable to our Sexton: whose Office is to sweep & keep clean the Synagogue, and to trim the Lamps. The Second is the Pernas, to whom belongs the care of providing the Holy Wine, which is given to the Youth at the entrance and end of their Sabbaths and Festivals. The Third Officer is the Mari-Acatab, who folds up and
unfolds the Law, and shows it to the people. The fourth (whose title I remember not) is he to whom belongs the Elevation of the Law, and the bearing it in procession through the Synagogue; which is an honourable Im∣ployment, and his who gives most. The fifth Office belongs to the Elhaim, or those who touch the two staves (which they call the trees of life) whereon the Law is rolled up, when it is carryed in procession. The sixth is the Chesau (or Praecentor.) All these Offices are bought and sold upon the day when the last Section of the Law is read, and without a new Election are not held above a year by the same persons. To express their Zeal to the Service of God, they canvas for these Offices, and give Monies to obtain them, which goes to the Poor-stock. The folding up and unfolding of the Law, being an Office of the greatest esteem, none carry it but he who is able to give liberally to the Corban; by which they raise a comfortable subsi∣stance for those are grown indigent: as in a∣nother Chapter we shall have occasion to dis∣course. Their times of repairing to the Synagogue, or hours of Prayer, are next to be conside∣red. To the Holy Exercise of Prayer, the Jews thrice every day assemble at their Ora∣tories; first at Sun-rising, which they call Tephilla Sabarit, or Morning-Prayer. Their
second time of going to the Synagogue is about three in the Afternoon, which is their Tephilla Mincha, or Evening-Prayer. The last is after Sun-set, and this they call the Tephilla Arvit, or Night-Prayer. To every one of which times there are proper Offices appoint∣ed, as is to be seen in the Sepher Tephilot. But the Office for the Morning far exceeds the other two in length. For they are a∣bove two hours in the Synagogue at Morning-Prayer, and not above half so much at both the other. They have no perfect difference between Proseuchae, Synagogues, Schools and Houses of Prayer, as was of old. For if there be or ever was herein ny distinction, it is swal∣lowed up into the one Title of Synagogue, by which is barely to be understood the place where the Jews gather together for Religious purposes; and may well be called an Oratory, or House of Prayer, because that is the main Duty for which they repair thither.
CHAP. XII. Of the Jews Preparation to the Synagogue. THe apprehension of the Divine Great∣ness and Majesty of God, which by all Civilized Religions is acknowledged for the sole and proper object of their Worship, hath moved men of all Faiths to ordain some Rites of preparation to so solemn an Address. This I have already observed in Mahume∣dism, the most considerable Religion for secular Grandeur in the World. And the pre∣sent Judaism is no way thereunto inferiour in this particular. For before the Jews go to the Synagogue to celebrate the Publick Service of God, they carefully observe all such pre∣parations as they have learned from Custom, Superstition, or their Masters. In whose ob∣servation they are rather too punctual and precise, than any way negligent or remiss. And first of all, the Jews are vigilant to Pray betimes in the morning, out of an Opinion that the more early the Oraison, the more acceptable it is to God. And this they found on the third Verse of the fifth Psalm: My voice shalt thou hear betimes, O Lord; early in the
Morning will I direct my Prayer unto thee, and will look up. When at any time they find themselves backward to these Morning-Devotions, they upbraid it with their for∣wardness to pursue their Secular interest, and shew how far the concerns of Religion doth exceed all worldly business: and that their care to seek God ought at least to equal that in seeking Mammon. There is a saying com∣mon to all Jews; That in Winter they raise the day, and in Summer the day them. The meaning whereof depends upon their rising before day to Prayers from the fifteenth of June till Pentecost, and after from Pentecost till the fifteenth of June. Let the Reader un∣derstand it. There are some Jews who to be esteemed Devout, rise very early every morning to la∣ment the ruines of Hierusalem and the Temple: and they hope by the merit of so doing to move God to hasten their reparation, and the restoring of the Kingdom to Israel. And there are those who believe that the Planets and Stars weep with those who in the night shed tears for the City: and that when they run down their cheeks, God puts the tears in a bottle, and keeps them to blot out all the Edicts which at any time shall be made by their Enemies for their Destruction. But to return to their Mattens. There is a general Tradition among the Jews, That at
night the Gates of Heaven are shut up, and that the good Angels sit silent by them, and that the Evil Spirits are then at liberty to wander up and down to effect their projects: And that a little after Midnight the Gates of Heaven are opened with so great a noise, that the Cocks here below are therewith a∣waken'd, and Crow to awaken them to their Prayers: And that this might not be thought to be the melancholy of some few imagining Jews, they have put it into their general Ly∣turgie, wherein for this good Office of the Cock they thus give thanks: Bendito tu Ado∣nai, nuestro Dio Rey del Mundo dn al Gallo distinto para entender entre dia y noche: Blessed be thou Adonai, our God, King of the World, who hast given understanding to the Cock to distinguish the night from the day. But the Oraisons we have now been speak∣ing of relate to their private Devotions, which are preparative to the publick. To which later they are not suffer'd to repair till they have dressed their bodies according to pre∣scription. And to a stranger they seem here∣in very antick and humoursom. For begin∣ning with their Shirt, that must not be put on but after such a secret manner, that the very beams of the house must not be privy to their Nakedness; and therefore they creep under the Counterpane or Coverlet while they put
on their Mutands. And for this they cite and praise the Example of one Master Jose, who upon his Death-bed gave God thanks that through the whole course of his life the timber of his Bed never discovered his Natu∣ral retirements. Much of this stuff might be set down relating to their present manner of dressing themselves, as how that the left-foot-shooe must be put on before the right, &c. But the love of brevity has prevailed with me to omit them. When they have accoutred themselves for the Synagogue, at the leaving of their Apart∣ments they are commanded moderately to bow down their Heads, to express thereby their great sadness for the desolation of the Temple. Before they go to publick Prayers they use all manner of needful Evacuations of the Body; and when for this purpose they enter their Retraits, the Devouter beseech the Angels to stay at door till they come out: whom they thus accost. Most Holy and most Glorious Ministers of the most High, I beseech you keep, preserve and help me: wait till I go in and come out: for this is the custom and way of all men. They account it a hainous Sin to retard the Natural Purgations of the Body, because thereby they may incur Distempers. And to
this unsavoury purpose they alledge Levit. 20.25. but for what reason, is not so easily to be comprehended. But their chiefest bodily preparation con∣sists in washing, which is a Ceremony bestow∣ed on all those parts of the body that are more notoriously liable to be unclean. And the hands, which (according to their Ma∣sters) after sleep are venemous and impure (by reason of the noxious spirits lodged as they opine in the palms thereof when they are asleep) are first of all to be punctually washt. For they hold, that if a Jew should touch his eyes, nose, ears or mouth with unwasht hands, he should be troubled with dimness of Sight, Catarrhs, Deafness, and a stinking Breath. In washing their hands they hold them up, that the water may run down to their Elbows. Which elevation of their hands, Ceremony of washings, help to explain the , St. Mark 7.3. which has made so much stir among Criticks. At the time of this preparative washing the Jews say this Hymn; Bendito tu Adonai, Nuestro Dio, Rey del Mundo, que nos Santi∣ficò en sus en comendancas, y en comendò so∣bre limpieza de Manos. Blessed be thou O Lord our God King of the World, who hast sanctified us with thy Commandments, and enjoyned us cleanness of hands. Where by Commandments must not be understood any
strict Law of Moses in this particular, but of the Tradition of their Elders, or injunctions of their Antient Sanhedrim, by which they are bound to wash not only when they go to the Synagogue, but also whensoever they eat. To which Custom that passage of Saint John 11.6. has an unquestionable reference. For the water-pots which were set ready at the Feast, , were for the Jews to wash in before they did eat. But we speak not here of their every-dayes washing, but of that which they now use in order of prepara∣tion to their publick Devotion, which is the last thing they do before they go to the Sy∣nagogue. And if any occasional defilement happen as they go, as the touching of a dead Carkass, the killing of a Flea, (for a small thing will defile a Jew) they presently wash their hands before they appear in the solemn Wor∣ship. There were other sorts of washing of old among the Jews, as that of the Priests when they went to the Temple to officiate: in imi∣tation whereof arose the washings and lustra∣tions among the Gentiles. There was also another sort of washing belonged to their Proselytes at their reception into the Church of the Jews: of which we have already spo∣ken something in their Proselytism.
CHAP. XIII. Of the Jews Zizith and Tephillim, or Phylactery or Prayer-Ornaments. WHen the Jews prepare for Morning-Service they with singular circum∣spection put on their Zizith and Tephillim, which are properly their Prayer-Ornaments, and so necessary an accoutrement for the Sy∣nagogue, that they are the chief Cognizances and badges of Religion, without which they cannot hope that their Church-Services should be accepted. The wearing of the Zizith or Fringe, they collect from Exodus 15.37. And they very confidently assert, that a careful observation of the Commandment concern∣ing the Zizith, is a fulfilling of the whole Law. And they ground this peremptory po∣sition upon a Mystery which their Gemalria has found in the word and manner of its making. For (say they) the Zizith hath five knots representing the five Books of Moses, and the eight threds added thereunto make thirteen, which together with the Numeral Letters in the word it self amount to six hun∣dred and thirteen, which is the number of all the Commandments contained in the Law.
And therefore they conclude that the right wearing of the Zizith is an observation of the whole Law. Credat Judaeus! Now as to the form and matter of the Zi∣zith, it is a quadrangular piece of Linnen-cloth (or Silk, &c.) with Fringes, worn next the Shirt, hanging down upon the Breast and Shoulders. At the putting of it on, they use these words:— Bendito tu A. N. B. Rey del mundo, &c. Blessed be thou, O Lord our God, King of the World, who hast sanctified us with thy Precepts, and commanded us to wear the Zizith. To this Religious Utensil no fewer Miracles are ascribed then to the Cowle of St. Fran∣cis: for the Jews say it can deliver from sin, and make Proselytes to their Faith: And that it is an Amulet against Sorceries, and pre∣serves those from receiving any hurt from evil Angels who constantly put it on. But all are not admitted to the honour of wear∣ing this Holy Ornament: for it being a part of the habit to be worn at the Synagogue, the women are totally forbid it, as being excluded the publick Service. Their next Prayer-Ornament is the Tephil∣lim, which are Scrowles of Parchment writ∣ten with several Sentences of the Law; and tyed upon their Fore-heads and left-Arms. And this they observe upon the ac∣count of the sixth of Deut. the sixth and eighth
Verses. The Sentences wherewith the Phy∣lacteries were antiently inscribed, are conje∣ctured to have been Exod. 13. from verse the 11th to the 17th, Exod. 13.2. to the 11th, Deut. 6. from verse 4. to the 10th, and Deut. 11. from the 13th to the 22. Others are of Opinion that the Phylacteries were written with the Decalogue. But for mine own part, I believe the Inscription to be concealed: for the Jews with whom I have practised in this particular, would not be moved either to show or explain their Phylacteries. At the putting them on, they say this Eucharist: Ben∣dito tu, &c. Blessed be thou O God our Lord, Governour of the Universe, who hast hal∣lowed us with thy Law, and commanded us to wear the Tephillim. i. e. Phylacteries. The Phylactery worn upon the Fore-head is folded up, and hangs between the brows, so as they may see it, and thereby be minded of walking according to Gods Statutes. There has been no small dispute among the Criticks and Interpreters concerning the Name and Office of the Tephillim: but if they will ac∣quiesce in the meaning which the Modern Jews give thereof, they signifie no more than Ornaments to be worn at publick Prayer, in which such Sentences of Scripture are writ∣ten as they deem most proper to remember them of their Duties, according to the first appointment hereof, Exod. 13.16. Deut. 6.8.
'Tis true, the first, plain, and wholesome in∣tent thereof has in course of time been much corrupted chiefly by the Schismatical Phari∣sees, who in stead of binding them for a sign upon their hands, and as Frontlets between their Eyes, hung them as Charms about their Necks, supposing in them a secret Power to defend them from Dangers. Out of which corruption 'tis probable did arise that super∣stitious Custom of some women in St. Hierom's time, of wearing their Parvula Evangelia, or short Sentences of the Gospel, to keep them from Inchantments and other Mischiefs. And at this day the Papists permit the wear∣ing about their Necks the beginning of St. John's Gospel, as a Defensative from Evil. That the wearing hereof was not unlawful, some produce Christs wearing them for a con∣vincing Argument, St. Luke 8.44. but the Fringe or Border of the Garment there men∣tion'd may belong to the Zizith, but no way to the Tephillim. However, the Jews were not condemn'd by our Saviour for the use, but superstition of this Ornament: and because they made their Phylacteries larger and broader than commanded, and this too to the end that they might appear more holy than others. And we may conceive the whole matter to be briefly thus: Tephillim or Phy∣lacteries are with the later Jews become a great part of their Religion, which they
ground upon the last mention'd Texts, taking them in a literal, which were intended in a figurative sense, according to their explica∣tion, Deut. 6.7. But this carnal people, which have ever been apt to turn all inward Piety into outward form, and to make that matter of Ambition and Ostentation, which was designed for humility and holiness, un∣derstand the Precept concerning the Phy∣lacteries meerly according to the Letter. And therefore make them Scrowles of Parchment, in which they write the four Sections of the Pentateuch, which were named before; and wear them on their Arms and Foreheads. As we have said already. In preparing these Scrowles, these Ceremo∣nies are still in use: first, the skins whereof they are made must be of Beasts which the Law has pronounced clean. Secondly, none but a Jew must kill the Beast and dress the skin for this purpose: for if a Christian, or in their Language, any other Edomite have a hand therein, it is wolly polluted and un∣serviceable. Thirdly, the Ink wherewith the Sections of the Law are writ, must not be black, nor of the ordinary confection. Fourth∣ly, they must be writ with the right hand, without interlining. These, with other ni∣ceties concerning columning and cutting the Parchments, are used about the Phylacte∣ries. And being thus Canonically made, they
sit and apply them to their Foreheads and Hand-wrists, and call them Tephillim, because they are especially used in Praying. The Greek Phylacteria relates to the end hereof, namely to keep the Law in memory. Though there is a present superstition which layes claim to the Phylacteries, because they keep those that wear them from Sorceries and Di∣seases, and the Malus Genius. Now what is principally blameable herein, is their affixing on God their own carnal observation and frivolous Ceremonies of these Tephillim, as if they were his own Institution and Appoint∣ment. And it was the peculiar fault of the Pharisees, to wear the Tephillim of a greater breadth than any other Jews, that they might be looked upon as persons of a greater Sanctity than the rest. CHAP. XIV. Of the Jews hastening to Morning-Prayer. Their Manner of Entrance into, and Deportment in the Syna∣gogue, &c. THrice every day (as we have said) the Jews repair to the Synagogue▪ and
herein they express a great chearfulness and delight. For they leave their houses in a ha∣sty posture, and with great willingness; and seem to strive who shall be first at the Syna∣gogue. But they return thence in a far diffe∣rent manner. For when they leave the Sy∣nagogue they go backward, and use a very slow pace therein. By which they testifie their delight in Gods publick Worship, and their unwillingness to go from it. And they interpret Hosea 6.3. of that dispatch, ready∣ness and alacrity wherewith they ought to come unto Gods House. And to those who are backward and come late to the Syna∣gogue, they apply that of Esay 50.2. Where∣fore when I came, was there no man? when I called, was there no man to answer? And of him who comes not to Prayers at all, they understand Esay 50.10, 11. At the Entrance of the Synagogue they either make clean or put off their shooes, in obedience to Eccles. 4.17. and Exod. 3.5. Put off thy shooes, &c. And this saves them the uncovering of their Heads: for their little black brimless Caps are never moved all the time they stay in the Synagogue. At their stepping into the Synagogue, they first spend a few minutes in the meditation of his Attributes whom they come to invoke; which is to beget in them a Deportment humble and reverend. And when they have
duly possessed their minds with an awful re∣verence of Gods Majesty, they repeat to them∣selves Numb. 24.5. How goodly are thy Tents, O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles, O Israel! And Psalm 26.8. O Lord, I have loved the habi∣tation of thy house, and the place where thine honour dwelleth. And the 6th Verse of Psalm 95. O come let us worship, and bow down: let us kneel before the Lord our Maker. This Meditation being ended, they lay the right hand upon the heart, and bowing their bo∣dies toward the Chest where the Law is laid up, they begin the publick Service with the 7th of the fifth Psalm: I will come into thy house in the multitude of thy mercies, and humble my self with fear in the Temple of thy Holiness: So it is Verbatim in an old Spanish Translation of the Jewish Lytur∣gie. They Pray standing, girt, with their faces toward Canaan, their heads moderately bow∣ed down, and hands upon their heart. They utter their Prayers in a sort of Plain-Song, sometimes straining their Voices to a very harsh and unpleasant Note, and then on a sudden letting it fall into a kind of whisper. Their bodies are always in a wagging un∣steddy posture: which they say expresses joy and satisfaction in Devotion. But to him that knows not the intent hereof, this wavering and (sometime) exulting of the body, will
seem very careless and negligent, and that they Pray with none, or very little intention and devotion of mind. Those which cannot read the Service in Hebrew (who are but few) are bound to learn when to say Amen. A thing the more easily attain'd unto, because they have a prescript Form. And how heedless soever they may appear in other parts of Prayer, yet they use a signal diligence in the right timing and pronouncing of the [Amen.] Because who∣soever saith it with all his might, the Gate of the Garden of Eden is open'd to him. In time of Prayers none are permitted open∣ly to spit, belch, yawn, or blow the Nose. All which they do with great Secrecy in the Synagogue, when they have occasion. Neither may they spit, or any such thing, to the right hand or before them; because of the Angels, which have made those places their Situation in the Synagogue. And from this short Account of the Jews entering, and behaviour in the Synagogue; we come to take a general view of the Pray∣ers made therein. And here we shall follow the Breviary in present use with the Jews in Barbary, which was Printed at Venice in the 1622 Year of Grace. And first of all, they begin the Morning-Ser∣vice with the eighteen Benedictions, of which, saith Moses Maimon, Ezra was the Author.
For when the Israelites returned from the Captivity, their Native Language was so cor∣rupted with that of their Bondage, that they were not able to praise or serve God in a continued Speech: And upon this oc∣casion Ezra is thought to have composed eighteen short Benedictions, wherein they might praise God, and beg at his hands the supply of his dayly blessings. But o∣thers are of opinion that these eighteen Benedictions were composed as a Directo∣ry whereby they might guide themselves both in the private and publick Service of God: to which purpose they are imployed at this day. After the Benedictions, follows a large Of∣fice for Sacrifice and Oblations: which be∣gins with the History of Abraham's going to Offer up his Son. To this succeeds a long course of Psalms: then a tedious Thanksgi∣ving. Then a Confession of Sins; at the saying whereof they throw themselves pro∣strate, and express a great sense of their own vileness and misery, and that they have no strength but in the Almighty. Then all on the sudden they start up, and comfort them∣selves with the Oath God made unto Ahra∣ham, when he went to Sacrifice his only Son. And now with great chearfulness they bless their Lot, that God has chosen them for his Heritage and the people of his Covenant.
But besides all this, they have in this Office a peculiar Thanksgiving for the Delivery of the Law; and a Prayer (which they say with a low voice) for the restauration of the Tem∣ple; That in their dayes God would rebuild the House of his Sanctuary, which they hour∣ly hope for. And they shut all with pray∣ing that God would lead them in his righte∣ousness, and make plain his way before them. And this is the sum of their dayly Morn∣ing-Service; for whose more regular Celebra∣tion, there are Rubricks intermingled with it, directing them to the Responses, Praises, and how every part must come in course. This Morning-Office (as was said) is very long; for which they make sufficient amends in the brevity of the other two. In some places they have a Custom for those to shut the Prayer-Book who are at Variance with their Neighbours: thereby signifying that they will not Pray at all, because they cannot pray a∣right, till the difference be reconciled. At the saying of [Give Ear O Israel, the Lord our God is one God,] they turn themselves East and North: at the pronouncing of [Holy, Ho∣ly, Holy Lord God of Sabbath,] they jump up three times. They dare not turn their Backs on the Chest where the Law is deposit; and lest they should do otherwise, they go back∣ward out of the Synagogue, having their
eyes always fixed thereon. They are very careful that nothing may interrupt them in their Devotions, at which if they sneeze, they account it a lucky token of being therein ac∣cepted, but to break wind preposterously is a very unhappy abodement. I have omitted in the former Paragraph to observe that after the appointed course of Psalms they have two Lessons; the first out of the Law, which is always read by the Cha∣sán, or some eminent Jew. The second Les∣son is taken out of the Prophets, and is read by any ordinary Jew who is able to read di∣stinctly. And in the difference of the persons imployed in these Lessons, they show the great value and esteem which they have for the Law above the Prophets. There is an universal Agreement among the Jews of all Countries, that they ought every day to repeat a hundred Benedictions; which they thus compute: At wshing in the Morning twenty three: At their Entrance in∣to the Synagogue six: At putting on of the Zizith or Fringes one: At putting on the Te∣phillim one: At every one of the three Offices in the Synagogue, eighteen: Three after din∣ner, and two before night: At going to sleep two: and as many at dinner and supper. Which if they reckon right make up the sum. At the saying of the Benediction for Gods giving them the Law, they stand up with
their heels joyn'd together, and their toes opened, bowing their heads toward Hierusa∣lem. They have also a Prayer which is said by the Priest alone, wherein he desires God that he would be pleased to pardon all those who have been negligent and unattentive at the time of Prayer. But I could not finde this Prayer in their Breviary, though with some curiosity I perused it to that pur∣pose. Besides the Sabbath, they keep Monday and Thursday as weekly Holy days. On each of which they read three Sections of the Law: the first by a Koên, whom they suppose to be descended of Aaron; the second by a Repu∣ted Levite; and the third Section by a Com∣mon Jew. As concerning the keeping of Monday and Thursday Holy, and reading the Law thereon as well as on the Sabbath, after a more Solemn manner: the Vulgar Jews give no other ac∣count thereof but Custom and the Pleasure of the Masters. But those who pretend to give a Rationale of their Rites, refer it to an Institution of Ezdras, grounded upon the peoples wandring three dayes without water in the Desart of Sur, in memory whereof he appointed the Law to be thrice solemnly read every week. Now to be without water, say they, is to be without the Law: for which interpretation they bring Esay 55.1.
Others think that Thursday and Monday are set apart for the solemn Lesson of the Law, in memory of Moses's going the second time into the Mountain to renew the Tables of the Law, which hapned (say the favou∣rers of this Opinion) upon a Thursday, and to have returned thence upon a Monday. Upon which dayes some of the preciser sort keep a strict Fast, like those in St. Luke 18. and in all probability for the same end. On these two dayes they have besides the usual Office, a proper Prayer, which from the first words thereof bears the title of Vehu-rachum, which is said with singular attention. Of old this Prayer used to work Miracles; but by rea∣son of some great delinquency in the present Jews, it has lost this Efficacy. CHAP. XV. Their Ceremonies about the Book of the Law: Their Manner of Cele∣brating the Sabbath: The Offices which thereon are Solemniz'd, &c. IT is a Canon strictly observed by the Jews, That a Book of the Law is necessary to the Constitution of a Synagogue: And there∣fore
the first thing they provide in order to set up a Synagogue, is a Copy of the Law, and a Chest or Ark wherein to lay it up. Now that which is called the Book of the Law is, The Pentateuch written in a large Character on Parchment, which is dressed according to the manner of the Phylacteries. The Parchment is rolled up upon two staves, to make it the more convenient to be car∣ried in Procession. It is also usually wrapt up in a covering of Linnen, Silk, Tissue, &c. As for the piece of Tapistry pictured with divers Birds, which was the old-fashion'd Covering of the Ark, the Jews in Barbary use no such thing, for they abhor all manner of Imagery in their Service, as minding them of the Idolatry of their Fathers, for which they conceive themselves to be still punished; and also out of an averseness to be thought to imitate those Christians, who have offen∣sively introduced Pictures into their Ora∣tories, not only for Ornament but Venera∣tion. But to return to the Law: The Jews pay the five Books of Moses so great a Reverence, that they never suffer them to be taken out of the Chest, or looked upon, but on three dayes (namely Monday, Thursday and Sun∣day) when they are read: and this too in the Morning, because it is esteemed the purest part of the day. 'Tis true, they use also to
show the Law to the people on the Sabbath-night, but it is because the whole day is hal∣lowed. The taking out of the Law belongs to a Noted Rabbi, or in his absence to one of the more ancient and Devouter Jews. But to carry it in Procession within the Synagogue, is sold to him who is able to give most for the Place. As we have observed in the Offi∣cers of the Synagogue. At the taking out of the Law, the Officer turns himself to the people, and repeats this Versicle: Come and extol God with me, and let us praise his Name together. And at the Elevation of the Law, the people bow their Faces toward it, and make a long Respond, wherein they declare their own vileness, and magnifie the Majesty of God. And when the Rabbi holds up the Law and opens it, he speaks these words: This is the Law which Moses laid before the Children of Israel, and which proceeded from God, whose ways are all just: The word of the Lord is pure, and a defence to all those who believe it. When the Law is carried from the Ark to the place where it is appointed to be read, all the people there present sing the Hymn of Moses, Numb. 10.35. Rise up Lord, and let thine Enemies be scatter'd, and let them that hate thee flee before thee. By which they wish and pray for the Destru∣ction of all those who are not of their Re∣ligion. When they carry the Law either to the
Reading-place or in Procession, there is always one who steps up to him that carries it, and kisseth the Covering thereof; for it were to defile the Law, to kiss either the Letters there∣of, or the Parchment whereon they are writ∣ten. And he who doth this, with a Voice moderately elevated blesseth God for having made the Jews his peculiar people, and that he hath given them his Law. When the Book returns from Procession, and has put on its Coverings, all the Males in the Synagogue kiss it in Order, as the Papists do their Pax: and when they have done, the Officer gives the Book an Elevation, and so lays it up in the Chest. And as it returns thither they say the words of Moses at the resting of the Ark, Numb. 10.36. Return, O Lord, unto the ten thousand thousands of Israel. The Pentateuch is divided into fifty two Sections, to the end that it may be read over upon the fifty two Sundaies in the Year. And in reading it they are bound to be very plain, audible, and articulate. Because every tittle thereof is of singular weight and moment. The last Lesson constantly falls upon Septem∣ber the twenty fifth, which immediately fol∣lows the Feast of Tabernacles. And when this Section is read over, the Chasans, or those who read the Law, declare a great joy and satisfaction, that they lived to make an end of the Annual Lesson. They also praise God
that notwithstanding the many Miseries be∣faln them, they are still in possession of the Law, in which all other Blessings are abridg'd. On the day when this last Section is read, all the Copies of the Law are brought forth of the Ark, about which the people dance in imitation and remembrance of David, 2 Sam. 6.16. During the time that the Law is out of the Ark, they place burning Torches therein, in token that the Law performs all the duties of a light to those that obey it. On this day also the Elder Jews make themselves merry in seeing the Youth scramble for the fruits they cast among them. On this day also are sold the Offices of the Synagogue to them that will give most. And all be∣ing orderly consummate, every one leaves the Synagogue with this Prayer: The Lord pre∣serve my going out, and my coming in, from henceforth and for ever. The next thing that we are to account for in this Chapter, is the Manner of their keeping the Sabbath, and the Offices thereon celebrated. A Theme large enough for a whole Volume, if we were to give an exact description of all Rites and Cases thereunto belonging. But I shall confine the discourse at present, to the Customs of the Jews in Barbary, among whom and the rest of the Jewish Nation there is but small disagreement in the Sabbatarian
Ritual. Though it must be confessed that the Barbary-Jews are neither so strict nor Ce∣remonious in this matter, as the Jews of other Countries, if we may believe the account which good Authours have given of the later. The whole Nation of the Jews sufficiently accord in the notice of the word Sabbath, and grant that it barely signifies no more than Rest; and that sometimes too it is used both for working-dayes and Festivals, and that it puts on a more peculiar and restrained sense, when it is concisely taken for that seventh day which God set apart for his Worship. And in the Observation of this Sabbath or Rest, the Jews practice numerous Ceremonies: some antecedent, and relating to their pre∣paration; and others concomitant, or waiting upon the day. Their antecedent Ceremonies are seen in dressing and preparing on the Eve of the Sabbath the Victuals that are thereon to be eaten: According to the Commandment Exod. 16.23. To Morrow is the rest of the Holy Sabbath unto the Lord; bake that which ye will bake to day, and seeth that ye will seeth, &c. From which they conclude, That all things ne∣cessary to the Sabbath, and for the Honor there∣of, ought to be provided over night, that there may be nothing to interrupt this Rest. If it falls out that the Servants are not able to make all things ready, the Masters assist
them, to the end that the Sabbath by no bo∣dily labour may be transgressed. And they are able to cite many great Rabbins who have help'd their Servants in preparing for this Rest. But this strict Custom of dressing no Vi∣ctuals upon the Sabbath, is not universal with the Jews we now speak off. With whom I have been entertain'd with good cheer on the Sabbath that was thereon prepared. And asking them how they durst or would act so contrary to their own pretences; the Reply was, That they thought the Crime of a low nature, if it was done without giving scandal to others, that is, secretly. Which was then the Case. Every Sabbath is observed with three Feasts, and four Offices. The first Feast is upon the Friday-night, or rather at the very entrance and begining of the Sabbath: The second is their Sabbath-dinner; and the third Feast concludes the Sabbath. Now the Cu∣stom of this triple Feast they deduce from the triple repetition which Moses used of the word [To day] when he gave out Orders con∣cerning gathering of the Manna, Exod. 16.25. Some of the more hospitable and weal∣thier Jews keep their Tables spread during the whole time of the Sabbath. And in this as other things they generally tread in their Fore-fathers steps, who were excellent at
turning the power and intention of the Law into Carnal Form and Superstition. But besides their greater apparatus in Diet for the Sabbath, they use other preparative Rites in order to the Solemnity of This Great Day: All which are bodily and external, and not worth our recital, if it were not to let us see into what follies a people may fall in Re∣ligion, when they have once renounced the Truth. All the Friday-afternoon is usually taken up in Sabbatical preparations, as wash∣ing of the head and hands, the trimming of their beards (whose corners the Graver sort suffer not to be cut, according to Law) and in a peculiar Superstition of paring their nails; on which parings they are forbid to tread; in prevention whereof they usually burn or bury them. In like manner, they spend no small time in whetting the Knives, and preparing other Utensils of the Table. The women on the Friday comb and dress their heads, and make ready all accoutre∣ments of the body. For they esteem a neglect in any of these particulars, a down-right vi∣olation of the Rest. And because their Ma∣sters use a word for Sabbath signifying Queen, they think it reasonable that they as duly pre∣pare themselves thereunto, as they would for the reception of so great a Personage. And he (saith the Jewish Canon) is greatly to be praised, who honoureth the Sabbath
with his Body, Clothes and Dyet: with his bo∣dy, by duely dressing it: with his clothes, by ha∣ving a Sabbath-days Suit: and with his dyet, which on the Sabbath should be both more and better than on other dayes. In Barbary they have their Sabbath-Lamps, which are lighted by the women, to which being lighted they hold up their hands and say this Benediction:— Blessed be thou, O Lord our God, King of the World, who hast sancti∣fied us with thy Precepts, and commanded us to light the Sabbatine-Lamps. If any mans curiosity lead him to enquire into the reason why the Office of lighting these Lamps belongs to the women: I shall only tell him, that among many other reasons pre∣tended to be given hereof, the chief is the keeping the women in minde of the trans∣gression of Eve, who seducing Adam to dis∣obedience, thereby put out, say they, and extinguished his Light and Glory. But the women do it upon the account of a received Opinion among them, that thereby they fa∣cilitate their Child-birth. There being these three Precepts recommended to them for that end, viz. To keep the Sabbath-bread, light the Lamps, and carefully to attend their Months. The Sabbath-lights we now speak of are so contrived, that they may last the whole Sabbath, on which they are not allowed so
much as to snuff them, for fear of transgressing the fourth Precept. But notwithstanding that the Jews in this part of the World are suffi∣ciently rigorous in the observation of the Sabbath, yet I neither could finde nor hear of any of them, who would if surprised with the Sabbath, expose themselves to the dan∣ger of abiding in Woods and Desarts, rather than on the Sabbath to travel a few furlongs to gain a safer residence. For they are wil∣ling to let things necessary to save mans life thereon to be provided for. And some will not doubt to say, that if ever they be Masters again of Hierusalem, they will not loose it for fear of transgressing the Sabbath. And they have an usual saying, Paligro del alma quaebra el Sabbato: That the hazard of loosing a mans life dispenseth with the Sab∣bath. They have a Custom in some places on the Friday to put water into little pits, and to draw no place dry, to the end that the Souls in Purgatory may therein cool and refresh them. For on the time that is over and a∣bove added to the Sabbath, they suppose the Souls in Purgatory have liberty to re∣create. There are many other Rites belong∣ing hereunto, the most whereof will fall in with the Offices: which are now to be ac∣counted for. Upon the Arvit or Eve of the Sabbath,
they have a peculiar Office, which begins with the twenty ninth Psalm: Give unto the Lord, ye sons of the mighty, give unto the Lord honour and strength. Give unto the Lord the honour of his Name, and bow your selves to the Lord with the beauty of Holiness. The voice of the Lord is upon the waters. The God of honour hath made it thunder. The Lord is upon much waters. The voice of the Lord is with strength, the voice of the Lord is with beauty. The voice of the Lord break∣eth the Cedars, and hath broken the Cedars of Libanus. And he hath made them leap as a Calf; Libanus and Sirion like the sons of Elephants. The voice of the Lord cutteth the flames of fire; the voice of the Lord vexeth the Wilderness, he vexeth the Wilderness of Cades. The voice of the Lord maketh the Hinds to be in pain, and discovereth the Forests, and in his Palace every thing speaketh honour. The Lord hath been upon the water, and the Lord hath sate King for ever. The Lord will give strength unto his people, the Lord will bless his people with peace. The Translation I have here given of this Psalm, which begins the Office of the Sab∣baths Arvit, is Verbatim out of the old Spa∣nish wherein the Jewish Liturgy is extant. And it is here inserted for no other purpose, but to show how it differs from our present Translation. Where the Reader may observe,
that the word Adonai is here and through all their Liturgy used for Lord; it being altoge∣ther unlawful for them to mention even in their Devotions the word Jehovah. After this Psalm immediately follows in their Liturgy a very large Expostulation con∣cerning the oyl and weke, and whole confe∣ction of the Sabbath-Lamps. Where the Opi∣nions of several antient Masters are recited concerning this matter: as the Opinions of Rabbi Ismael, Rabbi Tarphon, Rabbi Elihezer, Rabbi Aquiba, Rabbi Jehudah. Which  Master gives them leave to put out their Lamps on the Sabbath-night, for fear the Na∣tions (those that are not Jews) and evil Spirits should do hurt therewith. On the Arvit they make confession of the three sins, for which, as hath been said, women die in Child-bed. And among these three deadly sins▪ the want of due lighting the Sab∣bath-Lamps is none of the least. On the Arvit likewise when it grows dark they are bound to propound and answer these three Questions: Hast thou paid Tythes? Hast thou made the Hirub? Hast thou lighted a Candle? After this they repeat such Hymns and Psalms out of Holy Writ, as commemo∣rate Gods gracious Promises to Israel, of which they make a comfortable application to themselves. There are likewise repeated some short periods of Scripture relating to
the Season of the year: as in the Spring— He shall make his dew to fall: and in Autumn— Thou makest the winde to blow and the rain to descend, &c. Having done this, they use a Thanksgiving unto God, for that he refresheth the dead with his mercies, and confirms his Truth to those that sleep in the dust: that he punisheth Apostates, looseth the imprison'd, redeemeth the captive, provideth Medicines for, and healeth the sick. And at the end of this long Thanksgiving follows this Be∣nediction for the Institution of the Sabbath. Blessed be the Lord our God the Holy, Thou hast Sanctified the seventh day for thy Glory (having first finished the Heavens and the Earth) and hast blessed it above all dayes, and sanctified it above all times, as it is written in the Law. And here the Institution of the Sab∣bath out of Genesis is distinctly repeated. These things with the rest of the Office of the Sabbath-Arvit, which is very long, is concluded with a thankful recapitulation of Gods favours toward them, especially in that he has made them his peculiar people, given them his Law, and promised that it shall never be changed, nor they deprived of it. Then they most humbly implore the Almighty, that at last he would fulfil his promise, retarded so long by reason of their sins, and send them their desired Messias.
The next Office is that of the Sabbath-Morning, where the Rubrick directs them to rise before the Sun, and to read the ordinary course of Psalms till they come to the nine∣teenth: And then to begin their Mattins. Which for the most part are collected out of the Scriptures; some portions wherof are said by the Cazan alone, and others by the Kahal and Kohen, as the Rubrick all along directs them. This day the Law has always a solemn Proces∣sion, and is openly shown to the people. When it is brought to be laid up in the Hehal or Chest, he that bears it saith these words: Turn again to thy resting place, and to the house of thy desire, that every Mouth and Tongue may give praise and glory to thy Kingdom. And turn unto the million of the thousands of Israel: and, O Lord, turn us unto thee, and we shall be turned; renew our dayes as in former time. And with this Prayer they conclude the Morning-Office for the Sabbath. The third Office is the Musaf or Afternoon-Service, which begins thus— O Lord, thou shalt open our lips, and our mouth shall shew forth thy praise. After they have said this, they bless and laud God for the continuance of his favours both to quick and dead. Next, they recount how God gave their Great Ma∣ster Moses the Commandment for the Sab∣bath. After this they make a gratulatory Oration unto God for that he has been plea∣sed
to assist and accept their Services. And the whole Office is shut up with a distinct enumeration of the Divine attributes: and recommending themselves unto the Divine Protection, beseeching God to take the safe∣guard of them both when they sleep and watch. Their fourth Office is that of the Minha, or Sabbath-night: which being of the same tenor with the last we but now mention'd, there needs no more but to name it. At the determination of the Sabbath, they have an additional Service, at which though none are bound to be, yet all are present, to show their Devotion to the Sabbath, and how loath they are to part therewith. But others hold that they ought to protract this Rest as long as they can possible, for the sake of the Souls in Purgatory, especially for such as were condemn'd thither for the violation of the Sabbath. Through all their Offices there is still some∣thing peculiarly relating to the hastening of Elias, to the end that he may not only loose their knots, or resolve their scruples, but give them timely notice of the advent of the Mes∣sias. But notwithstanding that their Offi∣ces for the Sabbath contain excellent things, according to their way of Worship, yet they have therein many things apparently trivial and ridiculous. Of which we may give ex∣ample
in their praying over the Lamps, Wine and Spices which are brought unto the Sy∣nagogue. Where the Wine being consecra∣ted, it is carried home, that therewith they may sprinkle their houses, to preserve them from Witchcraft and Sorcerous Incantations. Some likewise wash therewith the parts of the Body that are infirm, and conceive that the consecrate Wine yields present cure. The Spices also being hallowed, are made use of to refresh the Soul that is left alone in the Body when the Sabbath is ended; for on that day only they hold that every Male-Jew has two Souls. But the consecrate Wine and Spi∣ces have yet an higher purpose and vertue. For with the Spices they refresh the Souls below on the week-dayes, because the fire of Purgatory thereon is believed to send forth a very grievous stench. And by pouring some of the consecrate Wine upon the ground, they imagine Corah and his fellow-Mutineers to be assisted. For they are of Opinion that that factious crew are still living in flames un∣der ground. It cannot be denyed, that albeit the Sabbath-Offices of the Jews are taken for the greater part out of Scripture, but that they enter∣tain a very Carnal sense thereof, and that the whole Rest tends more to gratifie the Bo∣dy than to serve God. And to engross this Ease unto themselves, and to show that the
Sabbath was purposely appointed for their sakes, and that none other have thereunto any right or title, as also to declare their just Dominion over all other people in the world, the Jews in Barbary imploy their Slaves in all manner of servile Offices upon this day. And on it too give solemn thanks unto God, That he has put no less difference between Israel and the Gentiles, than between light and darkness, the six days and the seventh. Mr. Selden observes out of their Rabbins that there were three things peculiarly com∣manded the Israelites; namely Circumcision, the Tephillim, and the Sabbath. The first was expresly commanded Gen. 17. the second in Exod. 13. and the third, Exod. 31. Now this last was so particularly commanded to the Israelites, that the Jews think no Gentile has any share therein; that they are not bound to its observation, and therefore cannot be punished for the breach thereof. And upon this account, as we but now intimated, they imploy their servants and slaves who are not of their Religion, in every sort of drudge∣ry upon the Sabbath: that their Doctrine may be illustrated by their Practice. And for a further Argument of the ap∣propriation of the Sabbath to the Jews, they wear thereon no Phylacteries, because with∣out those, the Celebration of the Sabbath is thought sufficient to distinguish them
from all other Religions in the World. The Jewish Masters have raised no few disputes concerning the cause and reason of the Institution of the Sabbath: with the per∣sons to whom it belongs: the time when its observation began: together with its obli∣gation both upon the Originarie and Prose∣lyte Jews. All which are industriously col∣lected and learnedly discoursed by Mr. Selden, lib. 3. cap. 10, 11, 12, 13, &c. de jure Nat. & Gentium juxta Disciplinam Hebraeorum. What we have already set down concern∣ing these Sabbatine Rites, hath respect unto the Jews in Barbary, whom I find to harmo∣nize herein with the Jews of other Countries. Now because the Sabbath and its Rites make up a great part of their present Religion, I thought it not improper to insert the Rules of the Sabbath which are practised by the Eu∣ropean Hebrews, as they are set down by Mr. Buxtorf in the tenth and eleventh Chap∣ters of his Synagogue. I have been enforced to make use of a young Pen in the Translation thereof, and to deliver them to the Press with∣out either Perusal or Transcribing, and there∣fore desire the Reader to correct and pardon what faults may therein occur.
CHAP. XVI. How the Jews Prepare themselves for the Sabbath, and how they be∣gin it. WE read how the Jews prepared them∣selves on the sixth day, according to that of Exodus 16.5, 23. To morrow is the rest of the Holy Sabbath unto the Lord; bake that which ye will bake to day, and seeth that which ye will seeth. Which they interpret of providing all necessary things against the Sab∣bath, that they may the better honour it; but especially all Dyet is to be prepared and dress'd, that they may have the better leasure to hallow the Day. And to this end, whatso∣ever they intend to eat on the Sabbath, they make ready on Friday before night: the wo∣men chiefly are employed in making sweet-meats of divers sorts; and when they make ready their dough, they make it in a great lump undivided; but if the lump be so great, as it is in large families, that it must be di∣vided, the remaining part is kept covered, lest a neighbour seeing it may be ashamed that others have provided for the next Sabbath, and he not for the present.
Every one according to his Ability hal∣lows the Day with three splendid Banquets. They begin the first on Friday-night before the Sabbath: the second on Saturday at noon: the last in the evening of the Sabbath. And they justifie the performance of this Cere∣mony from Moses his writings, where con∣cerning Manna it is thus expressed: Exod. 16.25. Eat that to day, for to day is a Sab∣bath unto the Lord, to day ye shall not find it in the fields. Here the Rabbies say that Moses meant (by repeating the word Day three times) that they should in their Ban∣quets on the Sabbath thrice eat of the Man∣na. But the repetition of those Banquets hath some other meaning, as is evident by their Book of Ceremonies written in the German Dialect. For unless they had been commanded to eat at three set-times, they would have so indulged themselves, that the whole Sabbath would have been a time only to eat and drink: but because all knew when they were present at one Banquet, that they must attend on two more, every one obser∣ved that moderation agreeable to their par∣ticular appetites, and befitting such a So∣lemnity, thinking on the dainties which they should again shortly taste. What is moreover meant by this Banquet, and how much they reckon of it, shall a little after be declared
Moreover, none, whether noble, rich or wise, ought to think it beneath him to do something in the honour of the Day. For though a man have an hundred maids, yea though he have the command of a thousand servants, yet he himself ought with his own hands to do something in the honour of the Sabbath: And so we read in the Talmud that Rabbi Chasdam cut the Pot-herbs, Rabbi Jo∣seph clave the Wood, Rabbi Sira kindled the Fire, Rabbi Nachman swept the House and co∣vered the Table. Their Meat whether roast or boyled is kept hot in a Cauldron, as being then most de∣lightful. The Table is night and day, whilest the Sabbath lasts, kept covered: for which they have a particular reason (as shall be afterwards shewed.) They wash their heads: the men, if it be the Custom, are shaved; the women comb their hair, plaiting it decently, and binding it with Fillets; they either wash their hands and feet, or else bathe themselves in hot Baths. They every Fryday (superstitiously) pare their nails, beginning with the left hand; they first pare the nail of the fourth finger, then of the second, then of the fifth, then of the third, and end with the thumb: so do∣ing, they never cut the nails of two fingers together, but still leave one betwixt. When
they pare the nails of the right hand, they begin with the second finger, and so pass to the fourth, and so on to the rest. 'Tis impious to cast the excrescencies under foot, for so the Devil gets power over them; but he who burieth them is reputed just, and he who burns them is righteous, and obtains a full pardon. And all this is grounded upon the place before mentioned, Exod. 16. And the sixth day they made ready, &c. Furthermore, every one pollisheth and whets his Knife; and that is justified from Job, And thou shalt visit thy Habitation, and know that thy Tabernacle shall be in peace, &c. Hence the Jewish Doctors observe, that if the Knife be dull that it will not cut, there is no peace to the House or Table. They have Garments designed only for the honour of the day, and every one is accord∣ing to his ability decently clad, because Esaiah sayes, Esay 58.13. Thou shalt honour him. And how canst thou do it in thy every∣ays vile habit? as the Talmud has it; and herefore the Jews have costly Garments pecu∣iar for those days. The Rabbies call the Sabbath Malkah, i. e. Queen; and therefore the Royal Apparel must be put on, or otherwise the Queen is disgraced. They cover the Table with clean white innen; provide Cups, Napkins, Seats, and
other things convenient, that the Queen, viz. the Sabbath coming, may find all things de∣cently placed; and he that honours the day with his Body, his Rayment, Meat and Drink, is very commendable. 'Twas antiently a Custom to winde a Horn, or sound a Trumpet six times, that every one might prepare for the Sabbath; but now in well-order'd Assemblies, 'tis proclaimed by a Cryer. That they may cease from work, and provide honourably to entertain the Bride, viz. the Sabbath. And therefore when the Evening draws nigh, they do no business abroad, but early begin the Sabbath, solemnizing some part of the remaining week: they repair to the Synagogue, and hallow the time with Hymns and Prayer. Now when the Sun begins to leave their Hemisphere, the Candles appointed only for the Sabbath are set up: as soon as they are kindled, a Jewish woman lifts up both hands towards them, and sayes; Blessed art thou, O Lord God, King of the World, that thou hast devoted us to thy Service, and hast command∣ed us to light Candles on the Sabbath. And the like Custom is observed by them on Ho∣ly-day-Eves. If it be troublesome weather, so that the skie be cloudy, the hens teach them their duty; for when they see them go∣ing to roost, then the time of providing
Candles is approaching: but if any live with∣out the City, where they want such infor∣mation, they are instructed by Ravens and Daws; for those Birds provide themselves a Lodging in the evening. But the reasons that women light up the Candles, and not men, are by tradition chiefly two: The first is, when Eve after eating the forbidden fruit perceived by certain tokens that she should dye, she perswaded her husband to taste it too, and told him, If I must die thou shalt die with me; but when her perswasions pre∣vailed not over his constancie, she brake off a branch from the tree, and beat him till he did eat; as it is expressed in Genesis 3.2. The Woman which thou gavest to be with me, she gave me of the Tree, (that is, she pluck't off a bough from the Tree, and with it beat me) and I did eat; so it is expounded in the Book Chajim (that is, the way of Life.) And by this means poor Adam was subject to his wife, brake the command of God, and brought death upon himself, and bequeathed it to all his posterity. But before Eve had sinned, the Sun shined bright, as it will in the World to come on the just; then they wanted not the instruction of Hens and Daws to teach them their duty: but as soon as she had transgressed, the Sun was clouded, and the Light of Heaven was soon darkned.
The second reason why the women light the Candles is, because they are alwayes at home, but the men often abroad: Moreover, we read Exod. 27.20. Thou shalt command the Children of Israel, that they bring thee pure oil-olive beaten for the light, to cause the lamp to burn alwayes in the Tabernacle before the testimony. The Rabbies moreover count that if a godly woman attend on the lighting of the Candles, she doth as holy a deed as if she had kindled Candles for the Golden Candlesticks in the Holy Temple at Hierusa∣lem. Moreover, we have it in the Talmud, that a woman guilty of these sins shall die in Childbed: first, if she have not provided a Cake: secondly, if she have not lighted up the Candles: thirdly, if she have not ta∣ken great care of her menstruous cloaths. But if the women diligently observe these Precepts, they sooner conceive, and are easier delivered. Of these Candles they have commonly two, some times more, according to the capacity of the house or dining-bed. And in those Candles all the members of man and womans bodies are secretly contain∣ed: according to Jewish Anatomizing, men have 248 members, women 252, which being added together make 500, which number the Hebrew word Ner (signifying a Candle) doth signifie.
They use Candles of two sorts, because the light of life lost in Eden, may be resto∣red again both to man and woman. The reason that they lift up both hands towards the light is, to guard their faces from the rayes of the Candle, whilest they repeat a short Prayer, which is not to be said till the Candles are lighted up. The matter whereof the wekes of these Candles is made, and what oyl they make the Candles with, may be seen at large in the Tal∣mud, to which I refer the Reader. That they set apart some time of the week-dayes, in which they early begin the Sab∣bath, is in love to the dead, whose Souls, they say, come from Hell or Purgatory to keep the Sabbath: for as soon as they enter the Synagogue they sing a short Hymn, at the hearing of which, the Souls of the deceased hasten from Purgatory, and rush into the water they first meet with, to wash off the stink of the smoak, and cool their flames; and therefore the Rabbies have strictly charg∣ed that no water should be drawn at that time, lest those sad Souls should be disturbed, as we read in Ritualibus eorum. Whilst they are intent on their Devotion, two Angels approach, one good, another evil, and place themselves one against another in the Synagogue: if they hear any one pray∣ing, or repeating his Lecture with a godly
intention, him the two Angels lead forth with their hands on his head, saying, Thy iniquity is taken away, and thy sin is purged. And if at their entrance into the Synagogue they find the Candles well kindled, the Table well furnished, the Bed covered with clean Linnen; then the good Angel saith, I wish I may see all things in this posture the next Sab∣bath, and the bad Angel is forced to say Amen. But if things are not well order'd, then the bad Angel sayes (as the good before) I wish I may find all things thus the next Sab∣bath; to which the good Spirit, though unwil∣ling, sayes Amen. When they come home, they sit down at the chief place of the Table, where the Salt is placed with a Cup of Wine and two Loaves covered with a Napkin: Then the Master of the Family taking the Cup of Wine, con∣secrates the Sabbath, saying; The sixth day the Heavens and the Earth were finished, and all the host of them, and on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made, and rested the seventh day from all his work which he had made: and God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it, because that in it he had rested from all his work which God had created and made. Gen. 2.1. &c. Then adds; Blessed art thou O Lord our God, Creator of the Ʋni∣verse, who hast created the fruit of the Vine. Blessed art thou O Lord God, Creator of the
Ʋniverse, who hast devoted us to thy Prae∣cepts, and hast given us a holy Sabbath, and in thy good pleasure hast left us an heritage as a remembrance of the Creation: it is a token of the Communion of Saints, and a remembrance of the departure out of Egypt; for thou hast chosen and sanctified us among all Nations; thou out of thine abundant goodness hast left to us thy holy Sabbath: Blessed art thou O Lord who hast hallowed the Sabbath. When he hath said this, he tasts the Wine, and deli∣vers it to all present to taste: then he removes the Napkin, and takes the two Loaves, but cuts them not before Prayers, as they do on week-dayes, but forthwith sayes, Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, Lord of the World, who hast caused the Earth to bring forth bread. After this, he cuts and eats a piece of bread, and gives to all that are present, in larger shares than on week-dayes; and all to honour the Sabbath, wherein all niggard∣liness is contemned. Whil'st the Wine is consecrating, every one looks diligently on the Candle, because the wise Rabbies write, that if they travel hard on week-dayes they loose much of the strength of their eyes; and looking on the Candles at the Consecration of the Wine is an effectual remedy. The Bread is covered on the Table, that its vileness in respect of the Wine may not be
seen; for in the Law it is mentioned before the Wine, though consecrated after it, as it is written Deut. 8.8. A Land of Wheat and Barley, and Vines. Where the Wheat and Bar∣ley of which the Bread is made are first named, yet consecrated last on the Sabbath; and if it were not covered, it would be much despised. The Rabbies say, that it is covered in remem∣brance of the Manna. For in the Wilder∣ness the Dew fell, then the Manna, after that the Dew; so that the Manna lay betwixt the Dew, after the same manner as the Bread is laid on a Table-cloth, and covered with a Napkin: and for this reason, the holy women bake a sort of Wafers which they eat instead of Manna. Their Flesh-pyes are made like ours; the Meat is laid on a thin cake, and co∣vered with another of the same sort, so that it lyes as the Manna did betwixt the Dew. And they take two loaves, because on Fridays in the Wilderness they gathered a double quantity of Manna, as it is written, Exod. 16.22. But on the sixth day they gathered twice as much Bread. What we shall chiefly Note, is, that on the Sabbath they much indulge their Genius, as is observable in the Law, Esay 58.13. where the Sabbath is called a delight; that is, that we may enjoy all delights that day; and so ought all our Feasts to be according to that: Thou shalt rejoyce in thy Feasts,
that all may be done to the honour of God; wherefore thou may'st eat and drink, and cloath thee decently, that so thou may'st truly honour the Sabbath; but don't be excessive in thy charge. All this is contained in Libello Timoris, where the Reader may see with what Charms they excite their Devotion, by repeating such short Sentences as these following. Prepare to keep the Sabbath, and Rest from all thy work. If all things necessary are provided, thou art praise-worthy. Yea if thou have a great retinue of Servants and Maids. The Day requireth strict observance. Be content, and thou hast plenty enough. Wear good Habit, for the Sabbath is called a Bride. Provide the choicest diet for the Day. And observe all Ceremonies carefully. Come with a good Appetite. Prepare good Wine, Flesh and Fish. Cover the Bed decently. Let the Table be furnished splendidly. Anoint thy Head, but be not proud. Sharpen thy Knife, and cut thy Meat mo∣destly. Cast the parings of thy Nails into the fire. Do not grudge Wine at the Consecration.
Wash thy hands and feet, for this is no trivial Injunction. Have a good courage. Wash all thy Cups. Be not mindful of any injuries. Rejoyce with thy Wife and Children. Banquet thrice in the day. Speak nothing but what may cause mirth. Besides these, they have a Book of all the Blessings for the Feasts of the whole year; amongst other these are observable. Wear such Habit as may donote mirth. Consecrate the Candle, that it may burn well. Finish all thy work on Friday, and rest. Eat all dainties, Fish, Capons and Quails. Walk softly, for the Law commands meek∣ness, and morning-rest. Silk Garments are of much account, and they who wear them also. The Sabbath is holy, and he who rightly ob∣serves it. Let no care trouble you, though Spiders be in your houses. Be merry and jolly, though at other mens charge. Get the best Wine, Fish and Flesh, and Ban∣quet thrice that day. If thou observe all this, thy reward is great.
And, Ye women see that the Candles be lighted, and be attentive. Your convenience will be much when you are with Child. And if you provide plenty of Wafers, you shall easier conceive, and bring forth with joy. But lest the curious Reader may think these to be meer fictions, I shall instance some pleasant passages out of the Talmud relating to the same purpose. Where we read that one Rabbi Chaja for∣tuned to lodge one Sabbath with a Butcher, and there was set before him a Golden Table, burthen enough for sixteen men, on which there hung sixteen silver Chains, and on it many vessels of the like Metal were set, as Spoons, Plates, and Cups furnished with plen∣ty of dainties. When all things were set in order, he praised God, thus: The Earth is the Lords, and the fulness thereof: and when the Banquet was ended, he gave thanks af∣ter this manner: The Heavens are the Lords, but the Earth hath he given to the sons of men. And then the Rabbi began to enquire of the Butcher how he had gotten such riches, and what good works he had done? the Butcher replyed, Hitherto have I been a Butcher, and when ever I lighted on a Beast fatter than usu∣al, I reserved it for the Sabbath, that I might
do as I am commanded, and therefore God has given me much riches, for the honour I do to his day. And when the Rabbi heard this, he gave God thanks that he had bestowed on him such abundance. And here we leave the Butcher. Moreover, we read in the same Page of a man truly Charitable, named Joseph; if any thing extraordinary came to the Market, especially Fish, he spared no charge to buy it; and he had a rich neighbour, who would often mock him, asking him what good this strict observing Sabbath-duties did him? thou gettest nought by it, saith he; I am much richer than thou, yet do not observe it so punctually: but Joseph took of his words but little notice, and answered, That God was able to recompence him. And at the same time, there came Astrologers to the rich man, saying: What good hast thou of thy riches? thou darest not buy a good Fish with it: we finde that the Fates have given all thy store to Jo∣seph the Sabbath-observer: he spares no charge to honour the day. The rich man took some notice of what they said, and went and sold all his possessions, and with it bought Jewels, and hung them in his hat, and resolved to travel, to secure his riches from Joseph; and taking ship, he was so toss'd with a Tempest, that he lost his Hat and Jewels in the Sea; there came a great Fish and swallowed them
up: and a little after, the same Fish was brought into the Market to be sold; many cheapened it, but thought it too dear: at length came this Joseph, and soon bought it; and dressing it, found the Hat and Jewels which the rich Traveller had lost: So the Astrologers Pre∣dictions were verified, and Joseph grew Rich on a sudden. Then there came a Wise Old man to Joseph, and said, He who bestows much on the Sabbath, him the day recompenseth; but he that of a little bestows a little, to him God gives fourfold. We read of another Passage in the Talmud concerning Feasts; how a certain Rabbi every Friday sent his Servants into the Market to buy off all the Herbs which the Sellers could not vent, and then he cast them into the River: and the Rabbies inquiring the cause why he had not distributed them to the poor Israel∣ites, the Answer was this: That if he had given them to the Poor, then they in expectati∣on of having them given still, would not have provided for the Sabbath; and therefore if it should happen that the Sellers had sold all, and the Poor not provided for themselves, then the Sabbath would not have had its due honour. But why then did he not cause them to be given to the Cattel? it had been better to do so, than to cast them carelesly away. The Answer was, That he would not give those things to Cattel which men might eat, and from
which they might have profit; for they might perchance take them out of the water. But why did he command them to be bought? the Reason is, That those who sold such Commodi∣ties might willinglier come to the Market: for suppose them to come often and sell nought, they would soon be weary, and not frequent the Market; and then the Poor would have had no∣thing to eat on the Sabbath, and thereby would have deprived it of its due honour. Moreover, we read in a Treatise of the Sab∣bath, that if any one on the Sabbath let loose the Reins to pleasure, and so pass the day, that God giveth him an Heritage for ever, as it is written: When thou shalt call the Sabbath a Delight, then shalt thou delight thy self in the Lord: and I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the Earth, and feed thee with the Heritage of thy Father Jacob: of which Heritage it is largely spoken; For thou shalt be spread abroad to the East, and to the West, and to the North, and to the South▪ Rabbi Mack∣man saith, He that feeds high on the Sabbath, and is joyful, shall be free from the Servitude of Kings, as it is, I will lift thee above the high places of the Earth, and thy Enemies shall be found Lyars. Another Rabbi saith, That he who merrily passeth the Sabbath, hath whatsoever he will ask of God, as 'tis written; Delight thou in the Lord, and he will give thee thy hearts de∣sire.
Seeing therefore that the Jews have not conquered their Enemies, nor obtained their desire, that they have not yet subdued the Christians, nor are Lords of the whole Earth according to their prayers on the Sabbath and Feast-days, may be imputed to their want of a right Hallowing the Sabbath, or at least, that they have not thereon been sufficiently mer∣ry. When they have thus joyfully finished the first Banquet, they again go to Prayers; but the Table is kept covered, and the Candles burn till the evening of the Sabbath. And they dispute much what is to be done with those Candles, whether it be lawful to catch Fleas or Lice with them; but reading by them is forbidden, lest when the light is dim he that reads should snuff the Candle and so violate the Sabbath. And because the Sabbath is cal∣led a Delight, they often marrie on it, and en∣joy the society of their Wives; they say those who are conceived on the Sabbath live to a good age, if their Parents don't respect the pleasure as the honour of the day. Finally, when a Jew travelleth on Friday, and hath a greater Journey than the Sabbath alloweth of, he ought to take up his Lodgings in the Fields or Woods at the approaching of the Sabbath, and there to continue till it be ended, exposing himself to the danger of Thieves, and want of sustenance. There is
a memorable Story in their Histories to this purpose. Three Jews on a time took a Journey on Friday when the Evening drew nigh, and the Sabbath approached; two of them spake thus to each other: What shall we do? we are in certain danger, the way is beset with Thieves▪ and the wood barbours wild Beasts; we had therefore better keep on our Journy and save our lives, than with certain danger both of bo∣dy and life hallow the Sabbath. But the third repli'd; Truly we ought not to stir hence but here to keep the Sabbath; God who hath commanded us so to do, is able to preserve  safe. The other two persisted, and broke the Sabbath, but the third pitched his Tent and there abode; he covered the Ground (in∣stead of a Table) with a Cloth, and on it laid the Provision he had with him, and so betook himself to Prayers; that being ended, he sat down to eat of the first Banquet of the Sab∣bath: the Attendance he had was a terrible Bear almost pin'd with hunger: the good Jew was almost afraid, and gave the Guest a piec of Bread, and had faith that God would pre¦serve him; the Bear took the Bread, and at¦tended on him. The Jew after supper betook himself again to prayer, and so to sleep, and the Bear lay down by him; in the morn h was very glad that the hungrie Bear was s kinde as to spare his flesh, and for it gave God
hanks, and so provided for his Morning-pray∣ers: he then dined, and after sup't, and did all his duty. When the Sabbath was ended he went on his Journey, the Bear still following him. The same night it fortuned that his Companions fell among Thieves, who strip∣ped them of all they had. At length this de∣vout Jew and the Bear overtook them; and though the Beast was so kinde to him, it was not for want of natural fietceness, for he soon tore the other two in pieces. Then the Godly Jew began to be afraid; but whilst he mused with himself, the Thieves beset him, and asked who he was, whence he came, and whither he was going? he told them he was a Jew, and that he came from the Kings Palace; they asked whence he had that Bear; he answered, The King gave it as a Companion. One of the Thieves told the other, that surely this Person was beloved of the King, that he had given him such a guard. The other said, Let us give him all our money, and follow him through this Wood, that the Bear hurt us not. So they gave him all their money to conceal them; and going far with him, at length de∣parted, the Bear also returned to the Wood. And from this storie the Jews conclude that they ought to observe the Sabbath in whatso∣ever place they are, and commit themselves wholly to the protection of God Almighty.
CHAP. XVII. How the Jews hallow the Sabbath, and how they end it. IN the morning they rise not up so early as on other days; but for the greater pleasure in honouring the day, they sleep a good part of the morning. And for this custom the Rabbies have consulted the Writings of Moses, and finde in Numb. 28. where it is spoken of daily Offerings, that it is expressed by the word Babboker mane, that is, the morning: but when it is spoken of the Offering of the Seventh day, it is expressed by the words Die Sabbathi (that is) the Sabbath day; intending this meaning, that the daily Offerings were to be performed Antelucano tempore, that is, at break of day; and instead of this on the Sab∣bath they had Morning-prayers, and referred their Offering till later in the morn: therefore the Jews sleep longer than on other daies, to prepare them for Prayers. When they repair to the Synagogue, they pray as on other, but longer, and sing more Hymns to honour the day; they put not on their Phylacteries as on other daies, because they think the Sabbath it self is a sufficient signe of the Jewish Faith, and ordained only
for them to hallow; and have therefore no need of Circumcision and Phylacteries, though both are signes by which Jews are distinguish∣ed and known. They bring the Book of the Law out of the Ark after the same manner as is declared in the ninth Chapter. They read a Section out of the Law, and divide each Section into se∣ven Lessons, to be read by seven choice men. After the reading of the Law, they read Lessons out of the Prophets, which are agree∣able to the Writings of Moses; of which cu∣stom this is the Original: When in old time they were forbidden to read Moses, they chose a Section out of the Prophets, which agreed with the Writings of Moses: of this there is men∣tion in the Acts of the Apostles, Act. 13.27. They which dwell at Jerusalem, and their Rulers knew him not, nor the Voices of the Pro∣phets which are read every Sabbath day. And again, Act. 15.21. Moses of old time hath in every City them that Preach him, being read in the Synagogue every Sabbath. But though they are not forbidden the reading of Moses, yet they keep the Old custom, and read the Pro∣phets after Moses. They pray also for the Souls of the dead who have not kept the Sabbath aright: For the Rabbies suppose that they, both before and after the Sabbath, are tortured in Hell-fire; and therefore they pray for them on the Sabbath,
that thereon they may have rest. They con∣tinue in prayer not after the sixth hour of the day, being forbidden to fast or pray longer, as they plead, from the place so often recited, Thou shalt call the Sabbath a Delight. Here they say that the word signifying in Hebrew Delight, is written without the Letter ד, which signifies six; by which the Prophet meant im∣plicitly that they should pray but till the sixth hour. When Morning-prayer is ended, they pro∣vide for the second Banquet; and to honour the day, they generally indulge their Appetites: but if it happen that any one have a strange Dream, as if he should see the Book of the Law or his house burn, or his teeth strook out, or suchlike portending evil, he has liber∣ty to abstain from meat till the evening. He who in a dream is offended with meat, and de∣lights in fasting, may do as he himself pleaseth; and he that is so grieved that he cannot refrain from tears, he may weep, for by it grief is eased, and such pleasant weeping honours the day; but he that fasts on purpose on the Sabbath, is bound to fast the next day after, that there∣by he may do Penance for detracting from the honour of the day. After Dinner the Rabbies have thought fit to studie or read in Sacred Writ: for one of the chief Rabbies relates, that the Sabbath made complaint that God had given to every thing
a companion and equal, except to it; and God answered, Israel shall be thy companion; for on the Sabbath they shall learn the Law, where∣as others are idle. The Law also came and complained, saying, When Isarel returns into his own Land, one possesseth his Vine, another his Field: Who then shall regard me? To which God said, Israel shall respect thee, for on the Sabbath they shall not labour. And consider∣ing this, they have thought it fit to spend some time after dinner in studying the word of God, that the Sabbath or the Law might have no more reason of complaint. At the time of Evening Sacrifice they re∣pair again to the Synagogue, and say their E∣vening-prayers, and then eat the third and last time on the Sabbath: when it begins to de∣part, they take leave of it with a Blessing. They look upon the observance of these three Banquets to be of much concern; for they think that he who thus observes the Sab∣bath shall escape Hell, and be preserved from the dreadful War of Gog and Magog, and also be free from the perplexities that shall attend the coming of the Messia: and therefore one of the Rabbies pray'd that his Portion might be with those who celebrate the Sabbath with three Banquets. At Evening they are again prohibited to draw water out of the River or Well, by rea∣son of the Souls of the wicked deceased, which
again refresh themselves as they are returning to Hell. At the very departure of the Sabbath, af∣ter supper, one very nimbly draws the Cloth from off the Table; for they say that he who doth it, shall in a short time be set at libertie. Aere Alieno. About the Evening they again go to pray∣ers, in which they make mention of the Pro∣phet Elias; for they say that his coming was promised in the evening of the Sabbath or some Feast-day: and when the Sabbath is gone, they ask him if he will come the next Sabbath and acquaint them with the coming of the Messia. Some of them also write, that the Prophet sate under the Tree of Life in Para∣dise, and registred the good Works the Jews did on the Sabbath. They continue these Prayers till late in the night, out of love to the Souls of the wicked, that they may have the more respit from tor∣ments: for as it is in the Evening on Friday proclaimed in Hell, by Dumah an Angel that is Ruler among the Spirits, that the wicked may go to their rest as the Jews do and all Is∣rael on the Sabbath: So when the Prayers are ended, the Spirit cries again, Return ye wicked into Hell, for the Jews have done Pray∣ers. As soon as the Hymn Benedicite is ended, the women go with haste to the wells and draw
water: for they write that the well Mara whereof they drink in the Desart, runs into the Sea of Tyberias, and thence in the end of the Sabbath did mixt it self with the water of all their wells; and if a woman should chance to draw in that instant, she would have an Antidote for all Diseases. A certain woman gave testimony to this most precious Panacea, who immediately af∣ter prayers going to draw water, came in that instant in which the Well had mixt it self with hers; but being somewhat slow in drawing, her Husband was verie angrie: The wo∣man for fear let the Pitcher fall out of her hands, and it happened that some drops fell upon her Husband, and those parts which the water touched were immediately healed. See the effect of this his anger! for he was only healed in part, whereas if he had drank, he had been totally cured, and clean as a new∣born Child. Hence is that notable Saying of the Rabbies; Iracundus nihil aliud quam i∣ram suam reportabit. Lastly, they separate the Sabbath from the Week following, and give God thanks that he hath enabled them so to hallow the Sabbath. They do it after this manner. A great Taper like a Torch is kindled, which they call the Candle of Separation; they have also a little Box full of sweet Spices provi∣ded: Then the Master of the Family takes
the cup of Wine in his right hand, and sings with a loud voice, Behold, God is my Salvati∣on, I will trust and not be afraid: I will re∣ceive the cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord, &c. Which done, he con∣secrates the Wine, and (spilling a little on the ground) saith, Blessed art thou O Lord who hast created the Fruit of the Vine. Then he smells to the sweet Spice, and delivers it to all present to smell to: afterwards he takes the Cup in his right hand, and going to the great Taper, looks diligently on the nails of his left hand, bowing his fingers inwards towards the palm of his hand, that they may cause a sha∣dow; after that he opens them again, and looks on the outside so diligently, that he may discern the nails to be whiter than the flesh, and saith, Blessed art thou O Lord who hast or∣dained a clear light: then taking the Cup in his left hand, he vieweth the nails of his right hand; which done, he removeth the Cup into his right hand, and saith, Blessed art thou who hast made difference betwixt things holy and prophane; betwixt Israel and other Nations; betwixt the seventh day and the other six days of the week: and while he saith this, he spills a little of the Wine on the ground, and then drinks, and giveth to all present to drink. And so the Sabbath is ended, and the Week be∣gun. They prove the difference between the Sab∣bath
and the Week-daies by these words: And that ye may put difference between things holy and unholy; and, God divided the light from the darkness. They smell to the sweet Spice to avoid do∣tage, because they are deprived of a Soul at the end of the Sabbath, which Soul they a∣gain receive at the beginning of it, and enjoy more than on week-daies. Antonius Marga∣rita in his Book de side Judaica has something to this purpose. The Jews write in the Tal∣mud, that every man hath three Souls; and prove it from Esay 42.5. Thus saith the Lord God, he that created the heavens, and stretched them out; he that spread forth the earth, and that which cometh out of it; he that giveth breath to the people upon it, and spirit to them that walk therein. From this Text they attribute to man two Souls, which with the true Natural Soul always inherent make three: moreover they say, that when a man sleeps, these two adventitious Souls steal from him; one ascends to Heaven, and there hears all fu∣ture Events; the other roves about the Earth, and there beholds nought but folly and vanity; and this they call the Irrational or Brutish Soul: but that Soul wherewith every man is first in∣spired, hath its immoveable residence in the heart, and sees all that those two Souls that have forsaken the body, do or see. Hence all dreams arise, and therefore not always to be
lightly esteemed. But on the Sabbath a fourth Soul cometh as a fresh supply, which elevates their minds, that so they may the better ho∣nour the Sabbath; and when the Sabbath is ended, this Soul leaveth them again: Hence it is that they are dull, and smell to the sweet Spices to refresh their Spirits. (So much of Margarita; but whence he collected this, cannot as yet be understood by the Jews wri∣tings.) Some more wise than the rest smell to the sweet Spices, because on the Sabbath the fire of Hell doth not stink; but as soon as the Sab∣bath is ended, and the Gates of Hell opened, that the Souls of the wicked may again enter in, it sends forth an ill sent; and these Spices are preservatives against it (as they say.) They spill a little of the Wine in the con∣secration, as a signe of plenty and abundance in their houses; for they say where the Wine is not spilt, there is no blessing: some think it is done to refresh Core and his company whom the Earth swallowed up; as if they were yet alive, and could perceive refreshment from this waste. They take strict notice of their nails, be∣cause of their soon growing; for though they pare them every Friday, they grow up again by the next. Some say it is by reason of the great difference betwixt the nails and the flesh, which made Adam so much to wonder when
he saw the world dark, and cried out, Ah me miserable creature, for my fault was the world darkned: and hereupon God was so merciful to him, that he gave him discretion to knock two Flints together, from which there came fire, with which he lighted a Candle; and when he saw himself all naked save only the tops of his fingers, he burst out into admiration, and praised God. To prove their Opinion of the stench of Hell, they produce this story out of the Tal∣mud: One Turnus Ruphus a wicked fellow, asked one of the Rabbies what the Sabbath was better than other week-daies? whom the Rabbi asked again, Why art thou more honour∣able than other men? he answered, Because it was the good pleasure of his Lord and King: So, saith the Rabbi, it was the good pleasure of the Lord of Hosts, to command us to prefer the Sabbath before other days. But saith Turnus, How knowest thou that the seventh day is your true Sabbath? it may be some other day: per∣haps the first, second, third, &c. The Rabbi told him that this was first revealed to them by a certain River which flows so strong six days that it hurls with it great stones, and is not navigable all the week; but on the Sabbath it moveth not at all. A second Proof of it, saith the Rabbi, is from thy own Fathers Sepulchre, which all the week is infected with a loathsome vapor caused by the stench of Hell-fire, in which
he is tormented; but on the seventh day it hath no ill smell, because on the Sabbath thy Father cometh from Hell, and the evil Spirits have no power over him, and therefore also Hell-fire has no ill smell on the Sabbath. When Tur∣nus heard this, Perhaps (saith he) his punish∣ment is ended. The Rabbi bid him go to the Sepulchre after the Sabbath, and he should smell a stench. When Turnus had made trial and found it so, he by the help of Magick raised his Father's Ghost, and spake thus to him: Whilst thou livedst thou did'st not regard the Sabbath, but now thou art dead thou hal∣lowest it: How long hast thou been a Jew? His Father answered, Dear Son, he who living observeth not the Sabbath willingly, in Hell shall be forced to do it. His Son proceeds, What is your imployment in Hell on week days? His Father answered, We are tortured in the fire, but on the Sabbath we enjoy our ease; for Fri∣day in the evening, which is the preparation for the Sabbath, Proclamation is made in Hell, 'Tis a time of rest, therefore rest ye wicked; so are we eased, and do hallow the Sabbath; but at the end of the Sabbath, when the Jews have ended their customary Prayers, an evil Spirit called Dumah, who is our Ruler, calleth us back again to Hell, because the people of Israel have ended the Sabbath, where we renew our tor∣ments, and endure them till the next Sabbath. And this is our Employment.
He who desireth to know more of this, let him consult Rabbi Bochai in his Expositi∣on of the eighteenth Chapter of Exodus, where he writes much concerning the Sabbath. And because God hath commanded in the Law, that not only Man but Beast also should rest on the Sabbath; they make great inqui∣ry how far a Horse or an Ass may travel on the Sabbath, and whether it may carry any thing on it? And here they say, that no beast ought to carry any thing on the Sabbath, but that with which it is led, as a Horse or Ass may car∣ry a Bridle or Halter; and these too must be put on on Friday before the Sabbath begins. They ought not to let a Horse go abroad with a Saddle on, much less must one ride upon it. If any one come home on the Sabbath with a Saddle on, they may loose the Girts, but not take off the Saddle; if the Horse shake it off, then the Jew is free. The Cock is not to be let loose with a piece of cloth tied to his leg or wing, but is to be loosed on Friday, that it may rest on the Sab∣bath. If a Beast fall into a Pit on the Sabbath, and cannot get forth of it self, it is to be fed in the place till the Sabbath is ended, and then to be holpen out. If the place be so deep that the beast is in danger of being drowned, then they are to put straw (and such-like stuff) under it, to preserve it; and if it get out of
it self, then the Jew is free. But this seems to contradict that answer Christ made to the Jews, when they blamed him for healing on the Sabbath-day, Mat. 12.11. Which of you (saith he) having an Ox or an Ass fallen into a pit, will not straightway help him out on the Sabbath-day? But this is the injunction of the Tal∣mud. On the Sabbath, a Christian may milk the Jews Cows or Goats; but the Jews must not eat the milk, unless they buy it of the Chri∣stians, as they usually do. The men or wo∣men must not run on the Sabbath, unless they be commanded of God; neither must they step more than the length of a Cubit at once, lest they hurt the eye-sight. No man ought to carry any sort of weapon, neither must a Taylor carry needles on his sleeve. If any one be lame or sick, so that he can∣not walk without a staff, he may use it; but he who is blinde may not. They must not use Stilts to help them over the water; for though they seem to carry a man, yet are they born of him; and any burthen is forbidden on the Sabbath. They must carry no moneys with them on the Sabbath. They may shake off the dirt from their shoos against a wall, but not on the ground, lest they may seem to fill the ditch. If any one have dirt on his hands, he may wipe them on his horse-mane; but washing is forbidden. They are forbidden
to catch Flies or Gnats which stick on their Garments, or creep on the ground; but if they offend them, they may catch them, not hurting them, and throw them away. A Louse may be killed; but one of the Rabbies saith, He who kills a Louse on the Sabbath, breaks it as much as he who kills a Camel: and this rai∣seth a dispute, what was to be done with such offensive creatures; and it was agreed, that those creatures which were generated by na∣tural coition, should not be hurt; (and there∣fore Flies were free) but those which were bred of corrupt, putrified matter, were to be kil∣led (and therefore Lice.) They are forbidden to climb trees, lest they should break the boughs. He who feeds his Hen and Chickens in any open place where the rain may fall, with any Corn, must not give them more than they can eat, lest when it rains it should grow, and so he might be said to sow on the Sabbath; which is a sin unpardo∣nable. They must not knock at the dore with the iron hammer, lest they may seem to drive a nail; and therefore Chassan, the Sex∣ton, doth knock with his fist. They may not knock with the fingers on the table, nor write on sand or ashes, but they may in the Air. No Picture, either in paper or wax, is to be de∣faced. The sum of all that they are forbidden, is contained in 39 Articles, to which all lesser matters are reducible.
The First Article concerns Plowing; under which, is comprehended dressing of Gardens, removing Herbs, setting Trees, planting Vines, digging, pruning, &c. whereby the growth of any thing may be improved: and because it is not lawful to fill Ditches, the Rabbies have thought fit that the Chambers should be sprink∣led with water, that the dust might not arise; but sweeping is forbidden, lest thereby any little chink in the Chamber should be filled: and for this reason, they would not throw nut∣shels towards the Ditch, lest peradventure they might fall into it. The Second Article concerns Reaping; un∣der which, is contained gathering any kinde of Fruit, which they are forbidden; as also to take honey from the Bees, and such-like. They may on the Sabbath eat any Fruit as it hangs on the stalk, but not break the stalk: they may not go over a Corn-field newly sown, lest the Corn should stick to their shoos, which is, as if they had purposed to take it. And it seems that the Jews were offended with our Saviour, for the breach of this Article, when his Disciples pluckt off the ears of Corn on the Sabbath, Mat. 12. The Third Article respects Thrashing; to which pertaineth beating of Hemp or Flax, to press any moist Fruits, as Grapes, and such-like. Milking is also contained under this Ar∣ticle; but the Rabbies don't as yet agree a∣bout it.
You may judge of the other Articles ac∣cordingly: The difference betwixt the gene∣ral ones, and those contained under them, is not great. He who beareth false witness a∣gainst another, is to be stoned; and he who willingly sins, him God shall judge, and root out of the Land of the Living. These are explained in the Talmud, in Tractatu de Sab∣batho, Chapter 7. with many more, but they are too tedious to be named. And though the Jews think that they right∣ly observe the Sabbath, yet they may be con∣vinced of the contrary from their own Con∣science: For we read in the Talmud, that he who observeth all the Ceremonies of the Sab∣bath to do them, shall have free pardon of all sins; yea though he be an Idolater, as Enoch, in whose time they say this sin had its Origi∣nal. According to Gen. 4.26. Then began men to call upon the Name of the Lord: And Esay the 56.2. Blessed is the man that keepeth the Sabbath from polluting it. Rabbi Juda said, If the Israelites had kept the first Sab∣bath aright, immediately after the Law was given, no Nation would ever have overcome them. And another Rabbi said, If they had kept the two first Sabbaths aright, they had soon been set at liberty; according to Esay 56.4. They that keep my Sabbaths aright, them will I bring back into my holy Mountain, (that is, Jerusalem.) But seeing they are not, neither
are like to be set at liberty, it must needs be because they have not kept the Sabbath aright, as they confessed, while the Temple stood at Jerusalem. As the Talmud expresly speaketh; For no other reason was the Temple at Jerusa∣lem destroyed, but because the Jews observed not the Sabbath aright. As it is written, Ezek. 22.27. They have hid their eyes from my Sab∣bath, and I am polluted among them. The Jews celebrate the Sabbath with Wine, Fish, and Flesh, and all kinde of Delights: they abstain from work, and are not at any time de∣sirous to do any thing, but only command the poor Christians; and therefore boast, that they are Lords over them. I shall conclude this Chapt. with the com∣plaint which God made to Israel by the Pro∣phet Esay, Esay 1.13. Incense is an abomi∣nation unto me: the new Moons and Sabbaths, the calling of Assemblies, I cannot away with: it is iniquity, even the solemn meetings. Your new Moons, and your appointed Seasons my Soul hateth, they are a trouble unto me, I am weary to bear them.
CHAP. XVIII. Of the Jews Feasts: The manner of their Celebration. IN the Order of Prayers according to the Hebrew Use, the Offices for the Festivals immediately follow those of the Sabbath, though the Service-book doth not yield Offi∣ces for every Feast which are in present ob∣servation with them. For besides a peculiar Order for the Purim, there is but one general Office for all the rest. Now besides what occurs in Holy Writ concerning the institution and reason of the Jewish Festivals, there are some modern Cu∣stoms chiefly therein to be considered, which we shall refer to the several Feasts, and only give them a naked enumeration. The chief both of the Antient and Mo∣dern Jewish Festivals, are the Passover, the Feast of Weeks or Pentecost, and the Feast of Tabernacles. The Passover is the first both in time and dignity, and the Divine Scriptures exhibit enough in testimony both of its Insti∣tution and Designe: So that we shall only suc∣cinctly set down the usual Rites of its present observation. And in the first place, the Jews esteem the
Passover of so great moment, that their prepa∣ration for its solemnity is much more great, than to all the other Festivals. For the Wealthier and Devouter sort spend above a Lunar Month in preparing for its coming. But their preparations consist not in any Spiritual exercise, but in a carnal providing for the bo∣dy. Where they use no small curiosity and diligence in getting the finest Wheat for the unleavened bread, which by Divine appoint∣ment is thereon to be eaten. And what is very commendable, the Richer are careful to provide the Poorer with fine Wheat for the same purpose gratis, out of their own Store. For they account it a great Scandal to their Religion, that any Jew should be unprovided of things requisite to so sacred a celebration. The two or three daies before the Passover, are spent in cleansing their houses, and washing their Furniture of brass, pewter, and iron. On the Eve of the Feast, the First-born of the Fa∣mily always fasts: and the rest of the houshold are imployed in searching every corner, that not a crum of leaven'd bread may remain till the Passover. And because they pray that not the least mite may escape their discovery, it is ordinary with them to cast some pieces of hard crusts into the secret corners, that find∣ing them, they may not be said to have pray'd in vain. Whatsoever crums they meet with, they are carefully laid up till the next morn∣ing,
when they are burn'd; and all this to testifie their especial diligence to observe the Law concerning the Passover. The Sabbath immediately antecedent to this Festival, is for its singular and peculiar Sanctity, stiled the Great Sabbath: which name was occasioned by a Miracle that thereon happned: of which the Rabbies give this short Legend. Our Ancestors, when they lived in Egypt, taking their Paschal Lambs, according to Gods appointment, upon the tenth day of the month, and tying them to their bed-posts, that  might have them ready to kill upon the fourteenth day of the month; (which in∣terim of time (from the tenth to the four∣teenth day) they were to spend in meditation of their deliverance, and in searching if the Lamb was without blemish.) The Egyptians demanding a reason of their so doing, the He∣brews told them, that their Lambs were kept to be killed at their Passover. The Egyptians murmured greatly thereat, and grew very much incensed against the Hebrews for killing the Lamb, because it so much resembled one of their Gods. For they had placed Aries, the Ram, one of the Celestial signes, in the number of their Deities. Whereupon the Egyptians began to complot the Hebrews Ruine, but were sud∣denly struck with so much horrour, that they durst not open their lips, nor move a finger, a∣gainst
them: And because this happened the next Sabbath before the Passover, it was there∣fore called the Great Sabbath: On which they make long discourses, relating to the Ordi∣nance and Use of the Passover. While they are searching and cleansing their houses, they are either to be silent, or to speak of nothing but finding out and burning the leavened bread. And at the lighting of the Candle wherewith the Crums are sought for, the Father of the Family saith this Bene∣diction: Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, the Lord of the whole earth, who hast Sanctified with thy Precepts, and commanded us to cast out the Leaven. And all his Domesticks distinctly answer, Amen. Some Jews will not suffer the women to cleanse the house, because they say, Talka∣tiveness is so natural to that Sex, that they can∣not perform that Office with so great silence as is required. The Father of the Family has alwaies the inspection of purging the house, who lest any leaven'd bread might be left un∣discern'd, useth this Execration: Let all the leaven which I have not found and taken a∣way, vanish into the dust of the Earth. While some of the Family are making clean the house, others grinde the Wheat for the Azima, or unleavened Cakes. Where their first care is to see the Mill throughly cleansed
from all Grain that was designed for leavened bread. And in Barbary this task is not long or difficult, because the Jews use small hand∣mills, like the Moors. Next, the Master of the house, betwixt Sun-set and Star-light, draws water and puts it in such consecrate Ves∣sels as are purposely set apart for their Festivals. And when all things are in readiness, they fall to making of the Pascal Cakes: Which are of a round figure, and without any other ingre∣dient, than pure water and fine flour; which must have been two or three daies ground be∣fore they use it. And this they do, lest the heat it takes in grinding, should make it smell, and grow leavenish. If in kneading or moul∣ding the Cakes, any part of the dough happen to fall to the earth, they must not take it up, but leave it to be eaten by any creature that has a minde thereunto. For they are of opi∣nion, that the least crum falling to the ground, being taken and put to the rest, will sower the whole lump. The woman that makes the Cakes, bakes first one alone, over which she saith, Blessed art thou our God, who hast commanded us to se∣parate the leavened Cake. And having said these words, she instantly burns it to ashes, and then begins to bake the rest. Upon the Eve of the Passover, at the time of the Mincha, they go to the Synagogue, where they celebrate the Office of the Sab∣bath-Arvit.
The Prayers for the Passover, are for the most part the same with those of the Sabbath; save that they intermingle there∣with some of the Roshodes. During the time that the men stay at the Synagogue, the wo∣men spread the Tables, and adorn their Cub∣bords, not for Ostentation, but honour of the Festival. Against they return from Publick Oraisons, there is a Cushion, the best they can provide, laid for the Head of the House, at the upper end of the Room where they are to dine: For their posture of eating, is exactly Eastern, or lying upon the ground. But this is no part of their Religion, but a conformity to the mode of their Residence. Upon the day of the Passover, they compose themselves to a stately Gesture of body, and an imperi∣ous Carriage, only to signifie thereby their deliverance from Egyptian Bondage. And the women which at other times sit hanging their heads, at this Feast look loftily, expressing thereby Alacrity and Triumph. In eating the Paschal Lamb, the Jews of all Countries use the same Ritual. Four Dishes make up their Bill of Fare; which are these: The first Dish contains three Paschal Cakes; the uppermost whereof represents the High-Priest; the middle, the Levite; & the lowermost, the Common Hebrews. The second Dish, is a Leg of Lamb or Kid rosted, together with an Hen-egg: The mystery of which last mor∣sel,
I could never meet with any Jew was able to reveal. The third Dish, is a deal of thick Stuff much like the Moors Cuscussow; but of much better ingredients: For the Moors make theirs of meer water and flour, or crum'd bread; but the Jews put several spices in theirs: and the better to make it represent the colour of the bricks they made in Egypt, they tincture it with Saffron. The fourth Dish, is a green Salad attended with Vinegre, in which they dipping the Salad, call to minde the sower herbs wherewith their Fathers were commanded to eat the Passover. At this Feast every Jew is to drink Wine, but none to exceed four glasses, and none to refuse so many. Before they lie down to eat, the Chief of the Family consecrates the Viands. And when the Cakes are broken, and every one hath eaten a piece, and drank a cup of Wine, the whole Family sing an Hymn: In which they remember the bread of Sorrow eaten by their Fathers in Egypt; concluding with their hopes of a speedie Restauration unto Ca∣naan. At the breaking of the second Cake, the Master of the house puts a piece thereof in his Napkin, in memory of their Ancestors wrapping up their Dough in haste before it was leaven'd, when they posted out of Egypt. And then they drink a second glass of Wine, and sing an Hymn; wherein they comme∣morate
their deliverance. And having past the afternoon and part of the night in libe∣ral refreshment; they eat the third Cake, and drink a glass of Wine: Then the Father of the Family saith Grace, and with the fourth cup of Wine in his hand, repeats the 6 verse of the 79 Psalm, and the last verse of Lamentations the 3. and utters most direful Execrations a∣gainst all that are not of their Religion. And immediately upon this, they go to sleep. On the night of the Passover they think them∣selves so safe from danger, that they let the doors stand open, which at other times are bolted and locked with all imaginable securi∣ty. But some tell us, that they leave their doors open upon the night of the Passover, that there may be nothing to hinder the en∣trance of Elias, whose coming on that night is expected. As for the rationale of the four Cups of Wine, the number of the Cakes, time of Ex∣ecration, and other mysterious Rites of this Fe∣stival, it is to be learned out of their Masters, whither the Curious are remitted. All that I have here to take notice of, is their Custom of showing the Paschal Cakes to their Children, and instructing them in the Institution and Ceremonies of the Passover: Wherein they pretend to be very faithful observers of Exod. 12.26, 27. As for the other daies of this Feast, there is little to be observed concerning
them, except that thereon the Jews eat better, and go finer than at other times. CHAP. XIX. Of their Pentecost, or Feast of weeks. THe meaning and institution of this Festi∣val may partly be learned from its name. For Pentecost denotes the time of its observa∣tion, which was the fiftieth day, reckoning from the second of the Passover. It was also called the Feast of Harvest, and of First-fruits; be∣cause the Jews then began their Harvest, and offered the first Fruits of the Earth, Exod. 23.16. And seeing they cannot keep this Feast according to its first Institution, they spend the time allotted thereunto in praying for their Restauration, that God would hasten their re∣turn to Canaan, and the rebuilding of the Tem∣ple: For which they use this form. Let it be thy good pleasure, O Lord our God, and the God of our Fathers, that the house of thy Sanctuary may speedily be rebuilt in our daies: and give us our portion in thy Law. And indeed, this Feast may well bear the Title of the Feast of Harvest, because it con∣tain'd the weeks usual for that season: which were bounded with two remarkable daies, whereof the one began, and the other ended
the Harvest. The former was called the se∣cond of the Passover, and the later the Pente∣cost. And from this second day of the Pass∣over, they number their Sabbaths, which Cu∣stom explains the , &c. Sab∣batum, used in the Gospel. At this Festival, the present Ceremonies are but few: only they carry the Law twice in Procession, and read out of it such portions as concern the Oblations which were of old ac∣customed to be offered. And these parcels of the Law are after a most solemn manner read by five select Jews. Their entertain∣ments likewise are at this time very plain and frugal; using little flesh-diet, though they are bound to use some, that they may not contra∣dict their own rule: A Feast without flesh, is without joy. But still white meats, and con∣fection of milks, are their prime Delicacies. And this sort of Viand is at this time made use, of, out of no less mystery, than that by its co∣lour and dulcour, they might be remember'd of the purity and delightfulness of the Law. To which they allude the 10 verse of the 19 Psalm. They have a Custom at this Feast to strow the Synagogues, their dwelling Houses, and the Streets (if they have leave) with Greens, and to wear some upon their heads; out of no deeper mystery, than to commemorate that pleasant Verdure which was upon Mount
Sinai when the Law was there given unto their great Master Moses. A Custom they have like∣wise, to bake a Cake of seven folds, to signi∣fie (say they) the seven Heavens, into which God ascended when he went up from the Mount. At the beginning of this Feast, the Jews with great Devotion make this Prayer. Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, the King of the World, who hast sanctified us with thy Precepts, and hast inabled us rightly to number the days, as thou hast commanded us, this being the first day. Thus they proceed to number until the whole fifty daies be expired, every day using the same Benediction. CHAP. XX. Of the Feast of Tabernacles. THis is the third Capital Feast of Divine appointment among the Jews, which those of Barbary keep at present as their Fa∣thers did antiently, in Booths, which being made of green Canes, it is now generally known among them by the Spanish name of Fiesta de las (writing as it is pronounced) Caunias, or the Feast of Reeds. And the end of this Feast is to preserve the memory of their Ancestors long Pilgrimage in the Wilderness;
and it lasts eight daies. The Institution here∣of is to be met with, Deut. 16. and Exod. 23, and 34. Now, as of old, the chief Solemni∣ty and observation of this Festival is confined to the first and second day thereof. In that Liturgie of the Jews (which I have so often named) there is no proper Office for this Feast; so that thereon they do no more but go to the Synagogue, and there solemnize the Ʋsual Service, and thence hasten home to their Booths, Bowers, Tents, or Tabernacles; which they finde furnished as richly as their Estate and Fortunes will make them. During the whole eight daies of this Festival, they live in their Booths, and adorn them with the Fur∣niture of their houses; and constantly lodge therein, unless it fall out that the rains (which in Barbary often begin in September, the time of this Feast) force them into more comfortable lodgings. Paulus Fagius (on Levit. 23.) reports out of the Rabbins, that every man was bound e∣very morning to bring a burden of Cittern, Palm, Mirtle or Willow-boughs, toward the making of these Booths. And this burden was called Hosanna. And the cutting down of the Boughs, and strowing them in the way, and crying Hosanna to Christ as he rode to Hierusalem, is thought to have been in allusion to this Custom. And the Jews in Barbary are wont at this Festival, to take any sort of
boughs in their hands, and to shake them to∣ward the four Cardinal Points of Heaven; be∣ginning at the East. And by this action they foretel and threaten destruction to all the ends of the Earth that oppose them. With these Boughs also they make a great noise, in allusion to the 12 verse of the 69 Psalm, and also to terrifie the Devil, and triumph over sin. At the shaking of these Boughs, they use these words: Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the World, who hast sanctified us with thy Pre∣cepts, and commanded us to carry a bundle of Palm. At this time also, the Law is brought to the Reading-place, about which they walk with great state; and nothing but threatning and victory appear in their looks. This they do seven times, in memory of their Fathers com∣passing the walls of Hiericho. But others say, That this compassing of the Reading-place seven times, is in prediction of the certain ru∣ine of their Enemies. And this notice of the Ceremonie, is very agreeable to the Execrato∣ry which is now used by them: Wherein they profoundly curse the Christians; desiring that God would smite them as he did the First-born of Egypt. And though this Direful Prayer is not found in that Liturgie printed at Venice, (as I above-mentioned) yet I am assured by a good Author, that it is extant in the
Machsor of the Cracovian Impression. Upon the last day of this Festival, the last Section of the Law is constantly read, and the first Section begun. For they begin and end the Lesson of the Law on the same day, to de∣clare their joy therein. This last day of the Feast of Tents, is called the Great day of the Feast, S. John 7.37. where Tremelius observes, that on the last of Tabernacles, the antient Jews used to incompass the Altar (as the mo∣dern Jews now the Reading-place) with Palms in their hands, crying Hosanna, that is, Preserve us we beseech thee: Whence it was called Hasanna Rabba, or the Great Hosanna, or the Chief of the Feast: And that on the same day they drew water from the Well of Shiloah at the foot of Mount Sion, and brought it to the Temple, where the Priests mingled it with the best Wine, and poured it on the Altar: and that the people sang these words of Esay; With joy shall they draw water out of the Wells of Salvation. To which our Saviour is thought to have alluded, in that speech which on this day he made use of, S. John 7.38. Every one that believeth in me, out of his belly shall flow living waters. When they have built their Tabernacles, they may not use them till the Father of the Family hath consecrated both them and all the Utensils of the Feast: wherein he gives God thanks that he hath chosen and sanctified
the Jews above all other Nations, and that to them only belongs the habitation in Tents. At the expiration of the Feast, when they come out of their Tabernacles, the Chief of the Fa∣mily saith these words: God grant that the following year we may dwell in the Tent of the Leviathan. The mystery of which Prayer de∣pends upon the Opinion that the Jews have of eating with their Messias of the great Fish cal∣led a Leviathan; which they imagine to be of a Poetical Magnitude, and preserved on pur∣pose for that great Entertainment to which they shall all be invited by Messias, at his com∣ing. And the Prayer above-named, has re∣spect to this Opinion, and designes no more than their desires that their King may have a speedy advent. And having now taken this short view of the present Rites wherewith the Jews celebrate their three Cardinal Feasts, their Minor Festi∣vals come next to be considered. Among which, their Purim or Feast of Lots merits the first remembrance: For to it is allotted a pro∣per Office, which honour is not granted to any of the rest.
CHAP. XXI. Of the Jews Purim, or Feast of Lots. THe word Purim is Persick, and signifies Lots; and the Feast bears this name from the occasion of its Institution, which without the trouble of transcribing, is to be seen at large in the Book of Esther. The Mischiefs plotted against the Jews, falling up∣on their Enemies, and those being killed by them who designed their destruction; and all this happening upon the 13 of the Month A∣dar, answering to our February, and ending upon the 14 of the same Month: in memory of their own deliverance, and the destruction of their Enemies, the Jews keep those two daies Festival, whereon they both happen∣ed. In the Celebration of this Feast, they at present use these Ceremonies: First they light up great store of Lamps, that thereby they may testifie their joy; and read over the Book of Esther: At which, both the women and chil∣dren are bound to be present. Who at the naming of Haman, make an hideous noise, beating with their hands, and stamping with their feet: and at the same time pronounce
these words; Let his name be blotted out: Let the name of the ungodly come to naught: Cursed be Haman; blessed be Mordachee: Cur∣sed be Zeresch, but blessed be Esther: Cursed be all Idolaters, and blessed be all Israelites. Which Maledictions are now applied to the Christians. And when they come to that passage concerning the death of Haman's Sons, they huddle it over without pause or distincti∣on; intimating that they were all killed in a moment, and that they hate to be long men∣tioning them. When they come out of the Synagogue, they fall to eating and drinking; and are therein much more liberal at this, than any o∣ther time. And they have a Rule, that at the Feast of Purim they should drink till they cannot distinguish between, Cursed be Haman, and blessed be Mordachee. At this Feast, the Rich supply the Poor with Wine and Viands; and for two daies none undertake a∣ny Servile work: The women especially are to keep Holy-day, in honour of her who was the occasion of their Deliverance. At this Feast also they salute one another with pre∣sents, and bestow large Alms upon the Needy, in compliance with what their Great Patriot commanded, Esther 9 20, 21, 22. Where he established the Institution of the Feast of Lots. The Mattins of this Feast, begin with ex∣tolling
Gods mercie and power in their Deli∣verance: After which follow the Proper Les∣sons out of Esther. When those are finished, the Chasan leaves the Pulpit, and saith part of the Dayly Service. Their Vespers they begin with this Psalm: My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? &c. and then again a Lesson is read out of Esther; and after that, the ordi∣nary Evening-Service: Then follow four Bene∣dictions, and all is concluded with select Psalms. Purim is the last of their Anniversary Festi∣vals: for happening in Adar, there is none be∣tween it and Easter; which alwaies falls in Nisan, the Month that began the Year when the Hebrews came out of Egypt, and which still keeps that place in the Computation of their Greater Feasts. Besides their Purim, and the three Capital Feasts which we have alrea∣dy considered, the Jews have other Minor Fe∣stivals, as that of Reconciliation, Dedication, Church-Officers, New year, and Lunar Muta∣tions; of which take this short account in their Order. And beginning with their Feast of Recon∣cilement or Expiation, we finde the ground thereof in Lev. 16. and an express Statute for its Celebration, v. 29. In the seventh month, on the tenth day of the month, ye shall afflict your souls, and do no work at all, whether he be one of your own Country, or a stranger ihat sojourneth among you: v. 30. For on that day shall the Priest make
an Atonement for you to cleanse you, that you may be clean from all your sins before the Lord. In obedience unto which Law, the Jews up∣on the 10 of Tizri repair to their Synagogues, and in places of open Toleration, carry wax∣lights in their hands, which when they have lighted, they begin in a very dismal note to lament their sins, and continue fasting and pray∣ing for ten daies, which are called the daies of Contrition: for which their Liturgy has a proper Office. Every morning, during this Feast of Expi∣ation, they thrice repeat this Confession. O Lord, thy people, the house of Israel, they have sin'd, they have done wickedly, they have transgressed before thee; I beseech thee now, O Lord, pardon the sins, iniquities, and trans∣gressions, with which the people, the house of Israel have sin'd, done wickedly, and transgres∣sed before thee, as it is written in the Law of thy Servant Moses: That in that day he shall make an Atonement for you, that he might cleanse you, and that you might be clean from all your iniquities before the Lord. This Confession, saith P. Fagius, is of very great Antiquity, and was made by the High-Priest when he disburden'd the sins of the whole Congregation upon the Head of the Scape-goat. Since the destruction of their City, the Jews have no place for a proper Sa∣crifice; and therefore, instead thereof, when
they come from the Synagogue, every Father of a Family takes a Cock, (a white one if possible) upon the 9th day of the Feast, and calling his Household about him, repeats se∣veral Sentences of Scripture; among which, the principal are the 17 vers. of Psalm 107. Fools because of their transgression, and be∣cause of their iniquities are afflicted. And 23 vers. of Job 13. How many are mine iniquities and sins! Make me to know my transgression and my sin. After the repetition of these Scriptures, he waves the Cock three times a∣bout his head, at each of which he useth these or the like words: Let this Cock be a Commu∣tation for me: Let it be my substitute: Let it be an Expiation for me: Let the Bird die; but let life and happiness be to me and to all Israel. A∣men. Then he again swings the Cock thrice a∣bout his head, once for himself, once for his Sons, and once for the Strangers that are with him. Then he kills the Cock, and saith, I have de∣served thus to die. The Woman takes a Hen, and doth the like for those of her Sex. In Barbary where the Houses are flat-roofed, they cast the Garbage thereon, to be devoured by some ravenous Birds, in token that their sins are removed as the Entrails they cast out. Now the reason why they chuse a Cock for the Ex∣piatory, is drawn from the ambiguous word in the Talmud, which may signifie either Man or Cock. So that they repute the death of a
Cock, as much as that of a Man: and to this Domestick bird the 53 of Esay, with many o∣ther Passages of Holy Writ, are prophanely and ridiculously applied. But however they may at this Feast greatly extol▪ the Merits of the Cock, and imagine all their sins to be atoned by his death: yet when themselves come to die, they acknowledge no Commutation, but skin for skin according to this saying of one of their Masters when he was a dying: Let my own death be the Expiation and Satisfaction for all my sins. When they have done with the Cock, they repair to the Sepulchres, where they repeat, enlarge, and enforce their Prayers, and Con∣fessions. They bestow the value of their Cocks upon the Poor, to whom formerly they gave their Carkasses, which they now keep to furnish out their own Tables. Besides that form of publick Confession which we men∣tioned before, they use private Confession one to another: which they thus perform. About the middle of the Service they make an inter∣ruption, and two by two step aside in the Sy∣nagogue and confess their sins to each other. During the time of Confession, he that confes∣seth turns his face Northward, and with great seeming Contrition bows his body, beats his brest, and readily submits his back to such stripes as his friend will inflict; who yet never exceeds the number of 39. And the first ha∣ving
thus made Confession, the second goes up∣on the same duty. This Feast as it has the name of Expiation (because according to its first Institution, the High-Priest did then confess his own sins and the sins of the people; and by certain Rites did expiate, and make atonement to God for them) so is it likewise called the Feast of Re∣conciliation, because at this time they endea∣vour a general Amnesty and Pardon. For they labour that no quarrel among them remain un∣reconciled. He that seeks to be at peace with his Neighbour, though he be refused, is looked upon as innocent. They hold this Re∣conciliation so necessary, that if the offended die without it, the offender must go to his Gre, and in the presence and hearing of ten Witnesses, confess his trespass. Upon the Even of the 9th of this Feast, they repair to the Synagogue, where they trim and encrease the number of their Lamps. The women do the like at home. If the Lamps burn cleer, it is a good signe that their sins are pardoned, and that they shall live chearful and happy. But if the Lamps burn dim, it is a sad abodement their trespasses are not expiated. Whereupon some of them renew their pe∣nances, and use several abstinences, and remain restless till the Omen alter. Some are repor∣ted at this time to bribe the Devil that he may not accuse them; and some again are so con∣fident of their Expiation, that they bid the Devil do his worst.
That the Expiation & Reconcilement might be extended unto all, upon the Eve of the 9th of this Feast, they absolve all Offenders, re∣store the Excommunicate, and admit to the Prayers and Communion of the Synagogue, even the stubborn and refractary. At last the Chasan blesseth the people, stretching out his hands toward them: which hands the people dare not stedfastly look upon while they are elevate, because they suppose them for that time to be full of the Holy Ghost. After the Ex∣piation is thus ended, they continue a space fasting at the Synagogue, and then return home to feast: and to testifie their mutual Peace and Reconcilement. Their next Feast is that of Dedication, whose Institution we meet with in 1 Maccab. 4.59. Moreover Judas and his brethren, &c. And this our Saviour honour'd with his pre∣sence, S. John 10.22. not to countenance the abuses, but to own its appointment, and to approve the Consecration and Dedication of times and places to Gods service. This Feast in the N. T. is called  or Renovations, or a Feast wherein something is renewed, and is in memory of second Dedications. It con∣tinues 8 daies, during which time the Syna∣gogues are full of Candles; which may be the reason that the Spanish Jews call it Fiesta de las Candelas; and some call it the Feast of Oyl: and both give this reason of the name.
In the Dedication of the Temple, and Re∣stauration of the Divine Worship, there want∣ed Oyl for the Holy Lamps; whereupon Ju∣das Maccabaeus diligently seeking every corner of the Temple for Oyl, at length found a Jar full, which was sealed with the High-Priests Seal, and had never fallen into the desecrating hands of the Enemy. But the Oyl was of so small a quantity, that it was but enough for one night. Whereupon, he and the people became very sorrowful, not being able to pro∣cure Oyl for the present necessity. For the place where it was to be bought, stood three daies journey from Hierusalem. But God (saith the story) by a bountiful Miracle made the small Jar of Oyl to last the whole eight daies of the Feast. In memory of which mi∣raculous supply, some, as I said, have called it the Feast of Candles, and others, the Feast of Oyl. They spend the eight daies in junketing and Games; little of Religion appearing through the whole Solemnity. They have another Feast in remembrance of giving the Law, at which time they sell those Ecclesiastick Offices we spoke of before: and which always falls out upon the same day that the last Section of the Law is finished, and the first begun. And they begin the Law the same day they end it, that the Devil may not tell God, that Israel is weary of his Law. On this Feast all the Copies of Law are taken
out of the Ark, and in very solemn Procession is carri'd through the Synagogue with all man∣ner of Exultation and rejoycing. And after this, they make the best provision they can possible, which they call the Supper upon the finishing the Law. And it is founded upon the Act of Solomon, who coming to Hierusa∣lem, and there offering Burnt-Offerings and Peace-Offerings before the Ark of the Cove∣nant of the Law, made a Feast to all his Ser∣vants, 1 Kings 3.15. The next Feast, is that of the New year, which is kept in Tizri; for that is the first Month according to their Secular, though but the seventh according to their Ecclesiastical Computation. On the day of this Festival, they repair to the Synagogue; and the Usual Service being ended, with a short Prayer they consecrate the Feast, and drink, if they can possible procure it, some Mustum, because it is Wine of a good abodement of an happy Year, which they then wish one to another. The Younger sort do now receive the Chief Priests Benediction, which he gives them by laying his hands upon their heads, and pray∣ing they may have a Good Year. In some places Rams horns are sounded at this Feast, in memory (think some) of the Ram which was sacrificed in stead of Isaac; some, in me∣mory of the giving of the Law with sound of Cornets; and some, to minde them of the day
of Judgement, to which they shall be summo∣ned by the sound of Trumpets. Now the de∣liverance of Isaac, and the giving of the Law did, and the last Judgement (say they) shall happen upon the first day of Tizri, answering to our September. The Jews have had a Custome on this day to run into the Rivers, and there to shake off their Sins, that according to Micah 7.19. they may be carried into the depths of the Sea. If at this Lustration they have the good For∣tune to see a Fish, they shake themselves lu∣stily on purpose to load it with their Sins, that it may swim away with them, and be as the Scape-goat of old, which carried the peo∣ples Sins into the Desart. Some among them would have this repairing to the running-Water, to be in memory of Abraham's being led by an Evil Spirit into a River, (when he went to Sacrifice his Son) where being in great danger of Drowning, he prai'd unto God, and the River upon the sudden became dry Land. But he that shall converse with the Jews, shall be furnished with plenty of Stories of this nature; and if upon every oc∣casion I should have set down the Miracles wherewith their most ridiculous and impro∣bable Rites are attested, I might have made this Discourse Voluminous to no purpose. Their last Feast I shall take notice of, is that of their New-Moons, which are a sort of Half
Holy-days; the Morning, as on other daies, being spent in the Synagogues, and the After∣noon in Good Company. At the first sight of the New-moon, they have a Benediction, wherein they bless God, that with the breath of his Mouth he hath created the Heavens and all the Host thereof, and appointed them Laws which they observe: That he renew∣eth the Moon, and makes it assist the pregnant Hebrews. And then they leap as 'twere to catch her, and wish their Enemies may come no nearer them, than they to the Moon. Then they extol her good qualities; for which they have but little reason, seeing that they are told how in the beginning God deprived the Moon of Light for Murmuring against Him; to ex∣piate which Crime of the Moon, the Jews were appointed to keep this Feast. At the Feast of Tabernacles, they Divine from the rays of the Moon, of the accidents of the whole Year. If the Shadows of their Bodies appear defective, they accordingly foretel their own or Friends Deaths. As if a man see his Shadow without a Head, then he is to fall in∣to danger of Death, or die, the following year. If it wants a Finger, he shall loose a good Friend. If the Right hand, a Son: If the Left, a Daughter. If no Shadow at all appear, then the man's death is unavoidable.
CHAP. XXII. Of the Jewish Fasts. THe Jewish Fasts, except that upon the Expiation, are esteem'd to be all of Hu∣mane Institution. Their first Fast, is in me∣mory of Nebuchadnezzar's Siege of Hierusalem, which happened upon the tenth of Tebeth, answering to our December; for which their Liturgy hath a small Office. Their second, is in memory of Moses's break∣ing the two Tables of the Law; for the loss of their daily Sacrifice; for setting Idolatry in the Temple; for the second Siege of the City, and breaking down the Walls thereof. And this constantly falls upon the 17th of Thamuz, corresponding to our June, and lasts till the ninth of Ab. All the daies of this Fast are accounted ominous and unlucky; so that thereon they avoid all business of mo∣ment, and if possible to begin Journeys, or at∣tempt ought that is considerable: And so care∣ful are they hereon to be idle, that School∣boys are not thereon to be Corrected. Up∣on the fifth of Ab, or July, they sit on the Ground, read Jeremiah's Lamentations, be∣wail the Dead, and the loss of Hierusalem; and for ten daies live so severely, that they abstain
from every thing wherein is supposed to be delight. Their third Fast is for the death of Geda∣liah, whom we read was Treacherously Mur∣thered, Jer. 41.2. and it falls out in Tizri, or September. Besides these Fasts which are of publick Institution, they have several that are private, as those of Munday and Thursday: one for the death of Miriam and Eli; and another for the turning of the Bible out of holy Hebrew into profane Greek, by the Seventy Translators. But these Fasts being the pri∣vate Exercises but of some Jews, their Rites fall under no certain annotation. The general Rule in all their Fasting, is to abstain from all manner of Meat and Drink till the Stars appear: and if the Jews were Ortho∣dox in the circumstances of this Afflictive, no people would therein exceed them. But in this, as all other things, they are palpably Car∣nal, relying upon the very doing of the work, and esteeming a meer Corporal abstinence high∣ly Meritorious. Besides, there are not a few Miracles ascribed to the bare act of Fasting. The Prayer used upon Fasting-daies; transla∣ted out of the Jews Liturgy. HEar our voice, O Lord our God, and have Compassion upon us; and with Mercie hear our Prayers: and impart thy pity, and
subdue us to thy Holiness. Deliver us from death and the sword, and hunger and captivi∣ty, from the prey and an evil desire; and bad infirmities, and hard chances. Pronounce a good sentence upon me and all the males of my house: And let thy Compassions return with thy Conditions; and O Lord our God, deal with us in mercie and favour, and enter with us be∣fore the Rule of Justice, and harken unto our Prayer, our Supplication and Cry: for thou hearest the Prayer of every mouth. Answer me O my Father, answer me in this day of Fasting and Affliction. Because I am in a great strait by reason I have offended, and rebelled against thee since the day that I was up∣on the Earth until this hour. I blush and am ashamed of my Rebellion, I repent me of my sins and transgressions. Notwithstanding I have put thy Mercies before mine eyes, with which thou art wont to keep off thy fury, and to be appeased with thy Creatures: Thou art good to pardon▪ and hast great pity upon all that call upon thee. For thy manifold Mercies now an∣swer me, and let a little of my Fat and Bloud be mingled with my fasting, and be received of thee, as the fat put upon the top of thy Altar to pardon every one that hath sin'd, and that hath striven and rebelled against thee. I beseech thee for the sake of thy Power, Soveraignty and Knowledge, bear good will unto me for thy Great Mercies, and look not upon my wicked∣ness,
nor stop thine ears at my prayers; be nigh unto my calling, and to the calling of the men of my house. It is said, Before we cry unto thee, thou wilt answer; before we speak, thou wilt hear: It shall be that before they cry, I will answer; and before they speak, I will hear. That thou, O Lord, wilt deliver, and answer, and be appeased in the hour of adversity, and hear the Petition of every mouth. Blessed be thou Adonai: Lord hear our Prayer. The Prayer used by the Jews after they have done fasting; translated out of their Li∣turgy. O Lord of the Worlds, I have afflicted my self this day with fasting before thee. I have made known and manifest before the Seat of thy Honour, that in the time that the house of thy Sanctuary stood, the man that sin'd brought before thee an Offering, and offer'd nothing but the fat and bloud, and was forgiven. And at present we have neither Sanctuary (that is, Tem∣ple) nor Altar for our many sins, nor Priest to pardon. Let it be thy will, Lord our God, and the God of our Fathers, that the little of my fat and bloud which is this day spent before thee, may be reckon'd with my fast, and accepted before the Seat of thy Honour, even as if I had done it upon the sides of thy Altar; and receive me of thy great mercies.
CHAP. XXIII. Of the Jewish Excommunication. THe Mahumedans (as I have observed in another Discourse) are not acquainted with Church-censures; the contriver of that Religion having left all sorts of Delinquents to the Civil Sword. And though for greater Decorum and Solemnity, the Grand Segnor keeps his Musti, whom he makes his Pope, and pretended Oracle in Religion; yet he has no power to chastize any by Spiritual Censures, be their Enormities never so hainous. And upon this account the Jews upbraid Mahume∣dism with great deficiency, because it has no power to terrifie Evil doers, to preserve the broken from the whole, and to prevent and divert Gods Judgements; to bring Offenders to amendment, and to maintain the credit and power of their Religion. To all which ends the Jews manage and hold Excommunication necessary. Concerning which, this ensuing Chapter shall give the Reader a short account of the causes of Excommunication, its kindes and form. Some have thought that the Jews of old used Excommunications onely in case of Pol∣lutions: of which they held chiefly these three
sorts, viz. by Leprosie, touching of the Dead, and an Issue. And that to these three sorts of Pollutions, were adapted as many kindes of Ex∣communication, namely, the Niddui, Herem, and Shammatha. But besides these three causes of Excommu∣nication among the Primitive Jews, the Modern assigne twenty four more; for all, or any of which, they at present Excommunicate, that is, forbid those of their Religion the free enjoy∣ment of all Civil and Religious Society. The causes of Excommunication among the Jews, are chiefly these. 1. He that doth Scandalize a Master, though he be dead. 2. He that doth revile a publique Minister of Justice. 3. He that calls a Free-man, a Slave or Ser∣vant. 4. He that doth not appear at the Consistory upon the day prefixt. 5. He that doth undervalue a single Precept, or one head of Doctrine, which is contained in the Prescripts of the Scribes, or the Law. 6. He that doth not what he is appointed, stands Excommunicated till he doth it. 7. He that keeps in his House what may do mis∣chief to another, as a biting Dog, or broken Scales, is Excommunicated until the fault
be corrected: that is, till the Dog be Hanged, and the Scales be mended. 8. He that sells his Land to a Gentile, is Ex∣communicate, till the Damage be repaired that thereby shall accrew unto an Israelite. 9. He that in the Courts of the Gentiles shall be a Witness against an Hebrew, so that he shall be forced to pay Money contrary to the custom of his Nation; shall be Excommuni∣cate until he refund it. 10. The Priest that Sacrificing doth not give the Dues to the rest of the Priests, is to stand Excommunicate until he doth. 11. He that shall do any Work in the forenoon of the day before the Passover. 12. He that shall carelessly, or with an Oath, or in lofty and Hyperbolical terms pronounce the Name of God. 13. They that shall cause the Vulgar to profane the Name of God. 14. He that shall cause the Vulgar to eat holy things out of holy places. 15. He that doth reckon the Years, and prefix the Months out of the Holy Land. That is, shall otherwise observe the Months and Years than of old their Fathers appointed them in the Holy Land. 16. He that putteth a Stumbling-block before the Blinde, or causeth him to slip. 17. He that hindereth the Common people in keeping any Commandment.
18. The Priest that suffereth a torn Beast to be Sacrificed. 19. He that killeth a Beast for the Sacrifice, and doth not first try his Knife before a Master, Rabbi, or Wise man. 20. He that is morose and backward to Learn. 21. He that keeps company with the Wife whom he has Divorced. 22. The Wise man that is ill-reported, or of a bad fame. 23. He that doth undeservedly Excommunicate another. 24. He that profaneth the Festivals. These were the old primarie Causes of Ex∣communication, most of which are now in pre∣sent use with the Jews. Those indeed rela∣ting to the Sacrifices, (because they now have none) are quite out of use: As also that which respects their selling of Land or House; for in Barbary they have none but what they hire. The kindes, or rather the Degrees of Excom∣munication in antient use with the Jews, were the three above-named, whereof the Niddui is by some Christian Authors reckoned the lowest sort; and by which they understand a Separation from, or a casting out of the Syna∣gogue; which usually lasted 30 days; but might be of a shorter or longer continuance, as the Offended gave signes of Repentance. During the time of this Excommunication,
the party was not to come within four Cubits either of a man or Woman, nor to dress or trim himself as at other times: yet they say he was admitted to Instruction, to hear Divine Service, to hire others, & to let out himself to work; on condition of observing the four Cubits distance but now mentioned. But if the Consistory plea∣sed, upon the contumacie of the Excommuni∣cate, they might retrench these Priviledges, and aggravate the Penance, even to the denial of his Son Circumcision, and the Burial of his Dead. Also if himself died, he was denied all usual Rites of Burial, and a great Stone laid upon his Grave, in token that he deserved to have been Stoned to death. The denouncing of this Excommunication was not always confined to the Court or Con∣sistory: (which at this day cannot consist of fewer than three Masters) for it was in the power of any private person to Excommuni∣cate those whom they found guilty of the thir∣teenth cause of Excommunication; and he that was herein negligent incurr'd the like pe∣nalty: But they were presently absolved, lest it should become a Snare and an offence unto o∣thers. And to restrain them to Sobriety here∣in, the Court had power to punish him, that did it rashly. From these private Excommunications their Superiours, Rabbins, and chief Lawyers, were Exempt: for these had a priviledge to Excommunicate and Absolve themselves. The
form both of Extrajudicial and legal Excom∣munication, was one and the same, which is this: N. Let him be Excommunicate. And the Excommunicate upon Repentance, was ab∣solved in this form: N. Thou hast Absolution, or thy offence is forgiven thee. But at the time of Absolution, the Court had power to correct the Trespasser with Stripes. The second kinde of Excommunication was called Shammatha, the same with the Maran-Atha think the most. And it sounds (saith Mr. Selden, according to the opinion of some) The Lord cometh. He would not have his Sham∣matha at all to differ from Niddui; which o∣pinion he grounds upon some sayings in the Talmudick Commentaries. But J. Drusius in∣timates otherwise, when he saith, the Jews were wont to Excommunicate per maledictionem, that was their Cherem, or Anathema; per Se∣parationem, that was their Niddui; and by Ma∣ranatha, the same with Shammatha; and by others of that kinde. By this last intimation, I conceive, may be meant the Anathema Ma∣ranatha. Their Shammatha was a total Exclu∣sion from the Church, a blotting them out of the Book of Life, and not permitting them the least communion in things of publick Re∣ligion. And by the word Shammatha, they signi∣fie the coming of the Lord, to take Vengeance upon those who are thus Excommunicate. And it was never pronounced upon the offender,
till he became desperately irreclaimable. A third kind of Excommunication was the Cherem, which enforced the Niddui when the offender within 30 daies gave no signes of A∣mendment, nor sought to be reconciled. A new form of Excommunication was now used, con∣taining dreadful Execrations, Imprecations and Cursings of it. As to the Maranatha, an old Spanish Author tells us, it got the signification of Anathema upon this occasion: The Jews glorying of their Messias to come, commonly used the word Maran▪ Our Lord: in opposition where∣unto, the Christians used to say Maran Atha; Our Lord or Messias is come already. Whereupon no small strife arose betwixt them. The Jews frequently out of contempt saying Maran, and contumeliously called the Christians Maranites. On the contrary, the Christians replied Maran Atha, affirming that their Lord was come already. And hence it grew that the Spaniards call those Maranos, who being discended of Jewish Parents, and being Christians, turn Apostates, and yet expect the coming of Messias. But the Maranatha is certainly of far great∣er antiquity, than in this story it can pretend to. For it was used in S. Paul's time, as 1 Cor. 16.22. doth cleerly testifie. Where an old English Translation (cited by Mr. Sel∣den) of an hundred twenty and five years standing, renders Anathema Maranatha, Let him be had in Execration to death: Meaning (perhaps) that the Excommunicate should die under this severe Censure. For Anathema being added to Maranatha, by a general agree∣ment,
was the highest degree of Excommuni∣cation. There were indeed two sorts of Che∣rem in the Old Testament: the one a Conse∣cration of things to Gods Service, by separa∣ting them from Common and Ordinary use: Of which we read, Lev. 27.28. And as in the case of Hierio, where pilfering or stealth of such things as were devoted, was punisha∣ble by death. Jos. 7. The other sort of Cherem, was a devoting of persons unto death. But the Cherem we now speak of, was in our Sa∣viours time a very fearful kinde of Excommu∣nication among the Jews. In which, with Solemnity and Authority, and a heap of dire∣ful Execrations and Cursings, a man was turn∣ed out of the Synagogue. And this sort of Excommunication was so dreadful, that for fear of it, many principal Jews who believed on Christ, durst not confess him, S. John 9.22. & 12.42. and 16.2. Of the manifold use of this Cherem among the antient Jews, Mr. Selden has made so plentiful a Collection, that the Reader may there best be satisfied, De jure naturali & gentium, &c. lib. 4. c. 7, &c. That which upon this subject I have here to take further notice of, is the Antient Form of their General Cherem or Anathema, as it de∣notes the severest Censure of the Jewish Church. The Form I shall here insert, is taken out of that Ritual, which they call Sepher Colbo, or Pandects; and which was used against all those Israelites who wilfully and knowing∣ly
transgressed any chapter of the Law Sacred or Introduced. The Form of Cherem or Anathema. BY the Decree of Cities, & Command of the Holy, we Anathematize, Adjure, Extermi∣nate, Excommunicate, Curse and Execrate, God being willing, & his Church, by the Book of this Law, by the 600 Precepts therein written, by the Anathema with which Josua Anathema∣tized Hiericho, by the Curse wherewith Elisha cursed the young men, by the Curse wherewith Gehezi cursed his Boy, and by the Excommu∣nication with which Barach Excommunicated Meroz, and by the Excommunication which Rab. Jehuda Son of Rabbi Jehezkiel used in this matter, and by all the Anathemata, Impre∣cations, Curses, Excommunications and Exter∣minations which have been made from the time of our Master Moses, and since, by the name of Acetheriel, Jah, the Lord of Hosts▪ by the name of Michael the Great Prince, by the name of Mittatron, whose name is as the name of his Master; by the name of Sandalipon, who ti∣eth the hands of his Lord; by the name of forty two Letters; by his name who appea∣red to Moses in the Bush; by the name with which Moses divided the Sea; by the name I am what I am; by the Mystery of the name Tetragrammaton; by the Scripture that
was written upon the Tables; by the name of the Lord of Armies, the God of Israel sitting upon the Cherubin; by the name of the Sphears and Circles, and living Creatures, Saints and ministring Angels; by the name of all the An∣gels which wait upon the most High God: e∣very Israelite, and every Israelitess, who willing∣ly and knowingly violates any of those which are now denounced to be observed, let him be Cursed of the God of Israel who sitteth upon the Cherubin. Let him be cursed by the bright and glorious name, which the High-Priest in the day of Ex∣piations expresseth with his mouth. Let him be cursed by Heaven and Earth. Let him be cursed from God Almighty. Let him be cursed of Michael that Great Prince. Let him be cur∣sed of Mittatron, whose name is as the name of his Master. Let him be cursed of Acetheriel, Jah, the Lord of Hosts. Cursed be he of the Seraphin, and the Orbs, of the holy Animals and Angels, who wait before the most High God of Israel in holiness and purity. If he was born in the month Nisan, which the Angel Ʋriel, as the Prince of the Classes un∣der which it is, governeth▪ Let him be cursed of him, and of all his Order. And if he was born in the month Ijar, which the Angel Tzephaniel governeth, Let him be cursed of him and his whole Order. And if he was born in the month Sivan, &c.
(The like imprecation is made in the same words by the Angel of this month, and so for∣ward by the Angel of every month.) Let him be cursed of the seven Angels set over the seven Weeks, and of all their Order, and helping Power. Let him be cursed of the four Angels which govern the four Seasons of the Year, and of their Order and helping Pow∣er. Let him be cursed of the seven Palaces. Let him be cursed of the Princes of the Law; by the Name of the Crown, and the Name of the Seal. Let him be cursed of the Great God, Strong and Bright. Let him receive confusion from his Embraces. Let him fall with swift Ru∣ine. Let the God, the God of Spirits, destroy him to all Flesh. Let the God, the God of Spirits, put him under all Flesh. Let God, the God of Spirits, lay him prostrate to all Flesh. Let God, the God of Spirits, cut him off from all Flesh. Let the Wrath of the Lord and vi∣olent▪ Whirlwinde fall upon the Head of the Wicked. Let the destroying Angels run upon him. Let him be cursed in every thing he puts his Hand unto. Let his Soul depart in terrour. Let him die of the Quinsie. Let not his Breath come or go. Let him be smitten with a Fea∣ver, Driness, the Sword, Rottenness, the Jaun∣dise. Neither let him be delivered from them be∣fore Destruction. Let his Sword enter his own heart, and let his Bows be broken. Let
him be as the dust before the wind, and let the Angel of the Lord drive him away. Let his ways be darknesses and slipperiness, and let the Angel of the Lord persecute him. Let sudden desolation come upon him, and his net which he hath laid let it catch himself. They shall drive him from light to darkness, and ex∣terminate him from the habitable World. Tri∣bulation and anguish shall make him afraid, and his eyes shall see his destruction, and he shall drink the fury of the Lord. He shall cloth himself with cursing as with a gar∣ment. Let him eat the strength of his skin. God shall scatter him for ever, and pull him out of his Tabernacle. The Lord will not rest that he may be propitious to him, but the Wrath of the Lord, and his Zeal shall smoak against him, and upon him shall rest all the Maledictions written in the Book of this Law, and the Lord shall blot out his name from un∣der Heaven. Also the Lord shall separate him to mischief out of all the tribes of Israel, ac∣cording to all the Curses of the Covenant which are written in the Book of this Law. But you who adhere to the Lord your God, are all alive this day. He that blessed Abra∣ham, Isaac, Jacob, and Moses and Aaron, Da∣vid and Solomon, and the Prophets of Israel, and those who were pious among the Nations, let him bless all this Holy Congregation, with all Holy Congregations, except the man onely,
who hath violated this Anathema. God of his mercie keep them, make them safe, and de∣liver them from all evil, misery, and affliction; and prolong their daies and years, and send his blessing and happie success to every work of their hands, and avenge them quickly, with all other Israelites. And so let it be his will and decree. Amen. CHAP. XXIV. Concerning the present Judicature a∣mong the Jews. COncerning the Ecclesiastical and Civil Consistories among the present Jews, little of moment is now observable. And though the Synedrion of old related to Civil Matters, as the Synagogue to Ecclesiastical: Yet the affairs of Religion and the World now do both fall under the cognizance of one and the same Court. But that which is the subject of the present remark, is the manner of legal proceeding in the case of Meum and Tuum; which is plainly and compendiously thus: When any contest ariseth among them concerning Debts, Bargains, Contracts, &c. a Juncto of Sabios, Chachams or Masters, are appointed to hear and determine in the Cause. This Court of Chachams consists of 11, 9, 7, 5.
and can never be of fewer than three. To these the party promovent makes his address, in a short and plain Allegation of the Case: which the Judges examine by Witnesses; who must be persons well reported of, and very sober: For so much is required by their 212 Precept. In case of want of Witnesses, the bare Oath of the party producent is sufficient: if he be a man of known integrity and good fame. If the Creditor have any thing under the Debtor's hand, he has the priviledge of at∣testing the truth thereof by his own Oath. But if he demands a debt for which he can produce no Writing, the Debtor has leave to swear the Negative. If the Witnesses whose names are at the Bill be dead, and there be none to attest their Hands, the Bill is invalid, & cast out of Court. That which much renowns their Judicial Procedures, is cheapness and ex∣pedition; the whole matter being tried and determined in a few hours. Yet if either party finde himself agrieved, he has the liberty of appealing to another Court, and may car∣ry the Appeal as far as Hierusalem: beyond which, there lies none. But though they may dislike, yet they dare not revile the Sentence of any Court. For to speak evil of any Mini∣ster of Justice, is ipso facto Excommunication. And he incurs the like punishment, who ven∣tures to appeal to a second Court, before he has obtain'd leave from the first: which laies
so great a restraint upon Appeals, that few now happen, unless in some such important Case, as Marriage and Divorce. It is very observable, that the Jews have made very cautious Provision to conserve the Esteem and Reverence of their Masters. In∣somuch that none in word or carriage can offer them the least disrespect, but he is Excommu∣nicate, and his Testimony render'd invalid. And if within three daies he make not his Peace with the offended Rabbi, the Excommu∣nication is aggravated, and pronounced be∣fore witness in open Court by a Rabbi, who superaddes thereunto a Solemn Malediction. If the Excommunicate flie to another Coun∣try, the Curse follows him, and he is sent before to beg pardon and be absolved in the same place where the Crime was committed; or in case of contumacie, the Execration is aggrava∣ted. Sometimes the delinquent Jew frees him∣self from the whole Censure by turning Rene∣gate. The Masters, of which the Court consists, are chosen upon their Reputation for their Learnedness in the Law, and Integrity of their Manners: and for a clearer testimony of the former, they sometime are tried by Disputati∣on. But besides Ʋnderstanding and Good life, there is a competent Age required to make a Master. Who upon Election, is invested with Authority in this form:
Behold, Hands are laid upon thee, and Power is given thee to exercise Authority in things Criminal. That which most tends to the Commenda∣tion of the Jewish Courts, are (as I said) Brevity and Cheapness: For they use no Dela∣tory Artifices, nor Covetous Exactions; but in a very small time, and at a very easie rate, the Litigants know their Doom. CHAP. XXV. The manner of the Jews Alms, and of their making provision for the Poor. THose who have observed that the Jews have no Beggers, seem not well informed of the manner of their Alms, and their way of providing for the Poor. Whom 'tis true we may not reckon among Beggers, as that word usually implies a seeking Relief from house to house. For though among the Jews in Barbary there is great store of needy per∣sons, yet they are supplied after a manner which much conceals (as to men of other Religions) their Poverty. For the Weal∣thier take care to provide for them, and very
much magnifie their Religion upon this very score, that they live under its profession in a more mutual Charity of Alms than either the Moore or Christian; both which (with great insulting) I have heard them upbraiding with their common Beggers. And it cannot be denied, but that the Jews manner of Relieving their Poor is Regular and Commendable. For first they suffer them not to take Alms of any man who is of a dif∣ferent Religion from their own: and this in∣spection of them and their wants, is consigned to no meaner persons than their chief Masters, who once or oftener every Year (as occasion requires) are very solemn in this Inspection. In every Synagogue they have in store seve∣ral Copies of the Law, which they sell for great sums of Money: But the Buyers are not permitted to carrie these Copies out of the Synagogue, or any further to impropriate them to their own use, than that (if any of them fall into Necessity) they may be sold a∣gain to relieve them. And therefore the Name of the Buyer is upon a Label annexed to the Copie of the Law, that they may know to whom it belongs, and for whose use it may be sold, if any of the Buyer's Relations be re∣duced to Want. Insomuch that the buying of one of these Copies of the Law, is a certain pro∣vision against Poverty, if it shall happen. But that which is here chiefly to be remarked,
is their raising of Maintenance for the Poor with the prizes of these Copies. And to make more ready Chapmen, the buying of them is accounted very Honourable, and Meritorious, & of no small Interest to the Buyer's Familie. Another way of raising Provisions for the Poor, are the Legacies and Bequeathments of dying persons: For the Jews have a Rule, that none die safely, who bequeath not some part of their Estates to the Corban of the Poor. Next they have their Contributions; and out of all these together they raise Portions, and make provisions for Orphans and indigent Fe∣males, and the Necessitous in general. And to prevent all Sophistication and partiality here∣in, the poorer Females are provided for by Lot; and without respect of Circumstances, those on whom the Lot falls, are first placed in Marriage. They moreover permit the Poor upon every Friday and Holy-day-eve to receive private Alms, to honour (that is, to keep) the Sabbath and the Festival with. They have also their Kibbuz, or Letters of Collection, by which the Indigent has liberty to go from Sy∣nagogue to Synagogue, to receive the Bene∣volence of their Country-men. And these Kibbuz much resemble our Briefs. In them the Poverty, Religion and Honesty of the Bear∣ers are certified, who are first to produce them to the Chief Master of the Synagogue; and he having given his approbation thereof, appoints
a day for the Collection, which is usually made at the door of the Synagogue. By these Let∣ters also the necessitous Father raiseth Portions for his Daughters. When any poor Jew is up∣on a Journey, it is the custom for him to repair for relief to those of his own Religion, who are oblidgd to treat him civilly; but his com∣pany quickly becomes troublesom, according to the old saying among them: The first day a Guest; the second a Burden; the third day a Vagamond. CHAP. XXVI. Their Visitation of the Sick; Testa∣ments: Burial of the Dead, &c. WHen a Jew falling sick apprehends his Disease to be mortal, he sends for a Sabio, or Master, and some of his more inti∣mate Friends, with whose advice and assistance he sets his house in order. The Rabbi first draws up an Envois of his Estate: then he takes account of his Debts, and making first provision for their payment out of the Estate, the rest is disposed of in Legacies and Alms. The object of the later, are Orphans, Widows, Synagogues, and the Holy house; for so they call the Temple, which they expect shall be re∣built at the coming of their Messiah. And
therefore toward the structure thereof, every dying Jew that is able, contributes something. For they have erected a Treasury to this pur∣pose; which is managed by the Masters, and carefully improved by them. The rest of the Estate is divided among the Wives and Chil∣dren: The Wives first taking out their Dow∣ries doubled. If the Children of the dying person be very young, the Master is to be their Guardian; who with a signal care labours to improve their Fortunes. The Alms like∣wise are deposite in the Rabbies hands, who out of them disposeth of some Females every year in Marriage. When the sick man has set his house in order, and is under evident indications of Death, He makes confession of his Faith, and in a short Oraison is recommended to Mercie. And the breath is no sooner out of his Nostrils, but they prepare for his Funeral, which is al∣ways within the natural day of his Depar∣ture. And first the Corps is washed in clean water; or if he be rich, in water of Roses, O∣range-flowers, or any thing that is Aromatick. While the Corps is thus making clean, they pray that God would cleanse the Soul from all the defilements that it had contracted in the body. This ceremony of washing being fini∣shed, they put the Corps in a clean Shirt and Drawers, and then a Strip of linnen resembling the Zizith; and after all, they sow him in a
very white Sheet, and put him into a Cof∣fin. The relations of the Deceased, for seven daies after the Interment, stir not abroad; or if by some extraordinary occasion they are for∣ced to go out of doors, it is without Shoos; which is a token with them, that they have lost a dear Friend. For the seven daies that they stay within, the Neighbours come to the house to pray with them; and their Mourning habit is either a black Ganiphe, or the same clothes they wore when the party died. The Corps is born by four to the place of Burial, in this procession: In the first rank march the Chachams or Priests, next to them the kindred of the Deceased, after whom come those that are Invited to the Funeral; and all singing in a sort of plain-song the 49th Psalm. And if it last not till they come to the Grave, they begin it again. At the Grave, ten Rab∣bies, or so many old Jews in their room, say o∣ver some certain Psalms, composed by the Rab∣bins for that purpose. And when they are ended, the Corps is laid in the Grave and co∣vered with Earth; and the Rabbies compassing the Grave seven times, say, From the Earth thou camest, and to the Earth thou art returned. After this is done, they return from the Grave to the house of the Deceased, where one, who as chief Mourner receives them, with his Jaws tied up with a linnen Cloth, after the same
manner that they binde up the Dead. And by this the Mourner is said to testifie that he was ready to die with his Friend. And thus muf∣fled the Mourner goes for seven daies; during which time the rest of his Friends come twice every twenty four hours to pray with him. At the end of these seven daies, the Friends of the Deceased repair to his Grave, which they cover with a black Cloth, and say this Prayer, Vide Syracides 22.23. Judge of the Truth, who Judgest truly, be Judge of the Truth; for all thy Judgements are Justice and Truth. And then the Kindred of the Dead wish one another good health and Comfort. And the same Ceremonie is repeated precisely that day twelvemonth; till which time the Obsequies are incompleat. If the Friends of the Deceased be devout, they often every Week repair to his Grave, where they make great Lamentation and bitter Wee∣ping over him; they pray at the same time, That God would pardon his Sins, and receive him into the Garden. Meaning the Garden out of which Adam was cast, when he became diso∣bedient. In the Funeral-Rites of the Jews, the same order is observed for both Sexes: only with this Decorum, that the Women meddle not with
the Men, nor the Men with the Women: but each Wash and Shrowd those of their own Sex. They never bury their Dead promiscuously with those of another Faith; but have pur∣chased distinct Burying-places where they re∣side, which they very much respect, and to which they often resort, both in contem∣plation of their own Mortality, and to lament and pray for those who are dead already. It may not be unfit to observe, that though the Modern Ceremonies of Burial are neither so numerous nor costly as those of old among the Jews; yet they do not much varie from them: For the washing of the Body was in use at the time of Tabitha's death; and the Chief Mourner, spoken of before, as also the Weekly Lamenting of the Dead, refers to the Women hired to lament at Burials: And which the Scripture calls Mourning-Women, Jerem. 9.17. the same with the Praeficae among the Romans. They likewise agree in the places of Burial, which are now as formerly without the Towns or Cities where they live, except that in Fez they have a Burying-place within the City, adjoyning to the Juderia, or the part where they live; as was said in the entrance of this Discourse. Enquiring after Inscriptions or Epitaphs, and though often in the Burying-place for that end, I could see none, nor any other State about the Graves than Green Turf and Boughs. But this remark respects the
Jews in Barbary, whom I conceive to come far short of those of other Countries, in this sort of Funeral Pomp. But we are told that they were not without Inscriptions upon their Sepulchers, as Hic jacet N. Memoria ejus sit in Benedictione. Though this I confess be now used, rather as an honourable Commemoration, when any Author of worth being dead, is ci∣ted by the Masters, than as a common Epitaph. But when they use Sepulchral Inscriptions, they are usually a Prayer for the Dead, such as, Let his Soul be received into the Garden of Eden. Or, Let his Soul be bound in the bundle of Life with the rest of the Just. The Confession of Sins made by the Sick up∣on his Death-bed. I Acknowledge and confess before thee, O Lord my God, and the God of my Fathers, the Mighty God of the Spirits of all flesh, that both my Health and Death are in thy hands. Re∣store me I beseech thee to my former health; be mindful of me, and hear my Prayers, as in the time of King Ezechias, when he also was grie∣vously sick: But if the time of my Visitation be come that I must die, let my death be an Ex∣piation for all my sins, iniquities, and trans∣gressions; whether I have committed them ig∣norantly, or knowingly, from the day that I first drew in the light. Grant I beseech thee,
that I may have my Portion in Paradise, and the future World appointed for the Just. Make known unto me the ways of Eternal Life; satis∣fie me with the joy of thy glorious Countenance at thy right hand for ever. Blessed art thou, O Lord God, who hearest Prayers. This Confession is usually made by the sick person in the presence of ten more invited thither for that purpose. After this Confession, follows the Absolu∣tion, which is pronounced by some chief Rabbi; wherein the sick person is absolved from all the Execrations and Curses which are fallen or may fall upon the sick and his Family. Here are also read the 20, 38, and 91 Psalms: then follows this Prayer, utter'd by the Rabbi. Let God be merciful unto N. and restore him to life and former health, and let his name be hereafter called B. Let him rejoyce in this name, and let it be confirmed in him. Let it be thy good pleasure, O God, that the change of his name may help to abolish all hard and evil de∣crees, and to tear in pieces the Sentence that is brought against him. If death be decreed up∣on the former name N. it is not decreed upon the later name B. If evil be designed against N. it is not so against the name B. Behold, at this hour he is as it were another man, as a new Crea∣ture, as a new-born Babe; bring him to a good life, and length of daies, &c.
In dangerous Diseases, they change the Name of the sick, and impose a new one (as the Prayer shows) on purpose thereby to move God to have compassion upon the sick, on the account that he desires to become a New man. Another Prayer used at the Grave. BLessed be God, who hath formed, created, fed, brought up, preserved, and doth kill us all in Justice and Judgement; who knows the number of you all, and will restore you all to life in his good time. Blessed be God, who kills and makes alive. Amen. In some places, the Jews are said, upon the Departure of a Friend, first of all to cast all the Water out of the house; and then present∣ly to cover his Face, without permitting any one to look upon him. They likewise bow down the dead man's Thumb into the hollow of the Hand, and by that incurvation they fancie to express the Holy Name of God; which is an Amulet against Satan. But all the rest of the Fingers of the Dead are stretched out at length, to shew that they have utterly forsaken the things of the World, and hold no∣thing of its Goods. Returning from the Grave, they pluck up Grass and cast it behinde their backs, to signifie
their hope of the Resurrection of the Dead, Who shall flourish again as the Grass, according to Es. 66.14. The Mourners use to eat Eggs, out of no less Emblem, than that Death is voluble like an Egg, and to day takes one, and another to morrow, and so will come round upon all. The Children yearly Fast upon the day their Parents died, and for the eleven Mouths say the Prayer for deliverance out of Purgatory. Where the Children out of a Reverend esteem of their Father's Piety, suppose that he stays but eleven months, though all the other Jews tarry twelve there. As we have said in our Chapter of Purgatory. They are very wary that none of the Earth taken out of the Grave remain uncast upon the Corps; for they imagine this were to up∣braid the Dead, as if the Earth should disdain to cover him. There are many other minute Ceremonies relating to the Jewish Interment, omitted chiefly upon the account of their small importance.
THE CONCLUSION: Wherein is considered The present OBSTRUCTIONS OF THE JEWS CONVERSION. HAving (through the Divine assistance) finished this Succinct Account of the present State of the Jews, I deem'd it would not be unwelcome to the Reader, by way of Epilogue to recollect some of the visible Im∣pediments of their Conversion. Of which, some respect the Jewish Nation in general, and others relate to the Jews of a particular Resi∣dence. Among the fatal Impediments respecting the Jews Conversion in general, their own in∣grafted Perversness, and obstinate adherence to the Doctrines of their Fore-Fathers, may be reckoned for the chief; and indeed, the root of all the rest. As to the former, the Jews are Notorious therein above all other people; though the latter be a thing common to the Hebrew with other Nations. For not onely
Cotta in Cicero, but most men of any parts or Education, have thought themselves under no small obligation to keep close to the Traditions of their Fathers; although no rational Evi∣dence could be produced for the matter of the Tradition. Ʋnum mihi satis est Majores no∣stros ita Tradidisse (which was Cotta's) is the ultimate Resolution of the Jews Religion. And not to speak of the obstinacie of Educa∣tion in this particular, we finde even the re∣nowned Propagators of Christianity com∣plaining of a Prioribus Credere, as the most knotty and stubborn objection they met with. And when the Jews (such I mean as are considerate and ingenious) do freely acknow∣ledge the Religion of Christians to be very conformable to the Law of Nature, which they account the Principal; yet lest they should seem to think themselves Wiser than their Ancestors, and so incur the imputation of being Proud, or upon the change of their Faith to be branded for Inconstancy; they re∣solutely retain the Religion in which their Forefathers lived and died, and thought them∣selves happy and secure. And this is spoken not upon Trust, but Experience: For upon a fair occasion pressing a Spanish Jew with the evi∣dent danger he was in, if after means of Convi∣ction he should obstinately die in his Judaism; he made no other Reply, but that he de∣sired to be in no better State, nor to be ac∣counted
wiser than the Sabies or Wise men of his Nation. And that if he was Damn'd, so would Rabbi Ben Maimon, Rabbi Salomon Jar∣chi (and so run over a large Catalogue of their Rabbins) placing great consolation to have such good company in Perdition. But beside all this, they esteem it so scanda∣lous a thing for any man to forsake his Native Religion, that even those who turn Jews are still under a very jealous aspect, according to their own old Proverb: Beware of Proselytes to the tenth Generation. Which is also the Genius of the Moors: for albeit that with a seeming Triumph they receive a Renegado for a Musul∣man; yet they never repose in him any con∣siderable Trust, nor look upon him as a per∣son of any worth or Gallantry. As to the , which some reckon among the Internal Obstacles of the Jews Conversion, if thereby be meant their ignorance, either in their own Rites, or in evading the Arguments brought against them; those that shall practise them herein, will finde they have arrived to no contemptible knowledge in both; there being no Rite of their Religion whereof they have not been taught (according to their Princi∣ples) a probable Rationale; nor any objection brought by Christians against the present Ju∣daism, for which they are not furnished with an Evasion. For the Jewish Masters take an especial care, and use an utmost diligence, to
see the Youth be so profoundly instructed in the Elements of their Religion, that it may be no easie task to efface the Characters of their first Catechism, or to pull down the Fortress of E∣ducation. And above all, it is in this point highly considerable, that the common sort of Jews are bound to acquiesce in the Judge∣ment of their Rabbins, to whom they make their last appeal, when pressed with Argu∣ments too difficult for their own Solution. Of which I could produce a numerous Cita∣tion; but I shall content my self with the single instance of one Jacob Israel Belgara, who from Hag. 2.7. being clearly confuted that the time of Messias's Advent was already past, eluded the whole Argument, by referring himself to the Sentiments of their Masters. The next thing which may be reckon'd a∣mong the grand impediments of the Jews Con∣version, are the Christians uncharitable Dis∣sentions and Divisions, which they suppose proceedeth from a want of the Ʋnity of Truth in the Foundation: And which they can no way make agreeable to that mutual peace and affection foretold to flourish among the Professors of the true Messias, and to be the signals of his Kingdom, Isaiah 11.6, 7, &c. This I alwaies found a string continually harp'd upon by the Jews; & one scoffingly told me, that if he should turn Christian, he knew not what Sect to be of: reflecting upon the manifold di∣visions
that are wofully hapned under the general denomination of Christian. In the body, a wound is worse than corruption; the former being a Solution of Continuity, the later but a disorder of some Humour. In Chri∣stians, evil manners are wholly contradictions of the Purity of their Religion, but Schism brings its Truth into question; and is of that wretch∣ed consequence, that it keeps those out that are without, and drives those out that are within. For our speaking with different tongues, will make the Atheist, as well as Infidel, say that we are mad. But were the scandal of our Divisions re∣moved, yet the Naughtiness of our lives would become a new hinderance of the Jews conver∣sion; who are very greatly scandalized with the open, and even professed, transgression of the third Commandment, so apparent in those Blasphemies which hellish mouthes dart up a∣gainst God, and those horrid Oaths which are become, with some, meer Interjections of Speech, and with others, Phrases of Gallantry. And that those sins which the Jews severely punish, should become the Christians Physick and Recreations: and that we should live in so palpable a contradiction to our Vow and Pro∣mise of a cleer contrary Carriage. And it was this Licentiousness of Conversation that made a leud Jew (in Spain turn'd to Popery) magnifie the happiness of his change, because
he had light on a Religion, wherein at once he could enjoy Both his Beads and his Whore. Reflecting upon that old Spanish Proverb, Las quentas en la Máno, y el Diáblo en el Capillo: Good words, and wicked works. And if this obstacle were also taken away, and Christians would take care to be as regu∣lar as their Religion doth oblige them; yet there wants proper means for the Jews Con∣version, as being vouchsafed neither compe∣tent conversation, nor Books for that purpose. As to the first, none I think will deny it high∣ly requisite in this affair, unless such as would make the Gospel (like weapon-Salve) to work at a distance. Now we know that in our own Nation there is no such competent familiarity or civil Society held with the Jews, as in any degree of probability may in ordina∣ry course be sufficient for their Conversion. For since their Expulsion out of England by King Edward the First, about the year 1290, the greatest conversation with them has been managed by Tradesmen upon the account of Trafick, and secular purposes: as is evident at this day. And we have been so far from en∣deavouring their conversion to Christianity, that that which might greatly have encouraged it, is quite taken away. I mean, the House of Converts erected by our Henry the Third, (which he piously indowed for the mainte∣nance of poor Jews converted to Christianity,
where every one during their lives was allow∣ed two pence a day) and appointed by Ed∣ward the Third for Records to be kept there∣in, now called the Rowles. Nor hath it fared any better with the Jews in other Nations than in our own: for since from France they were banished by Philippus Pulcher, Anno 1307: From Spain by Ferdi∣nand, Anno 1492: From Portugal by Emanuel, Anno 1497: Out of the Kingdom of Naples and Sicily by Charles the Fifth, Anno 1539. they have in these Kingdoms been so far from any enjoyment of that Society requisite to make them converts, that they dare not set a foot within their Borders without running ve∣ry great adventures: as is known to all, ac∣quainted with the Regiment of those Coun∣tries. 'Tis true, in the Jurisdiction of Avig∣non, (the Popes State) the Jews are admit∣ted: And they are very numerous in Rome, Venice, Legorn, &c. (not to speak of their Toleration in Germany, Bohemia, Polonia, Li∣tuania, Russia,) yet they are so little invited to Christianity, that they meet with no small motives to the contrary. For in the Papal Dominions no Jew can be admitted to Baptism till he has renounced the World; that is, till he confess all the Estate gotten in Judaism was ill gotten, and that he doth and ought to re∣nounce it, and leave it to the Church. And it is but cold comfort to a Jew, so notoriously
devoted to the world, to take a final farewel of his beloved Mammon, and to devest him∣self and Family of all maintenance, at his ini∣tiation into Christianity; without any con∣venient provision for his future subsistence, unless he will betake himself to a Cloyster; a kinde of life very unpleasing to the Jews, as contrary to the designe of Nature, which in∣tended man for Society, and each to be helpful to other in civil duties. Besides that Monke∣ry is a trade which they never finde commend∣ed or injoyn'd by God; never practised or counselled by their renowned Ancestors, who received continual instruction and inspiration from above; which none of their Patriarchs or Prophets have given Example of; only in three or four thousand years, Elias and some one or other have been found upon very ex∣traordinary cause to have taken also an extraor∣dinary course of life, though of other nature, and to other purpose, then the Votaries of the Roman Church. 'Tis true, the Pope has power to dispense in this particular, and to grant the Jew Baptism without confiscation of his E∣state; yet this is so seldom and uncertain, that few Jews are found so hardy as to trie the Ex∣periment. In the next place, as to Books tending to further the Jews conversion, it must be grant∣ed that there is no small impediment arising from this particular. For notwithstanding
that many learned Treatises have been com∣piled upon this Theme; yet they have either been pen'd in Languages unknown to most of this antient people, or in a Method exceeding the generality of their capacities, or, no means have been used to bring such Books to their perusal. And what is herein not the least con∣siderable, Tracts against Judaism, or rather for Christianity, have been composed by Bookish and Retired persons, who undertook the con∣futation of such Jewish Tenets, as the course of their Studies best inabled them to encounter. And others have spent much oyl and time in demolishing a fortress which most of the Modern Jews never undertook to defend. An instance whereof, I found in a learned Discourse con∣cerning Christ's Resurrection, in which the Au∣thor excellently confuting that Calumny of the Disciples stealing away their Master while the Guard slept: The Jews, with whom I dis∣coursed this Article, professed a deep silence therein, and that they medled no further with our Messias, than to bring him to the Cross; not being at all concern'd for what hapned af∣terward. So that all the Arguments brought to vindicate Christs Resurrection from the Jews belying the Disciples in conveying away secretly the Body of their Blessed Master, was answered by denying the supposition. Several Volumes (as I have seen) are writ∣ten both in Spanish and Portuguez upon the
same subject; but so far from any likelihood to confute the obstinacie of the Jews, that there is a greater probability they may add to its confirmation. For the Books (I speak of) are stuffed with such ridiculous and irrational Miracles, that in reading of them the Jews take no small contentment, as being so subser∣vient to their purposes of speaking evil of the Christian Faith, which they hope cannot long stand, while they imagine it is supported by such frail and chimerical buttresses. And be∣sides all this, the Jews have ever been as dili∣gent to detect, as the Fryars to contrive their fictitious Miracles. And what is herein truely deplorable, Christianity has the hard fate to be weighed in these Scales, and all its Sacred Truths to be rejected for a few Monkish trum∣peries. For I have heard some maligning Jews urging the brainless conceits of the Spa∣nish Fryars (who of all others seem herein the most Hypocondricaal) for the principles of Christianity; which they are the more ready to believe, as finding it advantageous to their designe; and that the Books wherein they oc∣cur are of no surreptitious Edition, but Permis∣su Superiorum, and allowed of by that Church, which calls her self the Catholick. What I now speak of, respects the Obstacles of the conversion of those Jews who converse with the Romanists, and live even in Rome it self: Where more Monks turn Jews, than Jews
Monks; as all Ages have observed. And in∣deed, through all the Papal Countries there is but little probability to make the Jews have a∣ny good will for Christianity, if we consider the manifold offences apparently arising from the whole Oeconomy of their Publick Wor∣ship and Doctrine, of which I shall for brevity sake give instances onely in the Vows and Pray∣ers made to Saints and Angels, which the Jews in all Ages have esteem'd a duty peculiar unto God. And they observe too, that more De∣votions are made to the Virgin, whom all Christians acknowledge to be but a Creature, than to Christ, who by all Orthodox Christians is believed to be God. But that which of all other yields greatest matter of Scandal to the Jews, is the worshiping of Images, for which both the Hebrew and Mahumedan lay Idolatrie to their charge; from which nought is left to defend, them but an unintelligible distinction of  and , and of a final and Instrumental intention in Worship. At which the Jew has no small occasion to be Scandalized, when they consider that yet the Sun never rose upon a Nation that was so blockish, as to make a Stock or a Stone the Final Object of their Worship; but looked upon their Simulachra as the representations of some absent Divinity, or things wherein the Divine Power did some∣times inhabit, and by his vertue work Miracles, even as the Papists opine the B. Lady in infi∣nite
places of Christendom, doth in her Ima∣ges. And whatever apprehensions and di∣stinctions these venturous Votaries of the Ro∣man Church may be furnished with, to save them from Idolatry, when they fall down be∣fore their Images; yet seeing they use therein all the circumstances appointed and fitting to wait upon the immediate Addresses which are made unto God, the Jews can perceive no∣thing visibly fit to vindicate the Service from being thought Idolatrous. For, as to the mental affection, so much spoken of, it lies altogether hid to the Beholder, and no less perhaps to the blunt and undistinguishing Wits of the Vulgar, who therein are concern'd. It would be a mat∣ter of no great difficulty to enlarge the in∣stance to many particulars of the Roman Do∣ctrine, whereat the Jews (in no mean degree) are daily Scandalized, as may be exemplified in their Transubstantiation, where the Jews are told Messias to be comprehended under the appear∣ances of a Wafer; which is a thing to them so egregiously offensive, that they spit at its men∣tioning. Those that have met with the Roman Catechism, observe the second Commandment to be wanting, and the tenth to be cloven into two, to keep up the Decalogue. Now all these things, and many more, are of so much the greater Scandal and indignity, as being believ∣ed by the Jews to be the Universal Tenets of Christians; and that Christs (pretended)
Vicar doth herein follow the Footsteps of his Master. Discoursing once with an Italian Jew con∣cerning the Conditions of Rome, (where he had long dwelt) he began with great assu∣rance to tell me, That at Rome great wonders were to be seen, as, a Man that could make his God, make and unmake Sins at his pleasure: and so run inveighing against the filthy and un∣hallowed Conversations of the principal Ro∣man Clergy; closing up his Discourse with a deep protestation, That if he were a Christian, the vices and Doctrines of Italy would strong∣ly tempt him to disown that Name. And what in the last place is not the least considerable, even at those Sermons in Italy, to which the Jews are bound to resort, little or nothing is to be heard directly tending to the subversion of those points, wherein they place their strongest Sanctuary: But obiter, and by the by, the Preacher Sallies out into a numerous invective against their obstinate in∣fidelity, without laying down such plain Argu∣ments as may rationally move them to forsake it. And if herein there were no fault, yet as long as the Jews (coming to the Christian Ser∣mons) shall see the Preacher begin his Dis∣course with an Ave Maria, (which is a gene∣ral custom with the Papists) and frequently to direct his Speech and Prayer to the B. Vir∣gin, and the little (Wooden) Crucifix which
stands on the Pulpit by him; to call that I∣mage his Lord and Saviour, to Kneel down to it, to Embrace and Kiss it, to Weep over it, and after all perhaps to cast it to the Ground, (to let the people see they meant not there to terminate their Worship) the very sight hereof doth as much induce the Jews to hate Christianity, as any reason can be alledged to perswade them to love and Embrace it. These are the Terms, in which the Jews (with whom I have conversed) do stand, who above all that has been said, derive the greatest obstruction of their Conversion from their own obstinacy; being not more scandalized, than stifneckt; nor less untractable within, than offended without: And as proud of their opinions, as they are despised for them. Glorying in their Ancestors and Founders; in Gods Temple, and Oracles, peculiar promises, and Prerogatives, long continuance in Ho∣nour and Prosperity; and indefatigable in their Expectation of being Triumphantly recolle∣cted, and Victoriously to Reign over the Edo∣mites, when the promise of their Messias shall be perform'd, which has (as they say) so long beyond the appointed time been protra∣cted, by reason of their own Ʋnworthiness.
A SUMMARY DISCOURSE Concerning the Jewish TALMUD, MISNA & GEMARA. HAving in the former part of the Ante∣cedent Discourse observed, That there are no Jews to be met with who adhere to the Old Bible without Talmud-Traditions; I thought it would be disagreeable neither to the Reader, nor the Subject, to give a succinct account of the Talmud, Misna, and Gemara, in order to facilitate the meaning of the Traditions above-mentioned. And waving all Critical reserches into the word Talmud (which makes so great a Noise in the World) it may suffice to observe, that by a sort of Metonymy, it signifies the Book containing the main Doctrines of the Jews, which by way of Eminence is called the Tal∣mud or Doctrinal. So that the word Talmud may as well be used for a System of Christian, as Jewish Doctrines, for any thing therein to the contrary. The two Talmuds (of which hereafter)
are according to Mr. Selden, the Pandects of the Jews Sacred and Civil Laws; and they are generally received of the present Hebrews for the Great Body of their Learning, and Stan∣dard by which the whole Israelitick Nation is to regulate both their Conversation and Do∣ctrine. And there needs no other Testimonie of their great esteem hereof, than the RR's frequent using it in the proof and Confirma∣tion of their Tenets. For it is very observa∣ble, that the Talmud is oftener brought in Vin∣dication of their Religion, than Moses, the Prophets, and Holy Writings: Insomuch that they make it, and not the Old Bible, the Touch∣stone of their Doctrine, and that into which they resolve the Decision of all their Cases. Nor are they herein greatly blameable, seeing they esteem the Talmud of equal Authority with the Canonical Scriptures, and no more inferiour thereunto, than a Law given by word of mouth is to one in Writing. For the Jews hold there is a twofold Law, which they are bound to observe: the one written, which is con∣tained in the five Books of Moses; the other Oral, which they call the Misna, or Traditional Law which God gave to Moses at the same time he did the other; but did not commit it to Writing, but left it to be preserved and propagated Orally. Some of the Masters gifted with a wonder∣ful Sagacity, with great assurance maintain
that Moses, during his abode in the Mount, could not discern the time of Night from the Day, but by the delivery of these two Laws: That when God gave the Written Law, he knew it was Day; and that it was Night when he gave the Oral. And R. Eliesar (as a late Author writes) affirms that Moses read the Scripture by Day, and the Misna by Night. But this will scarce sound congruously, if it be considered that the Misna was not written, and therefore could not be Read, till some thousand years after Moses received it in the Mount. And as to the reason why God would not suffer it to be written, it was the profound My∣steriousness of its Nature (say the Masters) which to have communicated by writing to the Vulgar People, would have been no better than to give Holy things unto Dogs, and to cast Pearls before Swine. Others are of opinion, that God foreseeing how the Nations would Transcribe the Books of the Law, Prophets, and Holy Writings, and pervert them to Heretical and Impious Doctrines; lest they should to the like to the Misna or the Second Law (for so  signifies) he would not suffer it to be com∣mitted to Letters. And here it may be pardonable to take no∣tice of two things; first, that by the Holy Wri∣tings, which the Jews call Cetaphim, they un∣derstand
the Books of Daniel, Psalms, Pro∣verbs, Job, Canticles, Ruth, Lamentations, Ec∣clesiastes, Ezra, Nehemiah, Chronicles; and that they were Compiled or Collected by Es∣dras, and the Seniors of the Synagogue, after the Jews returned from Babylon. Next, that the Jews were of old so cautious of preser∣ving their Law secret to themselves, that they would not suffer it to be Translated into any other Language out of their own. Insomuch that in the daies of Ptolemy when the Pente∣teuch was put in Greek by the Jews of Alex∣andria, they say that as if God had been there∣with displeased, there happened three daies of darkness over the whole Earth. And to te∣stifie their own abhorrence of so execrable a fact, the Jews appointed a solemn Fast to be kept upon the eighth of Tebeth, as the immor∣tal Joseph Scaliger hath observed. But to re∣turn. That Moses in the Mount did receive from God not onely the Written Law, but also a secret Explanation thereof, seems to have been the opinion of Origen (of the third) and Hillary (of the fourth Age.) And this Explanation is supposed to have been none other but the Mis∣na, or the Oral and Second Law we now speak of, which was preserved as the Cabala of the Creation, and of the things happening be∣fore the Flood, by Tradition from minde to minde (to use Mirandula) without Letters,
by word of mouth. For Moses thus delivered it to Aaron; and he to his Sons; they to Jo∣shua; Joshua to the Elders; the Elders to the Prophets; the Prophets to the Great Synagogue; and so it was drawn down by the Rabbins of successive Ages, of whom the Famous Ramban has given an account. And in this state the Misna continued till many years after the Nativity of our Blessed Saviour; even till Rabbi Jehuda (who for his Piety was called the Saint, and for his singu∣lar love to his Nation, and knowledge in their Law, the Prince) perceiving that this Oral Tradition grew difficult, and that thereby the Misna was in no small hazard to be utterly lost or grievously corrupted, by reason of the ex∣treme dispersion of his Nation, collected all the Notes (taken by the Jews to assist their Memories) which contain'd any thing of the Misna, and digested them into one Volume, which he called the Sepher Misnaioth, or the Book of Traditions. And this was no sooner compiled, than it gain'd such credit with the Hebrews, as to be publickly taught in their Colledges, and to be made the Catechism of their Youth; as in another Discourse I have observed. The time when this Syntagm was finished by Rabbi Jehuda is not certain; but most conjecture it was about an hundred and twenty years after the Destruction of the Temple, and near upon the 190th year of the Crucifixion.
About an hundred and eighty years after that Rabbi Jehuda had thus composed the Misna, one R. Jochanan (who for many years had been the Head of a Colledge in Pa∣lestine) added to the Misna of Jehuda, his Gemara; which together with the Misna made up the Hierusalem-Talmud, or the Doctrinal of the Jews who dwelt in the Citie and Judea. But this was looked upon as not sufficient for all the Constitutions and Decisions of the He∣brews (in Captivity and Dispersion) especi∣ally after they were passed from under the Ro∣man to the Persick Empire. And therefore one Rabbi Ashi, or Ase, composed a Second Ge∣mara, about an hundred years after the First; which being effected by him when he lived in Babylon, and for the use of the Jews there, it with the Misna was called the Babylonian Tal∣mud. And notwithstanding that the Talmud of Hierusalem is confessed by the Jews to have fewer Mysterious (that is Fabulous) Stories than the Talmud of Babylon; yet this later hath obtain'd publick Honour and Belief a∣mong them: and at this day is universally re∣ceived as the Authentick Body of their Law. In this Compilement the Misna is as the Text, and the Gemara as the Comment; in which the different Opinions of the Ancient Masters are reported and discuss'd, and a final and absolute Decision thereunto annexed. And thus we have seen (in brief) the O∣riginal
of the Talmud, which by way of emi∣nence is often stiled the Law; and indifferent∣ly used for the Misna or the Secundary Law, which contains the Traditions of Moses; and the Gemara, containing the Disputations and Decisions that have been made upon those Traditions; though properly speaking, these two are constituent parts of the Talmud. In which many passages are inserted, which if ta∣ken literally, the Jews confess, would look like the most idle and Romantick Tales that ever fil∣led a Legend. And therefore they assigne them a secret and reserved interpretation, which, say they, fall not under the comprehension of Vulgar and Ordinary Capacities. But after all this, it must be granted, that some Christian Writers understand the Talmud to be nothing else but a System of the  or Traditions of the Jewish Fathers; which if granted, can at most respect but one part there∣of, namely the Misna. It is true, that these  were highly valued by the Pharisai∣cal Jews, and as meanly looked upon by the Sadduces; who pleaded as eagerly for their Non-observance, as the other did to the con∣trarie. And the fierce and impetuous conten∣tion which hapned about these Traditions in the School of Antigonus Sochaeus, gave name and birth to the Pharisees and Sadduces, the first factious Sectaries notorious among the Jews. Josephus speaks much of their Emula∣tion
and Strife; and how the Sadduces were abetted by the Wealthy, and the Pharisees by the Multitude: And that in the end the later so prevailed with the Populacie as to have the  to be taught for Doctrine, and to be made an Authentick Institution of their Schools. Of which numerous are said to have been erected purposely to advance the Phari∣saical Discipline. Yet it must here be remarked, that the teach∣ing of these Traditions did not totally exclude, though greatly diminish the instruction of the written Law. For in every Colledge of the University of Hierusalem, there were two Schools, the one called the Bibliotheca, because therein they used Books, and taught the Scrip∣tural Law; the other was called the Misna, or Beth Talmud, or House of Doctrine, by reason of the Traditions that therein were instilled. Both these Schools flourished till they were laid de∣solate by Titus; whose desolation occasioned (in great part) the writing of the Sepher Mis∣naioth by R. Juda, who is said to have lived under the three Antonines; Pius, Marcus, and Commodus. But what in this affair is not the least obser∣vable, there is no express notice taken of the Talmud, by those Fathers who lived in the four first Ages of Christianity; notwithstand∣ing they spoke many things of the Jewish Tra∣ditions. And Tertullian ex professo writing
against the Jews, though he speaks distinctly of the Primordial Law given to Adam, and of the Law of the two Tables delivered to Moses, yet he makes not the least mention of the Misna, or Oral Law. S. Austin (of the fifth Age) doth expresly name this , or Second Law, as containing certain Traditi∣ons of the Jews, which they wrote not, but got by heart, and transfused them from one to another by word of mouth. But the great darkness that befel the Jews Records at the beginning of Christianity, might be one reason why the knowledge of the Talmud came so late to the Christian world. And indeed, for almost two Ages after the Talmud was finished, but little light or certainty is to be met with in the History of the Jews. And as to our part of the world, it was not much acquainted with the Doctrines and Records of the Hebrews, till they were expell'd Babylon. At which time a great part of them came into Europe, and e∣specially settled in Spain; where applying themselves unto Studie, the Rabbins began to multiply, and grow Learned; and to illustrate the Talmud with Commentaries, Expositions, and Homilies: As is to be seen in the Writings of Zacuth, Abarbinel, Gautz, Ben Nachman, &c. (all Spanish Jews) but especially R. Moses Ben Maimon (born at Corduba, and a Student in Egypt, whence he was called Moses Egyptius) who in the 23d year of his Age began to com∣ment
upon the Misnaioth, or the Text of the Talmud; which he finished at thirty. He lived seventy years, and during his whole life was so studious in writing upon, and instructing Reli∣gion, that to this day it is said of him: From Moses (the Prophet) to Moses (the Egyptian) there was never such another Moses. The first among Christians who took more solemn Cognizance of the Talmud, was Justi∣nian the Emperour, who about the 551 year of Christ gave Toleration to the Jews to read the Sacred Bible in their Synagogues in the Greek Tongue; but utterly prohibited them the Reading of the Misna, as being nei∣ther adjoyned to the Sacred Books, nor deli∣vered from above to the Prophets; but a meer invention of Earthly Men, who had nothing of Heaven in them. As is to be seen Novella 146. where the Notes upon that Constitution say, that the Misna Torah was Composed out of the Caballisticks and Anagogicks of the Jews, or some allegorical interpretations, pretended to be derived from Moses. When the Jews were setled in Italy and France, the Bishops of Rome began to take severe cognizance of the Talmud. For Pope Innocent IV. commanded all the Copies there∣of that could be found in France to be bur∣ned, because it contained manifest Blasphe∣mies against God, Christ, and the Virgin Mary, inextricable abuses▪ erronious and unheard-of
Fooleries. And in Italy the Talmud fell under the same Condemnation: for Pope Julius the third by solemn Bull sentenc'd it to the Flames, as containing many things offending the Divine Law, and the Orthodox Faith. Upon which the Inquisition seised upon all the Gemara's that could be met with in the Regions of I∣taly, and made them an Holocaust to the Holy Chair, &c. FINIS.
THE CONTENTS. CHAP. I. THe present Condition of the Jews in Barbary; their places of Re∣sidence, Profession, Apparel, Stature and Complexion, &c. page 7. CHAP. II. The Moral Conversation of the Barbary-Jews: the ingredients of their Reli∣gion▪ their backwardness to Disputes: their Creed▪ occasion, Author; with a short Paraphrase thereof, &c. 13. CHAP. III The Barbary-Jews Opinion of the Tri∣nity,
Angels, several States of the Soul, the Law, Merit, Purgatory, Re∣surrection, last Judgment, end of the World, &c. 26. CHAP. IV. Their Opinion of Matrimony and Coeli∣bate, their Espousals, Dowry-Bill, &c. 40. CHAP. V. Of other Ceremonies relating to their Marriages. 46. CHAP. VI. Their Opinion of Sterility: their Lilis: their Rites of Child-birth. 54. CHAP. VII. Of the Rites of Circumcision and Puri∣rification. 59. CHAP. VIII. Of the Jews Polygamy: Divorce: A
Copy of their Bill of Dismission, &c. 71. CHAP. IX. Of the Jews Concubinage: Of their Marrying the Brothers Wife. 74. CHAP. X. Of the Institution of their Children: the time and manner thereof. 80. CHAP. XI. Of their Synagogues: the Officers thereof: time of their Election: Hours of Prayer. 88. CHAP. XII. Of the Jews Preparation to the Syna∣gogue. 93. CHAP. XIII. Of the Jews Zizith and Tephillim, or Phylactery or Prayer-Ornaments. 99.
CHAP. XIV. Of the Jews hastening to Morning Prayer. Their manner of Entranc into, and Deportment in the Syn¦gogue, &c. 104. CHAP. XV. Their Ceremonies about the Book of the Law: Their Manner of Celebrating the Sabbath: The Offices which thereon are Solemniz'd, &c. 112. CHAP. XVI. How the Jews prepare themselves for the Sabbath, and how they begin it. 130. CHAP XVII. How the Jews hallow the Sabbath, and how they end it. 150. CHAP. XVIII. Of the Jews Feasts: The manner of
their Celebration. 167. CHAP. XIX. Of their Pentecost, or Feast of weeks. 175. CHAP. XX. Of the Feast of Tabernacles. 177. CHAP. XXI. Of the Jews Purim, or Feast of Lots. 182. CHAP. XXII. Of the Jewish Fasts. 194. CHAP. XXIII. Of the Jewish Excommunication. 198. CHAP. XXIV. Concerning the present Judicature a∣mong the Jews. 210. CHAP. XXV. The manner of the Jews Alms, and
of their making provision for Poor. 213. CHAP. XXVI. Their Visitation of the Sick; Testa∣ments: Burial of the Dead, &c. 216. The Conclusion: Wherein is considered the present Obstructions of the Jews Conversion. 225. A Summary Discourse concerning the Jewish Talmud, Misna and Gemara 239. FINIS.
