B2426 12841113 94365
Domus orationis Bonum est confiteri Domino et psallere tuo nomini Altissime. Te decet Hymnus. Gloria Miserere Confiteor
THE PSALTER OF DAVID: WITH Titles and Collects according to the matter of each PSALME. Whereunto is added, DEVOTIONS For the help and assistance of all Christian People, in all occasions and necessities. The third EDITION. LONDON, Printed for R. ROYSTON, at the Angel in Ivie-lane. 1647.
THE PREFACE. IT is naturall for all men when they are straitned with fears, or actuall infelici∣ties, to run for succour, to what their fancy, or the next opportunity pre∣sents, as an instrument of their ease and remedy. But that which distingui∣shes men in these cases, is the choyce of their Sanctuary: for to rely upon the Reeds of Aegypt, or to snatch at the Bul-rushes of Nilu, may well become a drowning man, whose Reason is so wholly invaded and surprizd by Fear, as to be uselesse to him in that confus∣on: But he whose condition (although it be sad) is still under the Mastery of Reason, and hath time to deliberate, unlesse he places his hopes upon something that is likely to cure his misery, or at least to ease it, by making his affli∣ction lesse, or his patience more, does deserve that misery he groans under. Stripes and remedilesse miseries are the lot of Fools, but Afflictions that happen to wse men, or good men, represent indeed the sadnesses of mortality, but they become Monuments and advantages of their Piety and Wisdome. In this most unnaturall Warre ommenced against the greatest solennities of Christianity, and all that is called, God, I have been put to it to run somewhither to Sanctu∣ary; but whither, was so great a question, that had not Re∣ligion been my guide, I had not known where to have found rest or safety, when the King and the Laws, who by God and Man respectively are appointed the Protectors of Innocence and Truth, had themselves the greatest need
of a Protector. And when in the beginning of these trou∣bles I hastned to His Majesty, the case of the King and His good Subjects, was something like that of Isaac, ready to be sacrificed, the wood was prepared, the fire kindled, the knife was lift up, and the hand was striking, that if we had not been something like Abraham too, and against hope have beleeved in hope, we had been as much without com∣fort as we were in outward appearance without remedy. It was my custome long since to secure my selfe against the violences of Discontents abroad, as Gerson did against temptations, in angulis & libellis, in my books and my retirements: But now I was deprived of both them, and driven to a publick view and participation of those dan∣gers and miseries which threatned the Kingdome, and disturbed the eavennesse of my former life. I was there∣fore constrained to amasse together all those arguments of hope and comfort, by which men in the like condition were supported; and amongst all the great examples of trouble and confidence, I reckon'd King David one of the biggest, and of greatest consideration. For conside∣ring that he was a King, vexed with a Civill Warre, his case had so much of ours in it, that it was likely the de∣votions he used might fit our turn, and his comforts su∣stain us. And indeed when I came to look upon the Psalter with a neerer observation, and an eye diligent to espy my ad∣vantages and remedies there deposited, I found very many Prayers against the enemies of the King and Church, and the miseries of Warre. I found so many admirable promises, so rare variety of expressions of the mercies of God, so many consolatory hymnes, the commemoration of so many deliverances from dangers, and deaths, and Enemies, so many miracles of mercy and salvation, that I began to be so confident as to beleeve there could come no affliction great enough, to spend so great a stock of comfort as was laid up in the treasure of the Psalter: the saying of S. Paul was here verified, if sinne [and misery]
did abound, then did grace superabound: and as wee beleeve of the Passion of Christ, it was so great as to be able to satisfy for a thousand Worlds; so it is of the com∣forts of Davids Psalmes, they are more then sufficient to repair all the breaches of Mankind. But for the particular occasion of creating confidences in us that God will de∣fend his Church and his Anoynted, and all that trust in him, against all their Enemies, (which was our case, and contained in it all our needs for the present) I found so abundant supply, that of 150. Psalmes, some whereof are Historicall, many Eucharisticall, many Propheticall, and the rest Prayers for severall occasions, 34. of them are expresly made against Gods and our enemies; Eleven expresly for the Church, four for the King; that is, a third part of the Psalms relate particularly to the present occa∣sion, beside many clauses of respersion in the other, which if collected in one, would of themselves, be great argu∣ments of hope to prevail in so good a cause. This which experience taught me now, I was promised before by a frequent testimony of the Doctors of the Church, who give the Psalter such a Character as is due to the best and most usefull book in the whole World, viz. The most profitable of books: the treasure of Holy instructions, consummationem totius paginae Theologicae, the perfection of the whole Scripture; so the ordinary Glosse calls it; arma juvenum, parva Biblia, tribulatorum solatia, the young mans armory, the little Bible, the com∣fort of the distressed, so others; to be said by all men up∣on all occasions, is the counsell of the most devout amongst them. But concerning the Psalter there are good words enough, and reall observation of advantages in the severall prefaces before the Commentaries upon the Psalms, set forth by the Fathers, and Writers of the first and middle ages. I leave the particular enumeration of them, to the learned Divines of our Church, to whom it is more proper; the summe of them is this, which Tertullian alone hath expressed in his Apology aginst
the Gentiles, Omnes Bibliothecas, & omnia monumenta unius Prophetae scrinium vincit, in quo videtur thesaurus collocatus esse totius Judaici Sacramenti, & inde etiam nostri, this book alone of the Prophet David, hath in it some excellencies beyond all the monuments of Learning in any Library whatsoever, and is the store-house both of the Jewish and Christian Religion. But that which pleases me most is the fancy of S. Hila∣ry, expounding the Psalter to be meant by the Key of David, spoken of by S. John in his Revelation: And pro∣perly enough; for if we consider how many mysteries of Religion are open'd to us in the Psalter, how many things concerning Christ, what clear vaticinations concerning his Birth, his Priesthood, his Kingdome, his Death, the very circumstances of his Passion, his Resurrection, and all the degrees of his Exaltation-more clearly and expli∣citely recorded in the Psalter, then in all the old Prophets besides, we may easily beleeve that Christ with a Key of David in his hand, is nothing else but Christ fully open'd and manifested to us in the Psalmes in the whole mystery of our Redemption. Omnes penè Psalmi Christi personam sustinent, saith Tertullian. Almost all the Psalmes repre∣sent the Person of Christ. Now this Key of David, opens not onely the Kingdome of Grace, by Revelation of the mysteries of our Religion, but the Kingdome of Heaven too, it being such a Collection of Prayers, Eucharist, acts of hope, of love, of patience, and all other Christian ver∣tues, that as the everlasting Kingdome is given to the Heire of the House of David, so the Honour of opening that Kingdome is given to the first Prince of that Family; the Psalmes of his Father David are one of the best inlets into the Kingdome of the Sonne. Something to this pur∣pose is that saying of one of the old Doctors, Vox psal∣modiae si recto corde dirigatur, in tantum omnipotenti Deo aditum ad animum aperit, ut intentae animae vel Prophe∣iae mysteria, vel compunctionis spiritum insundat. The saying or singing of Psalmes opens a way so wide for
God to enter into the heart, that a devout soule does usually from such an imployment receive the grace of compunction and contrition, or of understanding Prophecies. Upon such premises as these, or better, the Church of God in all ages hath made Davids Psalter the greatest part of her publike and private devotions; sometimes divi∣ding the Psalter into seven parts, that every weeks devo∣tion might spend it all. Sometimes decreeing that it should be said day and night. Otherwhile injoyned the recitation of the whole Psalter before the celebration of the blessed Sacrament; and after some time it was made the publike office of the Church. It was the generall use of Christendome, to say the Psalmes Antiphonatim, by way of verse and answer, saith Suidas; and so ancient, that the Religious of S. Mark in Alexandria used it, saith Philo the Jew; and S Ignatius, or else Flavianus and Diodorus brought it first into the Church of Antioch. And for the private Devotions, that they chiefly con∣sisted of the Psalmes we have great probability from the strict requiring it of the Clergy, and particularly from them who came to be ordained, great readinesse of saying the Psalter by heart. It was S. Hieroms counsell to Rusticus, and when S. Gregory was to ordain the Bishop of Ancona, his inquiry concerning his Canonicall sufficiency was, if he could say Davids Psalmes without book; and for a dis∣ability of doing it, John the Priest was rejected from the Bishoprick of Ravenna. But this I conceive more relates to their private, then to their publick devotions, for I cannot think but that in respect of the publick Liturgy, it was enough for Bishops and Priests to read the Psalm; the requiring ability to remember them was to ingage them to a frequent use of so admirable devotions, in their pri∣vate offices.
But the Psalms were not onely of use to the Church, as they lay in their own position and form, but the devout men of severall ages drew them into Collects, Antipho∣naries, Responsories, and all other parts of their devoti∣ons. Thy made their Prayers out of the Psalms, their con∣fssions, their doxologies, their ejaculations for the most part were clauses or periods of the Psalter. S. Hierome made a collection of choyce versicles, and put them toge∣ther into their severall classes, and that was much of his devotion; the Collection is still extant under the Name of S. Hierome's Psalter. S. Athanasius made an Index of the severall occasions and matters of prayer and Eucha∣rist, and fitted Psalms to each particular, that was his de∣votion, the Psalms intire as they lay, onely he made titles of his own. I have seen of latter time a short hymne of some eight verses, which are indeed very choyce senten∣ces out of severall Psalms set together to make a compen∣dium of Liturgy of Breviary of our necessity, and devo∣tions, collected by S. Bernardine, it is a very good Copy to be followed. But if we look into the old Liturgies of the Eastern and Western Churches, and where we will almost into the the private devotions of the old Writers, we may say of them in the expression of the Prophet, Hau∣riebant aquas è sontibus Salvatoris, they drew their waters from the fountains of our Blessed Saviour, but through the limbecks of David. But the practice of this devotion I derived from a high∣er precedent, even of Christ and his Apostles: for before the passion immediately, they sung a Psalm, saith the Scri∣pture, Hymno dicto, saith the vulgar Latine, having recited or said a Psalm. But however it was part of Davids Psal∣ter that was sung, it was the great Allelujah, as the Jews called it, beginning at the 113. Psalme, to the 119. ex∣clusively, part of that was sung. But this devotion conti∣nued with our Blessed Saviour as long as breath was in him, for when he was upon the Crosse, he recited the 22. Psalme ad verbum, saith the Tradition of the Church,
and that he began it, saith the Scripture, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? The whole Psalme is rather a history then a prediction of the Passion; and what Ter∣tullian saith of the whole Psalter is particularly verified of this, Filium ad Patrem, id est, Christum ad Deum verba facientem repraesentat, it represents the Sonnes addresse to his Father, that is, Crist speaking to God. Against the example of Christ if we confront the practice of Anti∣christ, nothing can be said greater in commendtion of this manner of devotion: for B. Hippolytus, in his Oration of the end of the world, saith, that in the days of Anti∣christ, Psalmorum decantatio cessabit, they shall then no more use the singing or saying of the Psalmes; which when I had observed, without any further deliberation I fix'd upon the Psalter, as the best weapon against him, whose comming we have great reason to beleeve is not far off, so great preparation is making for him. From the example of Christ this grew to be a Practice Apostolicall, and their devotion came exactly home to the likenesse of the design of this very Book: they turn'd the Psalmes into Prayers. Thus it was said of Paul and Silas, Act. 16. They pray∣ed a Psalme, so it is in the Greek; and we have a Copy left us of one of the Prayers or Collects which they made out of the bowels of the second Psalme, it is in the fourth Chapter of the Acts, beginning at the 24. verse, and ends at the 31. And now I have shown the reasons of my choyce, and the precedents that I have followed. This last comes home to every circumstnce of my Book. I onely adde this, that since according to the instruction of our blessed Saviour, God is to be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth; no worshipping can be more true, or more spi∣ritull then the Psalter said with a pure minde and a hearty devotion. For David was Gods instrument to the Church, teaching and admonishing us (as our duty is to each oher) in Psalmes and Hymnes, and spirituall Songs, an the Spirit of Truth was the Grand Dictator of what David
wrote; so that we may confidently use this devotion as the Church of God ever did, making her addresses to God most frequently by the Psalms: so Prudentius reports the guise of Christendome: Te mente purâ, simplici, Te voce, te cantu pio, Rogare curvato genu, Flendo & canendo discimus.Hymn. 2. Cathemer. The Prayers which I have collected out of the Psalms, are nothing else, but the matter of the Psalmes put into nother mood, and fitted to the necessities of Christen∣dome, and of our selves in particular, according to the first designation or secondary intention of the blessed Spi∣rit: for the use of them could not expire in the person of David, though first occasioned (many of them) by his per∣sonall necessities: for all Scripture was written for our learning upon whom the ends of the world are come, (saith the Apostle) and Christ, and his Apostles, and the Church of all ages, hath taught us by their example and precepts, that the purposes of the holy Ghost were of great extent, and the profits universall both for times and occasions: so also were the Prayers which the Church made out of the Psalms, and sung them in her publick offi∣ces. S. Austin found great advantages by such devotions, as himselfe witnesses; Cùm reminiscor lachrymas meas quas fudi ad cantus Ecclesiae in primordiis recuperatae fidei meae, magnam instituti hujus utilitatem agnosco. When I call to minde the many teares I shed when I heard the Hymnes and Psalms of the Church, I cannot but acknow∣ledge the great benefit of this institution. And yet besides, the spirituall sense of an actuall devo∣tion, which is sooner had in this use of the Psalms then of other Prayers, I have had a meditation that this manner of devotion might be a good Symbol and instrument of Communion between Christians of a different Perswasi∣on:
For if we all would communicate in the same pri∣vate devotions, it were a great degree of Peace and Cha∣rity. The Nicen Fathers in their zeale against Heresie, forbad their people to be present at the Prayers of Here∣tiques; and they had great reason so long as they derived their Heresie into their Liturgy, into their very formes of Baptisme: But I am much scandalized, when I see a man refuse to communicate with me in my Prayers, even such as are in his own Breviary or Manuall. For me thinks it is strange that the Lords Prayer it selfe should be unhal∣lowed in the mouth of a Protestant, and yet the whole of∣fice from the mouth of one of their Priests, though never so wicked, though a Necromancer, a secret Jew, or any thing, so of their Communion, shall lose no title of its sanctity and value. So long as nothing of controversie is brought into our Prayers (and certainly we may very well pray to God without disputing) and Devotion is not made a party, he that refuses to joyn with me in what him∣self confesses true and holy, upon pretence I am a heretick, will certainly prove himself a Schismatick. For true it is, a Heretick is to be avoyded, that is in his temptation and in his heresie, just as a notorious Fornicator, an Adulte∣rer, a sentenc'd drunkard, and no more, the Apostles rule excommunicates all alike, with such men no not to eat, and this rule cannot with so much ease and certainty bee put to practice in the case of heresie, as in the case of drun∣kennesse, because heresie is as much harder to be judg'd, as the soule is more invisible then the body, especially if wee make heresy to be an error, not in the great articles of faith only, but to consist in minutes also, as all they do who refuse to communicate with Persons disagreeing even in the smallest article. But hee that is ready to joyne with all the societies of Christians in the world, in those things which are certainly true, just and pious, gives great probation that he hath at least, animum Catholicam, no Schismaticall soul, because he would actually communicate with all Christendome,
if bona fides in falso articulo, sincere perswasion (be it true or false) did not disoblige him, since he clearly distingui∣shes persons from things, and in all good things commu∣nicates with persons bad enough in others. This is the Communion of charity, and when the Communion of beleef is interrupted by misperswasion on one side, and too much confidence and want of charity on the other, the erring party hath humane infirmity to excuse him, but the uncharitable nothing at all. This therefore is the best and surest way, because we are all apt to be deceived, to be sin∣cere in our disquisitions, modest in our determinations, charitable in our censures, and apt to communicate in things of evident truth and confessed holinesse. And such is this devotion; the whole matter whereof is the Psalms of David, and the prayers Symbolicall, and alike in sub∣stance, and of the same expression throughout, where it is not altered by circumstances. So that I thought I might not imprudently intend this Book as an instrument of publike charity to Christians of different confessions. For I see that all sorts of people sing or say Davids Psalms, and by that use, if they under∣stand the consequences of their own Religion, accept st forms of prayer for their Liturgy, and this form in speciall is one of their own choyces for devotion; so that if all Christians, that think Davids Psalmes lawfull devotion, and shall observe the Collects from them to be just of the same Religion, would joyn in this or the like form, I am something confident the product would be charity, besides other spirituall advantages. For my own particular, since all Christendome is so much divided, and subdivided into innumerable Sects, I knew not how to give a better evi∣dence of my own beleef, and love of the Communion of Saints, and detestation of Schisme, then by an act of Re∣ligion, whose consequence might be (if men please) the advancement of an universall Communion. For in that which is most concerning, and is the best preserver of cha∣rity, I mean practicall devotion and active piety, the dif∣ferences
of Christendome are not so great and many, to make an eternall dis-union and fracture; and if we instance in Prayer, there is none at all abroad (some indeed wee have commenc'd at home, but) in the great divisions of Christendome, none at all but concerning the object of our prayers and adorations. For the Socinian shuts the Holy Ghost from his Letanies, and places the Sonne of God in a lower form of addresse. But concerning him I must say, as S. Paul said of the unbeleevers, What have I to doe with them that are without? For this very thing that they disbeleeve the article of the holy Trinity, they make themselves uncapable of the communion of other Christian people of the Nicene Faith, and we cannot so much as joyn with them in good prayers, because we are not agreed concerning the persons to whom our devotions must be addressed; and Christen∣dome never did so lightly esteem the article of the holy Trinity, as not to glory in it, and confesse it publickly, and expresse it in all our offices. The holy Ghost toge∣ther with the Father and the Son must be worshipped and glorified. But since all Christians of any publike confession and government, that is, all particular and nationall Churches, agree in the matter of prayers, and the great object, God in the mystery of the Trinity, if the the Church of Rome would make her addresses to God onely, through Jesus Christ our Lord, and leave the Saints in the Calendar, without drawing them into her offices (which they might doe without any prejudice to the suits they ask, unlesse Christs intercession without their conjuncture were im∣perfct) that we might all once pray together, we might hope for the blessings of peace and charity to be upon us all. I am sure they that have commenced this war against the King & the Church, first fell out with our Liturgy, and refused to joyn with us in our prayers: I have therefore a strong perswasion, that if we were joyned in our prayers, we should quickly be united in affections: and to this pur∣pose
I have some reason to beleeve this Psalter may doe good service. For I have seen an Essay of this designe made by that prudent and pious Moderator of Controversies, George Cassander, who did much for the peace of Chri∣stendome, when disagreeing interests and opinions made the great Schisme in the Western Churches, he puts forth Devotions, and with them Collects for each Psalme. But I said, it was a meer Essay, they are short of what he could have done: but when I saw his name at them, I guessed what every man else would have guessed concerning him, it was a pursuance of his great designe for peace and charity. I have sen three more, the first by an old Saxon Priest or Bishop, in which there is nothing of offence, nothing but pious and primitive for the matter, but the Collects so short, that the Psalm did scarce passe through the Prayer, so little of the relish is left, that the percolation is scarce discernable. A second was printed at Lyons, 1545. without the Au∣thors name, with a complying design of avoyding all of∣fence, and a not engaging God in our scholasticall wrang∣lings, but quite contrary to the Saxon; the Prayers are so full of Paraphrase, that I resolved to goe further, and see if I could speed better, and at last met with a Psalter printed lately at Antwerp by Command, very fairly in∣deed, with a Title and a Collect to every Psalm, all free from dispute, and partaking in the questions of Cristen∣dome, not so much as a gust or relish of his own party till the Psalter be done, the Prayers all good, and here I had fixed, but that I had found them very often to be imperti∣nent. But that which I observed in all these, is, that the de∣sign seems alike, and they are a form of devotion made for no private Sect, but for the benefit of all Christian people, which the Author of the Antwerp Psalter declines in his Additionall Devotions, where he brings in Letanies to Saints as grosly as he had before avoided it with discretion.
If any mans piety receives advantage by this intend∣ment, it is what I wish; but I desire that his charity might increase too, and that he would say a hearty Prayer, when his Devotion grows high and pregnant, for me and my family; for I am more desirous my Posterity should be pious then honourable. I have no ends of my own to serve, but to purchace an interest of Prayers; for I would fain have these Devotions goe out into a blessing to all them that shall use them, and yet return into my own bo∣some too: and if I may but receive the blessings of the Psalter, even the sure mercies of David, it will be like the reward of five Cities for the improvement of a few talents; I shall venture again in a greater negotiation, and traffique for ten talents; for there is no honour so great as to serve God in a great capacity; and though I wait not at the Altar, yet I will pay there such oblations of my time and industry, as I can redeem from the services of His Maje∣sty, and the impertinences of my own life.
PSALMI. Dies. Ad Matutinas. Ad Vespertinas. j 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. ij 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. iij 15, 16, 17, 18. iv 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. v 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. vj 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. vij 35, 36, 37. viij 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43. ix 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49. x 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55. xj 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61. xij 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67. xiij 68, 69, 70. xiv 71, 72, 73, 74. xv 75, 76, 77, 78. xvj 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85. xvij 86, 87, 88, 89. xviij 90, 91, 92, 93, 94. xix 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101. xx 102, 103, 104. xxj 105, 106. xxij 107, 108, 109. xxiij 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115. xxiv 116, 117, 118, 119, Inde quatuor periodi. xxv Inde quinque periodi ejusd. Inde quatuor periodi ejusd. xxvj Inde quinque periodi ejusd. Inde quatuor ultimi ejusd. xxvij 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131. xxviij 132, 133, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138. xxix 139, 140, 141; 142, 143. xxx 144, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150.
THE INDEX SERVING TO direct the Readers devotion upon all emergent occasions to the severall matters compriz'd in the PSALMES and Collects of the whole Book. Petitions. FOr grace to love Gods Law, Psal. 19, 119. For preservation frō sin, Ps. 19, 40. & Collect p. 228 For preservation from the punishment of sin and Gods Judgements, ps. 25, 28, 75, 76. For pardon for our sins, ps. 6, 25, 32, 38, 40, 41, 51, 65, 130, 143. Col. p. 212. For propagation of the Gospel, ps. 47, 68, 72, 145. Col. p. 232. For Gods Providence and Protection, ps. 4, 16, 17, 23, 86, 91, 121. For protection against malicious and wicked persons, ps. 5, 70, 94, 109, 140. Col. p. 251, 255. For the Church and all faithfull people, ps. 5.10, 45, 48, 53, 68, 70, 74, 79, 80, 93, 94, 112, 132, 237, Col. p. 217. For defence against all Enemies ghostly and bodily, pub∣like and private, ps. 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 18, 27, 31, 35, 40, 54, 55, 59, 70, 108, 109, 135, 141. Col. p. 235, 252, 295. For a holy life, sanctity and innocence, ps. 1, 15, 23, 24, 25, 50, 84, 85, 101, 119, 126. Col. p. 22, 114, 165, 187, 228. For salvation and eternall joyes, ps. 16, 24, 28, 36, 50, 75, 84, 87, 97, 126. Col. p. 114, 133, 204, 215, 225, 299. For defence of our innocence, ps. 7. For a blessed and holy death, ps. 1, 33, 36, 50, 88, 90, 102, 142.
For deliverance from treason and private conspiracies, ps. 41, 55, 109. For the King, ps. 21, 61, 89, 352. For deliverance from death and damnation, ps. 28, 30, 102, 125. Col. p. 250. For health, ps. 91, 102. For all Christian Princes and Judges, ps. 82. For advancement of Religion, Col. p. 272. & 275. For deliverance from power of the devill, ps. 57. Col. p. 226 For peace, 46, 122, 133, 144. Col. p. 257, 269. For comfort in sadnesse, ps. 101, 102, 142. Col. p. 226, 283 For spirituall blessings, ps. 65, 73. For fruitfulnesse of the Earth, ps. 65. For cōpetency of living, ps. 127. Col. p. 119, 133, 297, 299 For tranquillity of spirit, Col. p. 143, & 144. For Victory, ps. 144. For comfort of Gods Spirit, ps. 34, 42, 43, 51, 61, 102, 142 Col. p. 226, 239. Prayers for particular graces. FOr Repentance, Col. p. 243, 275. For Mortification, ps. 131. Col. p. 275. For humility, ps. 131. Col. p. 253. For patience, ps. 94. For perseverance, Col. p. 165, & 166, 248, 249, & 250. For Devotion & Religion, ps. 27, 33, 42, 43, 99, 119, 141. Col. p. 285. For charity, ps. 41, 112. For liberality and contempt of riches, ps. 4, 49, 73. Col. p. 114, 240. For hope and trust in God, ps. 33, 37, 46, 49▪ 56, 57, 62, 77, 115, 125, 146. Col. p. 138, 242. For reverence and fear of God, ps. 2, 33, 112, 128. Col. p. 271, & 272. For watchfulnesse over our ways, ps. 56. For zeal, ps. 119. Col. p. 238, 241.246, & 247. For health and newnesse of life, Col. p. 170, 171.
Prayers for severall times and occasions. IN time of sadnesse, ps. 61, 102, 142, Col. p. 226, 283. In time of persecution and oppression, ps. 7, 9, 10, 52, 53, 58, 64, 69, 63, 137, 142, Col. p. 279. In time of War, ps. 18, 44, 46, 60, 89, 108. In time of slander, ps. 52, 57, 64, 120. In time of temptation, ps. 13, 19, 60, Col. p. 191, & 192, 235, 239. In time of sicknesse, ps. 30, 31, 88, 90, 102, 142. In time of publike calamity and distraction, ps. 46, 89, 91. In time of spirituall desertion, ps. 34, 42, 43, 51, 61, 102. Col. p. 239. In time of after lapse into sin, ps. 51, Col. p. 258. In time of solemne devotion, ps. 20, 81. On Good Friday, ps. 22. On Ascension day, ps. 24. Prayers preparatory, TO the Sacrament, ps. 23, 26, 111, Col. p. 151. To death, ps. 26, 30, 31, 39, 71, 88, 90, 142, viz. to bee said in sicknesse or old age. Deprecations, AGainst Atheisme and Irreligion, ps. 14. Against Idolatry, ps. 115. Against Heretiques and Heresie, ps. 59. Against danger of evil company, ps. 1, 12, 120. Against Sacriledge, and sacrilegious persons, ps. 74, 83. Against fearfulnesse and doubting, ps. 77. Against covetousnesse, ps. 4, 37, Col. p. 240. Against enemies of the Church, ps 59, 68, 74, 83, 199, 129 Against death, ps. 88. Meditations, ON the day of Judgement, ps. 50, 97 On the Passion of Christ, ps 22. On the joys of Heaven, ps. 126, 149.
On the perfections and excellencies of God manifested in his creatures, ps. 8, 104. On Gods providence over his people, and mercy to the penitent, ps. 74, 105, 92, 106, 147. On Gods Justice and Judgements on sinners, ps. 78, 92. On his Omnipotence and Omnipresence, ps. 139. Acts of Vertue. ADoration of God, ps. 8, 29, 67, 95, 96, 145. Col. p. 22. Adoration of the second Person in the Trinity, ps. 2, 4, 72, 110. Acts of hope in God, ps. 4, 11, 18. Acts of Religion, ps. 134. Acts of praise to God, ps. 17, 135, 148, 150. Acts of love to God, ps. 116. Desire after God and heavenly things, ps. 63, 84, 87. Of Election, or preferring spirituall blessings before tem∣porall, ps. 37, 73. Thanksgivings, FOr all Gods mercies, ps. 103, 136, 138. For his mercy and truth, ps. 100. For delivering from sicknesse and all other dangers, ps. 40, 107, 114, 116. For delivering from enemies and all other troubles, ps. 81, 107, 124, 144. For pardon of our sins, ps. 85, 106, 116. For redemption by Christ, ps. 98, 118. For the blessings of the Gospel, ps. 111. For Acts of Gods Providence, and particular care over us, ps. 113, 121. For Victory, ps. 144.
THE PSALTER of DAVID, With Titles and Collects fitted to each Psalme, &c. The j day. Morning Prayer. PSALME 1. A Prayer that we may continually meditate in Gods law, and have no fellowship with wicked persons in the manner of their living or dying. BLessed is the man that hath not walked in the counsell of the ungodly, nor stand in the way of sinners: and hath not sit in the seat of the scornfull 2 But his delight is in the Law of the Lord: and in his Law will he exercise himself day and night. 3 And he shall be like a tree planted by the water side: that will bring forth his fruit in due season. 4 His leafe also shll not wither: and look whatsoever he doth, it shall prosper. 5 As for the ungodly, it is not so with them: but they are like the chaffe, which the winde scattereth away from the face of the earth.
6 Therefore the ungodly shall not be able to stand in the judgement: neither the sinners in the Congregation of the righteous. 7 But the Lord knoweth the way of the righteous: and the way of the ungodly shall perish. The Prayer. O Holy Jesu, fountain of all blessing, the word of the Eternall Father, be pleased to sow the good seed of thy word in our hearts, and water it with the dew of thy divinest Spi∣rit, that while we exercise our selves in it day and night, we may be like a tree planted by the water side, bringing forth in all times and sea∣sons the fruits of a holy conversation, that we may never walk in the way of sinners, nor have fellowship with the unfruitfull works of dark∣nesse, but that when this life is ended, we may have our portion in the congregation of the righteous, and may be able to stand upright in judgement, through the supporting arme of thy mercy, O blessed Saviour and Redeemer Jesu. Amen. PSALME 2. A Prayer to promote Christs Kingdome, and for grace to serve him with feare and reverence. WHy doe the heathen so furiously rage together: and why do the people imagine a vain thing? 2 The Kings of the earth stand up, and the rulers take counsell together: against the Lord, and against his Anointed.
3 Let us break their bonds asunder: and cast away their cords from us. 4 He that dwelleth in heaven shall laugh them to scorn: the Lord shall have them in derision. 5 Then he shall speak unto them in his wrath: and vex them in his sore displeasure. 6 Yet have I set my King: upon my holy hill of Sion. 7 I will preach the law whereof the Lord hath said un∣to me: Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. 8 Desire of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance: and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. 9 Thou shalt bruise them with a rod of yron: and break them in pieces like a potters vessell. 10 Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings: be learned, ye that are judges of the earth. 11 Serve the Lord in fear: and rejoyce unto him with reverence. 12 Kisse the Son, lest he be angry, and so he perish from the right way: if his wrath be kindled (yea but a little) blessed are all they that put their trust in him. The Prayer. O Blessed Jesu, into whose hands is com∣mitted all dominion and power in the Kingdomes and Empires of the world, out of whose mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it thou mightest smite the Nations and rule them with a rod of yron, on whose vesture and on whose thigh a name is written, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, we adore thee in thy infinite excellency and most glorious exaltati∣on, beseeching thee to reveale thy name and
the glory of thy Kingdome to the Heathen which know thee not, and to the uttermost parts of the earth which are given thee for thy possession, and inheritance. And to us give thy grace to serve thee in fear, and plant the reve∣rence of thy law and of thy name in our hearts, lest thy wrath be kindled against us, and thou break us in pieces like vessels of dishonour. Have mercy on us, O King of Kings, for we have put our trust in thee, thou art our Saviour and Redeemer Jesu. Amen. PSALME 3. A Prayer for defence against all our Enemies, Bodily and Ghostly. LOrd how are they increased that trouble me: many are they that rise against me. 2 Many one there be that say of my soul: There is no help for him in his God. 3 But thou, O Lord, art my defender: thou art my wor∣ship, and the lifter up of mine head. 4 I did call upon the Lord with my voice: and he heard me out of his holy hill. 5 I laid me down and slept, and rose up again: for the Lord sustained me. 6 I will not be afraid for ten thousands of people: that have set themselves against me round about. 7 Up Lord, and help me, O my God: for thou smitest all mine enemies upon the check-bone, thou hast brokn the teeth of the ungodly. 8 Salvation belongeth unto the Lord: and thy blessing is upon thy people.
The Prayer. O Lord our defender have pity upon us, behold, the armies of the Flesh, the World, and the Devill fight against our Soules, and multiply against us every day temptations, and disadvantages. We are not able of our selves, as of our selves, to think a good thought, much lesse to put to flight the armies of them that have set themselves against us round about. But thou, O Lord, art our defender, thou art our worship and the lifter up of our heads. Up Lord and help us, arme us with the shield of faith, and the sword of the Spirit, and in all times of temptation and battell cover our heads with the helmet of Salvation, so shall we not be afraid for ten thousands of our enemies, for salvation belongeth unto thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 4. A Prayer in which we exercise an act of hope in God, and desire his providence over us. HEare me when I call, O God of my righteousnesse: for thou hast set me at liberty when I was in trouble, have mercy upon me, and hearken unto my prayer. 2 O ye sonnes of men, how long will ye blaspheme mine honour: and have such pleasure in vanity, and seek after leasing? 3 Know this also, that the Lord hath chosen to himself the man that is godly: when I call upon the Lord, he will heare me.
4 Stand in awe, and sinne not: commune with your own heart, and in your chamber, and be still. 5 Offer the sacrifice of righteousnesse: and put your trust in the Lord. 6 There be many that say: Who will shew us any good? 7 Lord, lift thou up: the light of thy countenance up∣on us. 8 Thou hast put gladnesse in my heart: since the time that their corn, and wine, and oyle increased. 9 I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest: for it is thou Lord onely that makest me dwell in safety. The Prayer. O God who art the author of all righteous∣nesse, from whom all grace, and safety, and glory does proceed, hear the prayers of thy humble servants whensoever we call upon thee in our trouble, for our trust is in thee alone, and no creature can shew us any good unlesse it derives from thee; shew the light of thy countenance upon us, let thy providence guide all our actions and sufferings to thy glo∣ry, and our spirituall benefit, and consigne us to the blessednesse of thy Kingdome by the testi∣mony of thy holy Spirit, that we may not place our ioyes and hopes upon the good things of this life which perish and cannot satisfie, but in the eternal fountain of all true felicities, that thou being our treasure, our hearts may be fix∣ed upon thee by the bands of Charity and Obedience, that thou maist make us to dwell
in safety here, and when our days are done, we may lay us down in peace and take our rest in thy armes, expecting the comming of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. PSALME 5. A prayer for blessing upon all pious people, and for protection against the malice of wicked men. POnder my words, O Lord: consider my meditation. 2 O hearken thou unto the voyce of my calling, my King and my God: for unto thee will I make my prayer. 3 My voyce shalt thou hear betimes, O Lord: early in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up. 4 For thou art the God that hast no pleasure in wick∣ednesse: neither shall any evill dwell with thee. 5 Such as be foolish shall not stand in thy sight: for thou hatest all them that work vanity. 6 Thou shalt destroy them that speak leasing: the Lord will abhorre both the bloud thirsty and deceitfull man. 7 But as for me, I will come into thy house, even up∣on the multitude of thy mercy: and in thy fear will I wor∣ship toward thy holy temple. 8 Lead me, O Lord, in thy righteousnesse because of mine enemies: make thy way plain before my face. 9 For there is no faithfulnesse in his mouth: their in∣ward parts are very wickednesse. 10 Their throat is an open sepulchre: they flatter with their tongue. 11 Destroy thou them, O God, let them perish through their own imaginations: cast them out in the multitude of their ungodlinesse for they have rebelled against thee. 12 And let all them that put their trust in thee, rejoyce: they shall ever be giving of thanks, because thou defendest
them, they that love thy name shall be joyfull in thee. 13 For thou Lord wilt give thy blessing unto the righte∣ous: and with thy favourable kindnesse wilt thou defend him, as with a shield. The Prayer. O Most holy and blessed Lord God, who canst take no pleasure in wickednesse, neither can evill come nigh thy dwelling, de∣fend us and all thy holy Church from the fraud and malice of blood-thirsty and deceitfull men, and from the crafty insinuations of all them that work vanity: but let thy blessings bee upon the righteous, and let thy favourable kindnesse defend thy whole Church as with a shield, that all those who put their trust in thy mercy may be ever giving of thanks, and may be joyfull in thee. O lead us in thy righ∣teousnesse that we become not a rejoycing to our enemies, but that we may worship thee in feare, and come into thy house to make our prayers unto thee, and to give thee thanks for the multitude of thy mercies which thou hast given us in our Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen.
Evening Prayer. PSALME 6. A Prayer of a penitent person for remission of his sinnes. O Lord rebuke me not in thine indigna∣tion: neither chasten me in thy dis∣pleasure. 2 Have mercy upon mee, O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord heal me, for my bones are vexed. 3 My soul is also sore troubled: but Lord how long wilt thou punish me? 4 Turn thee O Lord, and deliver my soul: O save me for thy mercies sake. 5 For in death no man remembreth thee: and who will give thee thanks in the pit? 6 I am weary of my groaning, every night wash I my bed: and water my couch with my tears. 7 My beauty is gone for very trouble: and worn away because of all mine enemies. 8 Away from me all ye that work vanity: for the Lord hath heard the voyce of my weeping. 9 The Lord hath heard my petition: the Lord will re∣ceive my prayer. 10 All mine enemies shall be confounded and sore vered: they shall be turned back, and put to shame sud∣denly. The Prayer. O Most mercifull God, whose property is alwayes to have mercy and to forgive, behold with the eyes of thy pity and compas∣sion the estate of thy humble servants, made
most miserable by reason of our sins. Hear the voyce of our weeping, pity our groaning, strengthen us, for we are weak, heal us, for our bones are vexed, and deliver our soules from death, that being saved from the bottomlesse pit, we may give thanks to thy holy Name. O turn from the severity of thy displeasure, and visit us with thy mercy and salvation. For all our sinnes give us a great sorrow and contriti∣on, and in our sorrows let thy comforts sustain us, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 7. A prayer for defence of our Innocence against the unjust molestation of our enemies. O Lord my God, in thee have I put my trust: save me from all them that persecute me, and deliver me. 2 Lest he devour my soul like a Lion, and tear it in peeces: while there is none to help. 3 O Lord my God, if I have done any such thing: or if there be any wickednesse in my hands. 4 If I have rewarded evill unto him that dealt friendly with me: yea, I have delivered him that without any cause is mine enemy. 5 Then let mine enemy persecute my soule, and take me: yea, let him tread my life down upon the earth, and lay mine honour in the dust. 6 Stand up, O Lord, in thy wrath, and lift up thy self: because of the indignation of mine enemies, arise up for me in the judgement that thou hast commanded. 7 And so shall the congregation of the people come about thee: for their sakes therefore lift up thy self again. 8 The Lord shall judge the people, give sentence with me, O Lord: according to my righteousnesse, and
according to the innocency that is in mee. 9 O let the wickednesse of the ungodly come to an end: but guide thou the just. 10 For the righteous God: trieth the very hearts and reins. 11 My help commeth of God: which preserveth them that are true of heart. 12 God is a righteous Judge, strong and patient: and God is provoked every day. 13 If a man will not turn, he will whet his sword: he hath bent his bow and made it ready. 14 He hath prepared for him the instruments of death: he ordaineth his arrows against the persecutors. 15 Behold, he travaileth with mischiefe: he hath con∣cived sorrow, and brought forth ungodlinesse. 16 He hath graven and digged up a pit: and is fallen himself into the destruction that he made for other. 17 For his travell shall come upon his own head: and his wickednesse shall fall on his own pate. 18 I will give thanks unto the Lord, according to his righteousnesse: and will praise the name of the Lord the most High. The Prayer. O God from whom commeth our help, thou art a righteous Judge and preservest all that are true of heart, deliver us from our per∣secutors who travell with mischief against us, and have digged a pit for our destruction. O let their wickedness and malicious devices against thy servants come utterly to an end for ever∣more. Thou, O Lord, art strong and able to take vengeance, and yet being provoked every day still art patient towards us and compassionate. Deliver us from their wrath to whom we have
done no injustice or displeasure: pardon our offences against thee, and protect our innocen∣cy against them, that we may praise thy name and give thanks unto thee for thy righteous∣nesse and slvation, who art blessed for ever∣more. Amen. PSALME 8. A contemplation of the Divine beauty and ex∣cellency manifested in his Creatures. O Lord our governour, how excellent is thy name in all the world: thou that hast set thy glory above the heavens! 2 Out of the month of very babes and sucklings hast thou ordained strength, because of thine enemies: that thou mightest still the enemy and the avenger. 3 For I will consider the heavens, even the works of thy fingers: the moon and the starres which thou hast ordained. 4 What is man that thou art mindfull of him: and the son of man that thou visitest him? 5 Thou madest him lower then the angels: to crown him with glory and worship. 6 Thou makest him to have dominion of the works of thy hands: and thou hast put all things in subjection un∣der his feet. 7 All sheep and oxen: yea, and the beasts of the field. 8 The fowls of the aire, and the fishes of the sea: and whatsoever walketh through the paths of the seas. 9 O Lord our governour: how excellent is thy name in all the world! The Prayer. O Lord God, Father of men and Angels, God of all the Creatures, who hast created all things in a wonderfull order, and hast made
them all conveyances of thy mercies to man∣kinde, give us great and dreadfull apprehensi∣ons of thy glory and immensity, thy Majesty and mercy, that we may adore thee as our Creator, love thee as our Redeemer, fear thee as our God, obey thee as our Governour, and praise thee as the author and fountain of all perfections, and all good which thou hast communicated to thy creatures, that they may all in their proportions doe thee service, who hast to that end made the world, and redeemed us by our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. Morning Prayer. PSALME 9. A Prayer of poore and oppressed people against their persecutors. I Will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, with my whole heart: I will speak of all thy marvellous works. 2 I will be glad and rejoyce in thee: yea, my songs will I make of thy name, O thou most Highest. 3 While mine enemies are driven back: they shall fall and perish at thy presence. 4 For thou hast maintained my right, and my cause: thou art set in the throne that judgest right. 5 Thou hast rebuked the heathen, and destroyed the ungodly: thou hast put out their name for ever and ever. 6 O thou enemy, destructions are come to a perpetuall end: even as the cities which thou hast destroyed, their
memoriall is perished with them. 7 But the Lord shall endure for ever: hee hath also prepared his seat for judgement. 8 For he shall judge the world in righteousnesse: and minister true judgement unto the people. 9 The Lord also will be a defence for the oppressed: even a refuge in due time of trouble. 10 And they that know thy name, will put their trust in thee: for thou Lord hast never failed them that seeke thee. 11 O praise the Lord which dwelleth in Sion: shew the people of his doings. 12 For when he maketh inquisition for blood, he re∣membreth them: and forgetteth not the complaint of the poore. 13 Have mercy upon me, O Lord: consider the trou∣ble which I suffer of them that hate me: thou that liftest me up from the gates of death. 14 That I may shew all thy praises within the ports of the daughter of Sion: I will rejoyce in thy salvation. 15 The heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made: in the same net which they hid privily, is their foot taken. 16 The Lord is known to execute judgement: the ungodly is trapped in the work of his own hands. 17 The wicked shall be turned into hell: and all the people that forget God. 18 For the poor shall not alway be forgotten: the pa∣tient abiding of the meek shall not perish for ever. 19 Up Lord, and let not man have the upper hand: let the heathen be judged in thy sight. 20 Put them in fear (O Lord:) that the heathen may know themselves to be but men. The Prayer. O Lord God who art a defence for the oppressed, and a refuge in due time of
trouble, have mercy upon us thy servants, who are violently assaulted by enemies without, and weaknesses and temptations within. Thou ne∣ver failest them that seek thee, but lovest to hear the poor make their complaint unto thee in their trouble, and art known to execute judgement upon them that oppresse them. Pity us, and look upon the trouble we suffer of them that hate us: deliver us from the strivings of our adversaries, lift us up from the gates of death, that being safe under thy mercies and protection, we may give thanks unto thee with our spirits and voices, we may embrace thee with a lively faith, fear thee with all our hearts, serve thee with all our powers & faculties both of soul and body, all the dayes of our life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 10. A Prayer to God in times of Persecution and Warre against the Church. WHy standest thou so farre off (O Lord:) and hi∣dest thy face in the needfull time of trouble? 2 The ungodly for his owne lust doth persecute the poor: let them be taken in the crafty wilinesse that they have imagined. 3 For the ungodly hath made boast of his own hearts desire: and speaketh good of the covetous whom God ab∣horreth. 4 The ungodly is so proud that he careth not for God: neither is God in all his thoughts. 5 His wayes are alway grievous: thy judgements are
far above out of his sight, and therefore defieth he all his enemies. 6 For he hath said in his heart, Tush, I shall never be cast down: there shall no harm happen unto me. 7 His mouth is full of cursing, deceit, and fraud: un∣der his tongue is ungodlinesse and vanity. 8 Hee sitteth lurking in the theevish corners of the streets: and privily in his lurking dens doth he murder the innocent, his eyes are set against the poor. 9 For he lieth waiting secretly, even as a lion lurketh he in his den: that he may ravish the poor. 10 He doth ravish the poor: when he getteth him into his net. 11 He falleth down and humbleth himself: that the congregation of the poor may fall into the hand of his Captains. 12 He hath said in his heart, Tush, God hath forgot∣ten: he hideth away his face, and he will never see it. 13 Arise (O Lord God) and lift up thine hand: for∣get not the poor. 14 Wherefore should the wicked blaspheme God: while he doth say in his heart, Tush, thou God carest not for it? 15 Surely thou hast seen it: for thou beholdest ungod∣linesse and wrong. 16 That thou maist take the matter into thine hand: the poor committeth himself unto thee, for thou art the helper of the friendlesse. 17 Break thou the power of the ungodly and malici∣ous: take away his ungodlinesse, and thou shalt find none. 18 The Lord is King for ever and ever: and the hea∣then are perished out of the land. 19 Lord, thou hast heard the desire of the poore: thou preparest their heart, and thine eare hearkneth thereto. 20 To help the fatherlesse and poor unto their right: that the man of the earth be no more exalted against them.
The Prayer. O Lord God, who beholdest all the actions of men, and seest all the ungodlinesse of sinners, and the wrong they doe unto thy ser∣vants, we flie unto thee for succour and defence in this our needfull time of trouble. Behold, O Lord, how the Enemies of thy Church have set their eyes against her, and use all violences and arts that thy poor servants may fall under the hands of their Captains. Thou seest their ma∣lice and their confidences, they fear thee not, neither art thou, O God, in all their thoughts. But thou art our King for ever and ever, and the helper of the friendlesse. We commit our selves wholly to thy mercy and providence, take the matter into thine own hand, let them perish out of the land that are exalted against thee, and against thy Church, that we being de∣livered from feare of our enemies, may serve thee with constant and regular devoti∣ons all the dayes of our life, through Jesus our Lord. Amen. PSALME 11. An addresse to God by way of hope and confidence in him, and a prayer against our secret ene∣mies. IN the Lord put I my trust: how say ye then to my soul, that she should flee as a bird unto the hill? 2 For lo, the ungodly bend their bow, and make rea∣dy
their arrows within the quiver: that they may privily shoot at them which are true of heart. 3 For the foundations will bee cast down: and what hath the righteous done? 4 The Lord is in his holy temple: the Lords seat is in heaven. 5 His eyes consider the poore: and his eye-lids trieth the children of men. 6 The Lord alloweth the righteous: but the ungodly, and him that delighteth in wickednesse doth his soule ab∣horre. 7 Upon the ungodly he shall rain snares, fire and brim∣stone, storm and tempest: this shall be their portion to drink. 8 For the righteous Lord loveth righteousnesse: his countenance will behold the thing that is just. The Prayer. O Lord who art our hope and our refuge, & the exceeding great reward of all that trust in thee, have mercy upon us thy servants, who have no confidences but upon thy mercies and infinite loving kindnesse. Defend us from all secret Plots and designes, intended against our peace and securities by them that privily shoot at us, and would overthrow the founda∣tions of our repose and safety. And that we may be better intitled to thy protection and care over us, make us to love righteousnesse, & to follow the things that are just, that by thy grace we being defended from taking delight in wickednesse, may also be delivered from the portion of the ungodly, which thou givest
them to drink, upon whom thou rainest snares, fire and brimstone, storm and tempest. Deliver us, O Lord, from the eternall pressure of thy wrath, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Evening Prayer. PSALME 12. A prayer for defence against the dangers of evill Company. HElp me, Lord, for there is not one godly man left: for the faithfull are minished from among the children of men. 2 They talk of vanity every one with his neighbour: they doe but flatter with their lips, and dissemble with their dou∣ble heart. 3 The Lord shall root out all deceitfull lips: and the tongue that speaketh proud things. 4 Which have said, With our tongue we will prevail: we are they that ought to speak, who is Lord over us? 5 Now for the comfortlesse troubles sake of the nee∣dy: and because of the deep sighing of the poor. 6 I will up (saith the Lord:) and will help every one from him that I welleth against him, and will set them at rest. 7 The words of the Lord are pure words: even as the silver which from the earth is tried, and purified seven times in the fire. 8 Thou shalt keep them, O Lord: thou shalt preserve him from this generation for ever. 9 The ungodly walk on every side: when they are ex∣alted, the children of men are put to rebuke.
The Prayer. O Most blessed Jesu, who in thy eternall providence doest suffer the tares and the wheat to grow together untill the harvest, per∣mitting hereticks and vicious persons to com∣municate in the externall society of thy peo∣ple, grant us thy grace, that we may so beleeve, and heartily obey all thy pure words and di∣ctates, which thou hast taught us in thy holy Gospel, that we may be kept unspotted of the world, and although▪ the ungodly walk on every side, yet we may persevere in the wayes of righteousnesse, and increase the number of the godly, that at last we may be admitted in∣to the glorious fellowship of Saints and An∣gels, who behold thy face and the glories of thy Kingdome, where thou livest and raignest with the Father and the holy Ghost, Eternall God world without end. Amen. PSALME 13. A Prayer in time of temptation. HOw long wilt thou forget me (O Lord) for ever: how long wilt thou hide thy face from me? 2 How long shall I seek counsell in my soul, and be so vexed in my heart: how long shall mine enemies triumph over me? 3 Consider and hear me, O Lord my God: lighten mine eyes, that I sleep not in death. 4 Lest mine enemy say, I have prevailed against him: for if I be cast down, they that trouble me will rejoyce at it.
5 But my trust is in thy mercy: and my heart is joyfull in thy salvation. 6 I will sing of the Lord, because he hath dealt so lo∣vingly with me: yea, I will prais the name of the Lord most Highest. The Prayer. O God the giver of all grace, the author of all Ghostly strength, look with compas∣sion upon our infirmities, and how unequally we are assaulted by many, by powerfull, by malicious adversaries. How long, O Lord, how long shall we seek for rest and finde none? O give us either peace or victory, and preserve us that we sleep not in the death of sin, lest our grand enemy the Devill, say, he hath prevailed against us. Our trust is in thy mercy, and thy delight is in it; strengthen us so with thy grace that we may fight a good fight, and conquer, and be crown'd with a crown of righteous∣ness, which we begge we may receive from the hands, and by the mercies of our Lord and Sa∣viour Jesus Christ. Amen. Psalme 14. A Prayer against Atheisme and irreligion. THe fool hath said in his heart: There is no God. 2 They are corrupt and become abominable in their doings: there is not one that doth good, (no not one.) 3 The Lord looked down from heaven upon the chil∣dren of men: to see if there were any that would under∣stand, and seek after God.
4 But they are all gone out of the way, they are alto∣gether become abominable: there is none that doth good, no not one. 5 Their throat is an open sepulchre, with their tongues have they deceived: the poyson of asps is under their lips. 6 Their mouth is full of cursing and bitternesse: their feet are swift to shed bloud. 7 Destruction and unhappinesse is in their ways, and the way of peace have they not known: there is no fear of God before their eyes. 8 Have they no knowledge, that they are all such wor∣kers of mischief: eating up my people as it were bread? 9 And call not upon the Lord, there were they brought in great fear (even where no fear was:) for God is in the generation of the righteous. 10 As for you, ye have made a mock at the counsell of the poor: because he putteth his trust in the Lord. 11 Who shall give salvation unto Israel out of Sion: when the Lord turneth the captivity of his people, then shall Jacob rejoyce, and Israel shall be glad. The Prayer. O Eternall God, Creator of the world, con∣server of the Creatures, whose essence and goodnesse and perfections are infinite, and made so manifest in the creation, order, pro∣tection, and disposition of thy creatures, that without the greatest sin & folly in the world, we cannot but acknowledge thee, and adore thee with the lowest adorations of soul and body, and with the most profound humility. Preserve us, O Lord, in great Religion, Vene∣ration, and reverence of thy Divine perfecti∣ons.
Keep us from all distrust of thy provi∣dence, all doubtings of thy infinitenesse, or of any other article of our faith, and grant that we confessing thee before all the world, may be acknowledged for thy children, and rewar∣ded among thy servants, not for our righteous∣nesse, but through the merits and mercies of our dearest Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. Morning Prayer. PSALME 15. Which is a short rule of a good life, and a desire of innocency and sanctity. LOrd, who shall dwell in thy tabernacle: or who shall rest upon thy holy hill? 2 Even he that leadeth an uncorrupt life: and doth the thing which is right, and speaketh the truth from his heart. 3 He that hath used no deceit in his tongue, nor done evill to his neighbour: and hath not slandered his neighbour. 4 He that setteth not by himself, but is lowly in his own eyes: and maketh much of them that fear the Lord. 5 He that sweareth unto his neighbour, and disappoin∣teth him not: though it were to his own hinderance. 6 He that hath not given his money upon usury: nor ta∣ken reward against the innocent.
The Prayer. O Lord let thy mercy preserve us in holi∣nesse and innocency, or if through infir∣mity we fall, make us to rise again by peni∣tence, that we may lead an uncorrupt life with humility, and truth, and justice, not slandering our neighbour, not invading his right, not breaking our trust, not oppressing the indigent and necessitous, but doing good to all, and e∣specially making much of them that fear the Lord; that we may never fall from thy favour, but at the end of our weary pilgrimage we may take our rest upon thy holy hill, and dwell in thy tabernacle where thou raignest with infinite glory and felicities, God eternall, world without end. Amen. PSALME 16. A Prayer for the blessings of Gods providence and preservation in this life, and for glory here∣after. PReserve me, O God: for in thee have I put my trust. 2 O my soul, thou hast said unto the Lord: Then art my God, my goods are nothing unto thee. 3 All my delight is upon the Saints that are in the earth: and upon such as excell in vertue. 4 But they that run after another god: shall have great trouble. 5 Their drink-offerings of bloud will I not offer: neither make mention of their names within my lips. 6 The Lord himself is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup: thou shalt maintain my lot.
7 The lot is fallen unto me in a fair ground: yea, I have a goodly heritage. 8 I will thank the Lord for giving me warning: my reins also chasten me in the night season. 9 I have set God alwayes before me: for he is on my right hand, therefore I shall not fall. 10 Wherefore my heart was glad, and my glory rejoy∣ced: my flesh also shall rest in hope. 11 For why? thou shalt not leave my soul in hell: nei∣ther shalt thou suffer thine Holy one to see corruption. 12 Thou shalt shew me the path of life, in thy presence is the fulnesse of joy: and at thy right hand there is plea∣sure for evermore. The Prayer. O God, who art the portion of our inheri∣tance, our God, and our preserver, pre∣serve and maintaine all those good things which thou hast wrought in us, and for us; and that we may never fall, give us thy grace, that we may set thee always before us, rejoycing in thee, and delighting in the Saints that are upon the earth, that when our flesh shall see corruption, our Souls may not be left in hell, but may walk in the paths of life; and in the day of restitution of all things, both bodies and souls may have a goodly heritage, even the lot of thy right hand, where there is pleasure for evermore, and where we may see thy face, and the glory of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen.
PSALME 17. A Prayer for protection against the injuries of our Enemies, Bodily and Ghostly. HEar the right, O Lord, consider my complaint: and hearken unto my prayer, that goeth not out of feign∣ed lips. 2 Let my sentence come forth from thy presence: and let thine eyes look upon the thing that is equall. 3 Thou hast proved and visited mine heart in the night season, thou hast tried me, and shalt finde no wickednesse in me: for I am utterly purposed, that my mouth shall not offend. 4 Because of mens works that are done against the words of my lips: I have kept me from the ways of the destroyer. 5 O hold thou up my goings in thy paths: that my foot-steps slip not. 6 I have called upon thee, O God, for thou shalt hear me: encline thine ear to me, and hearken unto my words. 7 Shew thy marvellous loving kindnesse, thou that art the Saviour of them which put their trust in thee: from such as resist thy right hand. 8 Keep me as the apple of an eye: hide me under the shadow of thy wings. 9 From the ungodly that trouble me: mine enemies compasse me round about, to take away my soul. 10 They are inclosed in their own fat: and their mouth speaketh proud things. 11 They lie waiting in our way on every side: turn∣ing their eyes down to the ground. 12 Like as a lion that is greedy of his prey: and as it were a lions whelp lurking in secret places. 13 Up Lord, disappoint him, and cast him down: de∣liver my soul from the ungodly, which is a sword of thine.
14 From the men of thy hand, O Lord, from the men, I say, and from the evill world: which have their portion in this life, whose bellies thou fillest with thy hid trea∣sure. 15 They have children at their desire: and leave the rest of their substance for their babes. 16 But as for me, I will behold thy presence in righ∣teousnesse: and when I awake up after thy likenesse, I shall be satisfied with it. The Prayer. O Most mercifull Jesu, thou that art the Sa∣viour of them that put their trust in thee, defend us, and deliver us from the hands of all our Enemies, and although they are a sword of thine, and an instrument sent from thee, to chastise us for our sins; yet arise, O Lord, in mercy and strength, disappoint them and cast them down, lest they destroy our souls, that when thou hast visited us with thy fatherly correction, and tried us like as silver is tried, thou maist finde no wickednesse in us. Sanctifie our hearts and lips, that we may not thinke a thought displeasing unto thee, and that our mouth may not offend: Keep us as the apple of an eye, hide us under the shadow of thy wings of mercy and providence: keep us from the ways of the destroyer, and hold up our goings in thy paths, that we may persevere in righte∣ousnesse, and our foot-steps may not slip: that in the day of the resurrection of the Just, we may behold thy presence, and receive infinite
satisfactions in the vision beatificall. Grant this O merciful Saviour and Redeemer Jesu. Amen. Evening Prayer. PSALME 18. A prayer for strength and Victory in Warre, tem∣porall or spirituall, together with an act of hope and confidence in God. I Will love thee (O Lord) my strength, the Lord is my stony rock and my defence: my Saviour, my God, and my might, in whom I will trust, my buckler, the horn also of my salvation, and my refuge. 2 I will call upon the Lord, which is worthy to be prai∣sed: so shall I be safe from mine enemies. 3 The sorrows of death compassed me: and the over∣flowings of ungodlinesse made me afraid. 4 The pains of hell came about me: the snares of death overtook me. 5 In my trouble I will call upon the Lord: and com∣plain unto my God. 6 So shall he hear my voice out of his holy temple: and my complaint shall come before him, it shall enter even into his ears. 7 The earth trembled and quaked: the very foundati∣ons also of the hils shook and were removed, because hee was wroth. 8 There went a smoke out of his presence, and a con∣suming fire out of his mouth, so that coals were kindled at it. 9 He bowed the heavens also and came down: and it was dark under his feet. 10 He rode upon the cherubims, and did flie: he came flying upon the wings of the wind.
11 He made darknesse his secret place: his pavilion round about him, with dark water, and thick clouds to cover him. 12 At the brightnesse of his presence, his clouds re∣moved: hailstones and coals of fire. 13 The Lord also thundered out of heaven, and the highest gave his thunder: hailstones and coals of fire. 14 He sent out his arrows and scattered them: he cast forth lightnings and destroyed them. 15 The springs of waters were seen, and the foundati∣ons of the round world were discovered at thy chiding, O Lord: at the blasting of the breath of thy displeasure. 16 He shall send down from the high to fetch me: and shall take me out of many waters. 17 He shall deliver me from my strongest enemy, and from them that hate me: for they are too mighty for me. 18 They prevented me in the day of my trouble: but the Lord was my upholder. 19 He brought me forth also into a place of liberty: he brought me forth, even because he had a favour unto me. 20 The Lord shall reward me after my righteous dea∣ling: according to the cleannesse of my hands shall he recompence me. 21 Because I have kept the wayes of the Lord: and have not forsaken my God as the wicked doth. 22 For I have an eye unto all his laws: and will not cast out his commandements from me. 23 I was also uncorrupt before him: and eschewed mine own wickednesse. 24 Therefore shall the Lord reward me after my righ∣teous dealing: and according unto the cleannesse of my hands in his eye-sight. 25 With the holy thou shalt be holy: and a with a per∣fect man thou shalt be perfect. 26 With the clean thou shalt be clean: and with the froward thou shalt learn frowardnesse. 27 For thou shalt save the people that are in adversity:
and shalt bring down the high looks of the proud. 28 Thou shalt also light my candle: the Lord my God shall make my darknesse to be light. 29 For in thee I shall discomfit an host of men: and with the help of my God I shall leap over the wall. 30 The way of God is an undefiled way: the word of the Lord also is tried in the fire, he is the defender of all them that put their trust in him. 31 For who is God but the Lord: or who hath any strength except our God? 32 It is God that girdeth me with strength of warre: and maketh my way perfect. 33 He maketh my feet like Harts feet: and setteth me up on high. 34 He teacheth mine hands to fight: and mine arme shall break even a bow of steel. 35 Thou hast given me the defence of thy salvation: thy right hand also shall hold me up, and thy loving cor∣rection shall make me great. 36 Thou shalt make room enough under me for to go: that my foot-steps shall not slide. 37 I will follow upon mine enemies, and overtake them: neither will I turn again till I have destroyed them. 38 I will smite them, that they shall not be able to stand: but fall under my feet. 39 Thou hast girded me with strength unto the bat∣tell: thou shalt throw downe mine enemies under me. 40 Thou hast made mine enemies also to turn their backs upon me: and I shall destroy them that hate me. 41 They shall cry, but there shall be none to help them: yea, even unto the Lord shall they cry, but he shall not hear them. 42 I will beat them as small as the dust before the winde: I will cast them out as the clay in the streets. 43 Thou shalt deliver me from the strivings of the people: and thou shalt make me the head of the heathen. 44 A people whom I have not known: shall serve me.
45 Assoon as they hear of me, they shall obey me: but the strange children shall dissemble with me. 46 The strange children shall fail: and bee afraid out of their prisons. 47 The Lord liveth, and blessed be my strong helper: and praised be the God of my salvation. 48 Even the God that seeth that I be avenged: and subdueth the people unto me. 49 It is he that delivereth me from (cruell) enemies, and setteth me up above mine adversaries: thou shalt rid me from the wicked man. 50 For this cause will I give thanks unto thee (O Lord) among the Gentiles: and sing praises unto thy name. 51 Great prosperity giveth he unto his King: and shew∣eth loving kindnesse unto David his anointed, and unto his seed for evermore. The Prayer. O God our Saviour, the rock upon whom all our hopes are built, our strength and defence, our salvation and our refuge; heare our voyce out of thy holy temple, let our com∣plaint come before thee, and enter even into thy Ears. The sorrows of death compasse us, and we are afraid, because of the overflowings of ungodlinesse: Our enemies are strong, yea, they are too mighty for us, and we have no hope to escape, unlesse thou preventest them in the day of our trouble, and deliverest us from the strivings of our enemies. But in thee, O Lord, is our hope, doe thou teach our hands to fight, and gird us with strength unto the battell: Make us to have an eye unto all thy
laws, that we may eschew our own wicked∣nesse, and be uncorrupt before thee, then shalt thou give us the defence of thy salvation, and we shall give thanks unto thee, O Lord, and sing praises unto thy name, who art become our strong helper, and the God of our Salva∣tion, which thou hast given unto us in our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. Morning Prayer. PSALME 19. A prayer for preservation from sinne, and for love of Gods law. THe heavens declare the glory of God: and the firmament sheweth his handy work. 2 One day telleth another: and one night certifieth another. 3 There is neither speech nor lan∣guage: but their voyces are heard among them. 4 Their sound is gone out into all lands: and their words unto the ends of the world. 5 In them hath he set a tabernacle for the sun: which commeth forth as a bridegroom out of his chamber, and rejoyceth as a giant to run his course. 6 It goeth forth from the uttermost part of the heaven, and runneth about unto the end of it again: and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof. 7 The Law of the Lord is an undefiled law convert∣ing the soul: the testimony of the Lord is sure, and gi∣veth wisdome unto the simple.
8 The statutes of the Lord are right, and rejoyce the heart: the commandement of the Lord is pure, and giveth light unto the eyes. 9 The fear of the Lord is clean, and endureth for ever: the judgements of the Lord are true, and righteous alto∣gether. 10 More to be desired are they then gold, yea then much fine gold: sweeter also then hony, and the hony combe. 11 Moreover by them is thy servant taught: and in keeping of them there is great reward. 12 Who can tell how oft he offendeth? O cleanse thou me from my secret faults. 13 Keep thy servant also from presumptuous sins, lest they get the dominion over me so shall I be undefiled and innocent from the great offence. 14 Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart: be alway acceptable in thy sight. 15 O Lord: my strength, and my Redemer. The Prayer. O Most blessed Jesu, thou Sun of righteous∣nesse, who camest forth from the bosome of thy eternall Father, as a Bridegroom out of his chamber, be pleased to plant in our hearts the fear of the Lord, and in our bodies the purity and cleannesse of chastity, and make them to abide there for ever: Lighten our eyes with the light of thy Gospel, and the bright revelation of thy whole will and plea∣sure, that so being guided by thy grace, wee may be cleansed from all our secret sins, and preserved from presumptuous and great of∣fences, so shall the thoughts and meditation
of our heart, the words of our mouth, and all our actions be alway acceptable in thy sight, O Lord our Saviour, our strength, and our Re∣deemer Jesus. Amen. PSALME 20. A Prayer that God would heare our petitions, which we make to him in times of trouble. THe Lord hear thee in the day of trouble: the name of the God of Jacob defend thee. 2 Send thee help from the sanctuary: and strengthen thee out of Sion. 3 Remember all thy offerings: and accept thy burnt-sacrifice. 4 Grant thee thy hearts desire: and fulfill all thy minde. 5 We will rejoyce in thy salvation, and triumph in the name of the Lord our God: the Lord perform all thy petitions. 6 Now know I that the Lord helpeth his anointed, and will hear him from his holy heaven: even with the wholesome strength of his right hand. 7 Some put their trust in chariots, and some in horses: but we will remember the name of the Lord our God. 8 They are brought down and fallen: but we are ri∣sen, and stand upright. 9 Save Lord, and hear us, O King of heaven: when we call upon thee. The Prayer. O king of heaven, who art the health and strength of our right hand, have mercy up∣on us, and hear us when we call upon thee; let our prayers come into thy presence like a burnt
offering of a sweet savour: for in all our trou∣bles we disclaim all confidences in any of thy creatures, and remember thy name onely, O Lord our God. Teach us what to ask, and how to come into thy presence, that we may never begge of thee any thing but what is agreeable to thy will, and may then promote thy glory when thou suppliest our necessities, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 21. A Prayer for the King. THe King shall rejoyce in thy strength, O Lord: excee∣ding glad shall he be of thy salvation. 2 Thou hast given him his hearts desire: and hast not denied him the request of his lips. 3 For thou shalt prevent him with the blessings of goodnesse: and shalt set a Crown of pure gold upon his head. 4 He asked life of thee, and thou gavest him a long life: even for ever and ever. 5 His honour is great in thy salvation: glory and great worship shalt thou lay upon him. 6 For thou shalt give him everlasting felicity: and make him glad with the joy of thy countenance. 7 And why? because the King putteth his trust in the Lord: and in the mercy of the most Highest he shall not miscarry. 8 All thine enemies shall feel thine hand: thy right hand shall finde out them that hate thee. 9 Thou shalt make them like a fiery oven in time of thy wrath: the Lord shall destroy them in his displ sure, and the fire shall consume them. 10 Their fruit shalt thou root out of the earth: and
their seed from among the children of men. 11 For they intended mischiefe against thee: and ima∣gined such a device as they are not able to perform. 12 Therefore shalt thou put them to flight: and the strings of thy bow shalt thou make ready against the face of them. 13 Be thou exalted, Lord, in thine own strength: so will we sing and praise thy power. The Prayer. O Eternall God, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, have mercy upon thy servant the King; as thou hast set a Crown of gold upon his head, and given him power and command to rule thy people with justice and piety, so do thou heare the request of his lips, grant him the desire of his heart, and prevent both his de∣sires and requests with the blessings of thy goodnesse: give him great honour and reve∣rence in the sight of his People, and of all the Nations round about: let all his enemies feel thine hand, and put them to flight that rise up against him, that when thou hast given him the blessings of a long life and prosperous, and made him glad with the joy of thy counte∣nance, at last he may be crown'd with everla∣sting felicity, and reign with thee in thy eter∣nall Kingdome, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Evening Prayer. PSALME 22. A meditation upon the Passion of our Blessed Saviour. MY God, my God, (look upon me) why hast thou forsaken me: and art so farre from my health, and from the words of my com∣plaint? 2 O my God, I cry in the day time, but thou hearest not: and in the night season also I take no rest. 3 And thou continuest holy: O thou worship of Israel. 4 Our fathers hoped in thee: they trusted in thee, and thou didst deliver them. 5 They called upon thee, and were holpen: they put their trust in thee, and were not confounded. 6 But as for me, I am a Worm, and no man: a very scorn of men, and the outcast of the people. 7 All they that see me, laugh me to scorn: they shoot out their lips, and shake their heads, saying, 8 He trusted in God, that he would deliver him: let him deliver him, if he will have him. 9 But thou art he that took me out of my mothers womb: thou wast my hope when I hanged yet upon my mothers breasts. 10 I have been left unto thee ever since I was born: thou art my God, even from my mothers womb. 11 O goe not from me, for trouble is hard at hand: and there is none to help me. 12 Many oxen are come about me: fat buls of Basan close me in on every side. 13 They gape upon me with their mouthes: as it were a ramping and roaring lion.
14 I am poured out like water, and all my bones are out of joynt: my heart also in the midst of my body is even like melting wax. 15 My strength is dried up like a potshard, and my tongue cleaveth to my gummes: and thou shalt bring me into the dust of death. 16 For (many) dogges are come about me, and the counell of the wicked layeth siege against me. 17 They pierced my hands and my feet, I may tell all my bones: they stand staring and looking upon me. 18 They part my garments among them: and cast lots upon my vesture. 19 But be not thou far from me, O Lord: thou art my succour, haste thee to help me. 20 Deliver my soul from the sword: my darling from the power of the dog. 21 Save me from the lions mouth: thou hast heard me also from among the horns of the unicorns. 22 I will declare thy name unto my brethren: in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee. 23 O praise the Lord ye that fear him: magnifie him all yee of the seed of Jacob, and feare him all ye seed of Israel. 24 For he hath not despised nor abhorred the low estate of the poor, he hath not hid his face from him: but when he called unto him, he heard him. 25 My praise is of thee in the great congregation: my vows will I perform in the sight of them that fear him. 26 The poor shall eat and be satisfied: they that seek after the Lord, shall praise him, your heart shall live for ever. 27 All the ends of the world shall remember them∣selves, and be turned unto the Lord: and all the kindreds of the nations shall worship before him. 28 For the Kingdome is the Lords: and he is the go∣vernour among the people. 29 All such as be fat upon earth: have eaten and wor∣shipped.
30 All they that go down into the dust shall kneel be∣fore him: and no man hath quickned his own soul. 31 My seed shall serve him: they shall be counted unto the Lord for a generation. 32 They shall come, and the heavens shall declare his righteousnesse: unto a people that shall be born, whom the Lord hath made. The Prayer. O Mercifull Jesu, who for our sakes didst suffer thy selfe to be betrayed, tormen∣ted, spit upon, crucified, and to die, that thou mightest purchase for us redemption from the sting of death, the miseries of hell, the malice and power of the Devil, deliver our souls from the sword of thy Vengeance, cut us not off by untimely death, free our darling from the power of the dogge, our soules from being a prey unto the devill, snatch us out of the Li∣ons mouth, who goeth up and down seeking whom he may devour. O Jesu, be a Jesus unto us, and let those victories which thou hast ob∣tained over Satan, and Hell, and the grave, bring us Peace and Righteousnesse, and a Crown of glory in the Heavens where thou li∣vest and reignest, in the great congregation of Saints and Angels, one God world without end. Amen.
PSALME 23. A prayer that God would guide, and feed, and support us as a Shepheard doth his flock. THe Lord is my shepheard: therefore can I lack no∣thing. 2 He shall feed me in a green pasture: and lead me forth beside the waters of comfort. 3 He shall convert my soul: and bring me forth in the paths of righteousnesse for his names sake. 4 Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staffe comfort me. 5 Thou shalt prepare a table before me against them tht trouble me: thou hast anointed my head with oyle, and my cup shall be full. 6 But thy loving kindnesse and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life: and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. The Prayer. O Blessed Jesu, thou great Shepheard and Bishop of our Souls, let thy grace convert us, let thy mercies guide us in the paths of righ∣teousnesse: feed us with thy Word and Sacra∣ments, refresh us with the comforts of thy Ho∣ly Spirit, and in the whole course of our life, which is nothing else but a valley of miseries, and a shadow of death, let thy rod correct us like a father when we do amisse, and thy staffe support us in all our troubles and necessities. O let thy loving kindnesse and mercy follow us all our dayes, that after this life we may dwell in thy house for ever, where thou hast
prepared a Table, and a full cup of blessing for thy People, and shalt anoint their heads with the oyle of an eternall gladnesse in the fruition of thy glories, ô blessed Saviour and Redee∣mer Jesu. Amen. Morning Prayer. PSALME 24. A Meditation upon the ascension of our Blessed Saviour, and a prayer for Sanctity, that wee may ascend where he is. THe earth is the Lords, and all that therein is: the compasse of the world, and they that dwell therein. 2 For he hath founded it upon the seas: and prepared it upon the flouds. 3 Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord: or who shall rise up in his holy place? 4 Even he that hath clean hands, and a pure heart: and that hath not lift up his minde unto vanity, nor sworn to deceive his neighbour. 5 He shall receive the blessing from the Lord: and righteousnesse from the God of his salvation. 6 This is the generation of them that seek him: even of them that seek thy face, O Jacob. 7 Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors: and the King of glory shall come in. 8 Who is the King of glory: it is the Lord strong and mighty, even the Lord mighty in battell. 9 Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doores: and the King of glory shall come in.
10 Who is the King of glory: even the Lord of hots, he is the King of glory. The Prayer. O Blessed Jesu, King of glory, Lord of Hosts, and King of all the Creatures, to whom the everlasting doors were opened, that thou mightest enter into thy Kingdome, which thou didst open to all beleevers, after thou hadst overcome the sharpnesse of death: give us clean hands and a pure heart: teach us to fol∣low thy innocency, to imitate thy sanctity, that we may receive from thee our Lord the eternall rewards and blessings of righteous∣nesse, and ascend thither whither thou, ô God of our salvation, art gone before, who livest and reignest with the Father and the Holy Ghost eternal God world without end. Amen. PSALME 25. A penitentiall Psalme, or a prayer for delive∣rance from Sin and Punishment. VNto thee, O Lord, will I lift up my soul, my God, I have put my trust in thee: O let me not be con∣founded, neither let mine enemies triumph over me. 2 For all they that hope in thee, shall not be ashamed: but such as transgresse without a cause, shall be put to con∣fusion. 3 Shew me thy wayes, O Lord; and teach me thy paths. 4 Lead me forth in thy truth, and learn me: for thou
art the God of my salvation, in thee hath been my hope all the day long. 5 Call to remembrance, O Lord, thy tender mercies: and thy loving kindnesse which hath been ever of old. 6 Oh remember not the sinnes and offences of my youth: but according to thy mercy think thou upon me (O Lord) for thy goodnesse. 7 Gracious and righteous is the Lord: therefore will he teach sinners in the way. 8 Them that be meek shall he guide in judgement: and such as be gentle, them shall he learn his way. 9 All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth: unto such as keep his covenant and his testimonies. 10 For thy names sake, O Lord: be mercifull unto my sinne, for it is great. 11 What man is he that feareth the Lord: him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose. 12 His soul shall dwell at ease: and his seed shall inherit the land. 13 The secret of the Lord is among them that fear him: and he will shew them his covenant. 14 Mine eyes are ever looking unto the Lord: for he shall pluck my feet out of the net. 15 Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me: for I am desolate and in misery. 16 The sorrowes of my heart are enlarged: O bring thou me out of my troubles. 17 Look upon mine adversity and misery: and forgive me all my sinne. 18 Consider mine enemies how many they are: and they bear a tyrannous hate against me. 19 O keep my soul, and deliver me: let me not be con∣founded, for I have put my trust in thee. 20 Let perfectnesse and righteous dealing wait upon me: for my hope hath been in thee. 21 Deliver Israel, O God: out of all his troubles.
The Prayer. O Gracious and Righteous Lord God, who art the guide of the meek, and teachest the humble and gentle in thy way, forgive the sins and offences of our youth, and although by them we have deserved thy wrath, and that we be put to confusion, yet be pleased to think up∣on us for thy goodnesse, and according to thy mercy, that when thou hast forgiven us all our sinne, and taken away our adversity and all our misery, thou maist keep our soules in per∣ectnesse and righteous dealing, that at last we may dwell at ease, free from trouble, and safe from all our enemies, even when we shall in∣herit the land of everlasting rest, where thou livest and raignest eternal God world without end. Amen. PSALME 26. A Prayer of preparation to the holy Sacrament, and to death. BE thou my judge, O Lord, for I have walked inno∣cently: my trust hath been also in the Lord, therefore shall I not fall. 2 Examine me, O Lord, and prove me: try out my reins and my heart. 3 For thy loving kindnesse is ever before mine eyes: and I will walk in thy truth. 4 I have not dwelt with vain persons: neither will I have fellowship with the deceitfull. 5 I have hated the congregation of the wicked: and will not sit among the ungodly.
6 I will wash my hands in innocency, O Lord: and so will I goe to thine altar. 7 That I may shew the voyce of thanksgiving: and tell of all thy wondrous works. 8 Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house: and the place where thine honour dwelleth. 9 O shut not up my soul with the sinners: nor my life with the bloud-thirsty. 10 In whose hands is wickednesse: and their right hands are full of gifts. 11 But as for me, I will walk innocently: O Lord de∣liver me, and be mercifull unto me. 12 My foot standeth right: I will praise the Lord in the congregations. The Prayer. O Lord our Judge, whose loving kindnesse is great, and alwayes before our eyes ma∣nifested in the abundant acts of thy grace and providence, make us to love and frequent all the actions, ministeries, and conveyances of thy graces to us, especially thy holy Sacraments. O dear God, endue our Soules with faith and charity, and holy penitence, that our hands and hearts, our Souls and bodies, being washed in innocency and penance, we may goe to thy holy Table, and may in the whole course of our life, walk righteously and in obedience to thee, that in this world hating the congre∣gation of the wicked, and the fellowship of the deceitfull and vain persons, at last our Soules may not be shut up with sinners, nor
our lives with the bloud-thirsty, but wee may have our portion in the eternall habitation of thy house, where thine honour dwelleth and reigneth world without end. Amen. Evening Prayer. PSALME 27. A Prayer, that being freed from our Enemies, we may attend the services of Religion, and serve God in his holy Temple. THe Lord is my light and my salvation, whom then shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom then shall I be afraid? 2 When the wicked (even mine enemies and my foes) came upon me to eate up my flesh: they stumbled and fell. 3 Though an host of men were laid against me, yet shall not my heart be afraid: and though there rose up War agaist me, yet will I put my trust in him. 4 One thing have I desired of the Lord, which I will require: even that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the dayes of my life, to behold the faire beauty of the Lord, and to visit his Temple. 5 For in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his ta∣bernacle: yea, in the secret place of his dwelling shall he hide me, and set me up upon a rock of stone. 6 And now shall he lift up mine head: above mine enemies round about me. 7 Therefore will I offer in his dwelling an oblation with great gladnesse: I will sing and speak praises unto th Lord. 8 Hearken unto my voyce, O Lord, when I cry unto thee: have mercy upon me, and hear me.
9 My heart hath talked of thee, seek ye my face: thy face Lord will I seek. 10 O hide not thou thy face from me: nor cast thy servant away in displeasure. 11 Thou hast been my succour: leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my salvation. 12 When my father and my mother forsake me: the Lord taketh me up. 13 Teach me thy way, O Lord: and lead me in the right way, because of mine enemies. 14 Deliver me not over into the will of mine adversa∣ries: for there are false witnesses risen up against me, and such as speak wrong. 15 I should utterly have fainted: but that I beleeve ve∣rily to see the goodnesse of the Lord in the land of the living. 16 O tarry thou the Lords leisu; be strong, and he shall comfort thine heart, and put thou thy trust in the Lord. The Prayer. O Lord God, thou hast been our succour, our light and salvation, leave us not, neither forsake us when we are assaulted by enemies without, and by temptations from within, but lead us in the right way which thou hast ap∣pointed for us to walk in: and when thou hast lift up our heads above our enemies round about us, grant that we may spend our days in prayer, and giving praises to thee, and in all other actions of holy Religion, visiting thy temple with frequent addresses of devotion, and contemplating, and admiring the fair beau∣ty of the Lord, and that being secure in such
imployments, being hid in thy Tabernacle, and taking Sanctuary within the secret place of thy dwelling, we may at last come unto thy heavenly Jerusalem, where the gates of thy Temple are open day and night, there seeing the goodnesse of the Lord in the land of the living, praising thee to all eternity, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 28. A prayer for deliverance from death and damna∣tion. VNto thee will I cry, O Lord my strength: think no scorn of me, lest if thou make as though thou hearest not, I become like them that go down into the pit. 2 Heare the voyce of my humble petitions when I cry unto thee: when I hold up my hands toward the mercy-seat of thy holy temple. 3 O pluck me not away (neither destroy me) with the ungodly and wicked doers: which speak friendly to their neighbours, but imagine mischief in their hearts. 4 Reward them according to their deeds: and accor∣ding to the wickednesse of their own inventions. 5 Recompence them after the work of their hands: pay them that they have deserved. 6 For they regard not in their minde the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands: therefore shall he break them down, and not build them up. 7 Praised be the Lord: for he hath heard the voyce of my humble petitions. 8 The Lord is my strength and my shield, my heart hath trusted in him, and I am helped: therefore my heart danceth for joy, and in my song will I praise him. 9 The Lord is my strength: and he is the wholsome defence of his anointed.
10 O save thy people, and give thy blessing unto thine inheritance: feed them, and set them up for ever. The Prayer. O Lord my strength and confidence, my shield and the defence of all that hope in thee, hear the voyce of our humble petitions: We hold up our hands to thy mercy-seat, pray∣ing thee for pity, and pardon of our sinnes: reward us not according to our deeds, nor ac∣cording to the wickednesse of our inventions; for if thou shouldest deal with us according to the operation of our hands, we should be like them that go down into the pit, and our inhe∣ritance would be death and destruction. But our heart hath trusted in thee, and thou hast helped us; continue thy loving kindnesse to us, and pluck us not away, neither destroy us with the ungodly and wicked doers, but mag∣nifie thy mercies in the salvation of our soules, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 29. In which God is adored, and the mightinesse of his power and voyce is celebrated. BRing unto the Lord (O ye mighty) bring young Rams unto the Lord: ascribe unto the Lord worship and strength. 2 Give the Lord the honour due unto his Name: wor∣ship the Lord with holy worship. 3 It is the Lord that commandeth the waters: it is the glorious God that maketh the thunder.
4 It is the Lord that ruleth the Sea, the voyce of the Lord is mighty in operation: the voyce of the Lord is a glorious voyce. 5 The voyce of the Lord breaketh the Cedar trees: yea, the Lord breaketh the Cedars of Libanus. 6 He made them also to skip like a calfe: Libanus also and Sirion like a young Unicorn. 7 The voyce of the Lord divideth the flames of fire, the voice of the Lord shaketh the wildernesse: yea the Lord shaketh the wildernesse of Cades. 8 The voice of the Lord maketh the Hindes to bring forth young, and discovereth the thick bushes: in his Tem∣ple doth every man speak of his honour. 9 The Lord sitteth above the water floud: and the Lord remaineth a King for ever. 10 The Lord shall give strength unto his people: the Lord shall give his people the blessing of peace. The Prayer. O Most glorious God who makest the thun∣der, thy voice is mighty in operation, and is a glorious voice, give us grace that we may hear thy voice, and obey it with reverence and humility. Thou that breakest the Cedar trees, let thy word rend our hearts with sorrow and contrition for our sinnes, that so we may feel the power and the mercy of thy voice, and may ascribe unto thee worship and strength, worshipping thee with a holy worship all the dayes of our life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Morning Prayer. PSALME 30. A Prayer for deliverance from sicknesse and death and damnation. I Will magnifie thee, O Lord, for thou hast set me up: and not made my foes to triumph over me. 2 O Lord my God, I cried unto thee: and thou hast healed me. 3 Thou Lord hast brought my soul out of hell: thou hast kept my life from them that go down to the pit. 4 Sing praises unto the Lord (O ye Saints of his:) and give thanks to him for a remembrance of his holinesse. 5 For his wrath endureth but the twinkling of an eye, and in his pleasure is life: heavinesse may endure for a night, but joy commeth in the morning. And in my prosperity I said, I shall never be remo∣ved: thou Lord of thy goodnesse hadst made my hill so strong. 7 Thou didst turn thy face (from me:) and I was troubled. 8 Then cried I unto thee, O Lord: and gat me unto my Lord right humbly. 9 What profit is there in my bloud: when I go down to the pit? 10 Shall the dust give thanks unto thee: or shall it de∣clare thy truth? 11 Heare, O Lord, and have mercy upon me: Lord be thou my helper. 12 Thou hast turned my heavinesse into joy: thou hast put off my sackcloth, and grded me with gladnesse. 13 Therefore shall every good man sing of thy praise without ceasing: O my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever.
The Prayer. O Lord our God whose mercy is infinite, but thy wrath endureth but the twink∣ling of an eye, and even in this short time of thy wrath thou remembrest mercy, we cry un∣to thee, and addresse our selves unto thee right humbly: O turn not thy face away from us; keep our life from them that goe downe into the pit, and preserve our souls from hell; and although thou sometimes sendest heavinesse unto us, and trouble upon our loyns, yet let it be but as for a night, let thy mercy dawn upon us, and shine as in a glorious morning; for thou art more pleased in demonstrations of thy mercy, then in shewing thy displeasure. O Lord heal us, and be mercifull unto us, and save us, turn our heavinesse into joy, and gird us with gladnesse, so shall we give thanks unto thee for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 31. A prayer for protection against our enemies and all dangers of soule and body, and specially at the houre of death. IN thee, O Lord, have I put my trust: let me never bee put to confusion, deliver me in thy righteousnesse. 2 Bow down thine ear to me: make haste to deliver me. 3 And be thou my strong rock, and the house of de∣fence: that thou maist save me. 4 For thou art my strong rock, and my castle: be thou also my guide, and lead me for thy names sake.
5 Draw me out of the net that they have laid privily for me: for thou art my strength. 6 Into thy hands I commend my spirit: for thou hast redeemed me, O Lord, thou God of truth. 7 I have hated them that hold of superstitious vanities: and my trust hath been in the Lord. 8 I will be glad, and rejoyce in thy mercy: for thou hast considered my trouble, and hast known my soule in adversities. 9 Thou hast not shut me up into the hand of the ene∣my: but hast set my feet in a large room. 10 Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am in trouble: and mine eye is consumed for very heavinesse: yea, my soul and my body. 11 For my life is waxen old with heavinesse: and my yeares with mourning. 12 My strength faileth me, because of mine iniquity: and my bones are consumed. 13 I became a reproofe among all mine enemies, but specially among my neighbours: and they of mine ac∣quaintance were afraid of mee, and they that did see me without, conveyed themselves from me. 14 I am clean forgotten as a dead man out of minde: I am become like a broken vessell. 15 For I have heard the blasphemy of the multitude: and feare is on every side, while they conspire together against me, and take their counsell to take away my life. 16 But my hope hath been in thee, O Lord: I have said, Thou art my God. 17 My time is in thy hand, deliver me from the hand of mine enemies: and from them that persecute me. 18 Shew thy servant the light of thy countenance: and save me for thy mercies sake. 19 Let me not be confounded, O Lord, for I have cal∣led upon thee: let the ungodly be put to confusion, and be put to silence in the grave. 20 Let the lying lips be put to silence: which cruelly,
disdainfully, and despitefully speak against the righteous. 21 O how plentifull is thy goodnesse, which thou hast laid up for them that fear thee: and that thou hast prepared for them that put their trust in thee, even before the sonnes of men! 22 Thou shalt hide them privily by thine own presence, from the provoking of all men: thou shalt keep them se∣cretly in thy tabernacle from the strife of tongues. 23 Thanks be to the Lord: for he hath shewed mee marvellous great kindnesse in a strong city. 24 And when I made haste, I said: I am cast out of the sight of thine eyes. 25 Neverthelesse thou heardest the voyce of my pray∣er: when I cried unto thee. 26 O love the Lord, all ye his Saints: for the Lord pre∣serveth them that are faithfull, and plenteously rewardeth the proud doer. 27 Be strong, and he shall stablish your heart: all yee that put your trust in the Lord. The Prayer. O God our rock & the house of our defence, let us be glad and rejoyce in thy mercies and salvation. Consider, O Lord, our trouble, and in thy pity know our souls beset round a∣bout with enemies and adversities: Shut us not up into the hands of our enemies, nor our lives within the grave. Our time, O Lord, is in thy hand, to thee pertain the issues of life and death, and though our strength hath failed us because of our iniquity, and our bones are vex∣ed by reason of our sins, yet our hope is in thee, O Lord, we have said, Thou art our God: deliver us from all our enemies bodily and
ghostly: turn our sadnesse into joy, and our mourning into gladnesse, lest our bodies and soules be consumed for very heavinesse. Let us not be put to confusion nor to silence in the grave, but let us see thy marvellous loving kindnesse, and partake of thy plentifull good∣nesse which thou hast laid up for them that fear thee, even before the sonnes of men. O let us never be cast out of the sight of thine eyes, but deal with us in mercy and loving kindnesse. Into thy hands we commend our spirits, re∣signing our selves up to thy providence and disposition, either to life or death, as thou in thy infinite wisdome shalt finde most propor∣tionable to thy glory, and our eternall good, beseeching thee to be our guide to death, and to lead us for thy Name sake to everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Evening Prayer. PSALME 32. A confession of sins, and a prayer for pardon. BLessed is he whose unrighteousnesse is forgiven: and whose sin is covered. 2 Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord impu∣teth no sin: and in whose spirit there is no guile. 3 For while I held my tongue: my bones consumed away through my daily complaining. 4 For thy hand is heavy upon me day and night: and my moisture is like the drought in Summer.
5 I will knowledge my sinne unto thee: and mine un∣righteousnesse have I not hid. 6 I said, I will confesse my sinnes unto the Lord: and so thou forgavest the wickednesse of my sin. 7 For this shall every one that is godly make his prayer unto thee in a time when thou mayest be found: but in the great water-flouds they shall not come nigh him. 8 Thou art a place to hide me in, thou shalt preserve me from trouble: thou shalt compasse me about with songs of deliverance. 9 I will enform thee, and teach thee in the way where∣in thou shalt goe: and I will guide thee with mine eye. 10 Be ye not like to Horse and Mule, which have no understanding: whose mouthes must be holden with bit and bridle, left they fall upon thee. 11 Great plagues remain for the ungodly: but whoso putteth his trust in the Lord, mercy embraceth him on every side. 12 Be glad, O ye righteous, and rejoyce in the Lord: and be joyfull all ye that are true of heart. The Prayer. O Lord God, eternall Judge of men and An∣gels, whose property is always to have mercy and to forgive, have mercy upon us who confesse our sins unto thee to be so great and many, that were not thy mercy infinite, we might despair of having our unrighteousnesse forgiven, or our sins covered. O dear God, pre∣serve us from the great plagues that remain for the ungodly, and let thy mercy imbrace us on every side. Impute not unto us the sins we have multiplied against thee, and against all the
world; for we have been like to a Horse and Mule without understanding, brutish in our passions, sensuall in our affections, of unbridled heats, and distemperatures. But thy mercy is as infinite as thy self; O let not thy hand be heavy upon us, but forgive the wickednesse of our sin, and compasse us about with songs of deliverance, then shall we be glad and rejoyce in thee, O Lord, who art become our mighty Saviour and most mercifull Redeemer Jesu. Amen. PSALME 33. A prayer to God for the graces of feare, hope, and Religion. REjoyce in the Lord, O ye righteous: for it becometh well the just to be thankfull. 2 Praise the Lord with harp: sing psalmes unto him with the lute and instrument of ten strings. 3 Sing unto the Lord a new song: sing praises lustily (unto him) with a good courage. 4 For the word of the Lord is true: and all his works are faithfull. 5 He loveth righteousnesse and judgement: the earth is full of the goodnesse of the Lord. 6 By the word of the Lord were the heavens made: and all the hosts of them by the breath of his mouth. 7 He gathereth the waters of the Sea together, as it were upon an heap: and layeth up the deep as in a treasure house. 8 Let all the earth fear the Lord: stand in awe of him all ye that dwell in the world. 9 For he spake, and it was done: he comded, and it stood fast.
10 The Lord bringeth the counsell of the Heathen to nought: and maketh the devices of the people to bee of none effect, and casteth out the counsels of Princes. 11 The counsell of the Lord shall endure for ever: and the thoughts of his heart from generation to generation. 12 Blessed are the people whose God is the Lord Jeho∣vah: and blessed are the folk that he hath chosen to him to be his inheritance. 13 The Lord looked down from Heaven, and beheld all the children of men: from the habitation of his dwel∣ling he considereth all them that dwell in the earth. 14 He fashioneth all the hearts of them: and under∣standeth all their works. 15 There is no King that can be saved by the multitude of an host: neither is any mighty man delivered by much strength. 16 An Horse is counted but a vain thing to save a man: neither shall he deliver any man by his great strength. 17 Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him: and upon them that put their trust in his mercy. 18 To deliver their soules from death: and to feed them in the time of dearth. 19 Our soul hath patiently tarried for the Lord: for he is our help and our shield. 20 For our heart shall rejoyce in him: because wee have hoped in his holy name. 21 Let thy mercifull kindnesse (O Lord) be upon us: like as we doe put our trust in thee. The Prayer. O Lord God, who lovest righteousnesse and judgement, who fillest the earth with thy goodnesse, and lookest down from Heaven up∣on the children of men: Consider us, O Lord,
and let thy grace fashion our hearts, and pro∣duce in our souls such forms and impresses, as may bear thy Image, and seem beauteous in thy eyes, that thou maist be our God, and choose us for thine inheritance. Let thy mercy feed us, thy hands deliver us from death, and snatch us from the jaws of hell: teach us to fear thee, to put our trust in thy mercy, patiently to tarry for thee, and the revelation of thy loving kindnesses, to hope in thy holy Name, and to rejoyce in thy salvation, giving thee thanks and praise with a good courage, with humble and religious affections, all the days of our life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 34. A Prayer, that we being dispos'd by holy living, may receive and have a sense and taste of the Divine goodnesse. I Will alway give thanks unto the Lord: his praise shall ever be in my mouth. 2 My soul shall make her boast of the Lord: the humble shall hear thereof and be glad. 3 O praise the Lord with me: and let us magnifie his name together. 4 I sought the Lord, and he heard me: yea, he delive∣red me out of all my fear. 5 They had an eye unto him, and were lightened: and their faces were not ashamed. 6 Lo, the poor crieth, and the Lord heareth him: yea, and saveth him out of all his troubles.
7 The Angel of the Lord tarrieth round about them that fear him: and delivereth them. 8 O taste and see how gracious the Lord is: blessed is the man that trusteth in him. 9 O fear the Lord ye that be his Saints: for they that fear him lack nothing. 10 The lions doe lack, and suffer hunger: but they which seek the Lord, shall want no manner of thing that is good. 11 Come ye children and hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of the Lord. 12 What man is he that lusteth to live, and would fain see good dayes: keep thy tongue from evill, and thy lips that they speak no guile. 13 Eschew evill, and do good: seek peace and ensue it. 14 The eyes of the Lord are over the righteous: and his eares are open unto their prayers. 15 The countenance of the Lord is against them that doe evill: to root out the remembrance of them from the earth. 16 The righteous cry, and the Lord heareth them: and delivereth them out of all their troubles. 17. The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite heart: and will save such as be of an humble spirit. 18 Great are the troubles of the righteous: but the Lord delivereth him out of all. 19 He keepeth all his bones: so that not one of them is broken. 20 But misfortune shall slay the ungodly: and they that hate the righteous, shall be desolate. 21 The Lord delivereth the souls of his servants: and all they that put their trust in him shall not be destitute. The Prayer. O Most mercifull and gracious Lord, whose eies are over the righteous, and thine ears are open unto their prayers, give us, we be∣seech
thee, a contrite heart, and an humble spirit, a fear of thy Name, a watchfulnesse over our tongue, that we speak no guile, a care of our actions that we eschew all evill, and a zeal of thy Name that we may do good; that be∣ing thus prepared with holy dispositions, we may be delivered out of all our troubles by the hands of thy mercy, we may be defended against our enemies by the custody of Angels, we may be provided for, so as to want no manner of thing that is good, by the ministra∣tion of thy providence, that so in all the whole course of our life, we may feel the goodnesse of the Lord, seeing and tasting the sweetnesses of thy mercy, which may be to us an antepast of eternity, and as an earnest of the Spirit to con∣signe us to the fruition of the glories of thy Kingdome, who livest and reignest ever one God, world without end. Amen. Morning Prayer. PSALME 35. A Prayer to be delivered from our Enemies. PLead thou my cause, O Lord, with them that strive with me: and fight thou against them that fight against me. 2 Lay hand upon the shield and buckler: and stand up to help me. 3 Bring forth the spear, and stop the way against them
that persecute me: say unto my soul, I am thy salvation. 4 Let them be confounded and put to shame that seek after my soule: let them be turned back, and brought to confusion, that imagine mischief for me. 5 Let them be as the dust before the winde: and the Angel of the Lord scattering them. 6 Let their way be dark and slippery: and let the An∣gell of the Lord persecute them. 7 For they have privily laid their net to destroy me without a cause: yea, even without a cause have they made a pit for my soul. 8 Let a sudden destruction come upon him unawares: and his net that he hath laid privily, catch himselfe: that he may fall into his own mischief. 9 And my soul be joyfull in the Lord: it shall rejoyce in his salvation. 10 All my bones shall say, Lord, who is like unto thee, which deliverest the poor from him that is too strong for him: yea, the poor and him that is in misery, from him that spoileth him? 11 False witnesse did rise up: they laid to my charge things that I knew not. 12 They rewarded me evill for good: to the great discomfort of my soul. 13 Neverthelesse, when they were sick, I put on sack∣cloth, and humbled my soul with fasting: and my prayer shall turn into mine own bosome. 14 I behaved my self as though it had been my friend, or my brother: I went heavily as one that mourneth for his mother. 15 But in mine adversity they rejoyced, and gathered them together: yea, the very abjects came together a∣gainst me unawares, making mowes at me, and ceaed not. 16 With the flatterers were busie mockers: which gnashed upon me with their teeth. 17 Lord, how long wilt thou look upon this: O deli∣ver
my soul from the calamities which they bring on me, and my darling from the lions. 18 So will I give thee thanks in the great congregati∣on: I will praise thee among much people. 19 O let not them that are mine enemies triumph over me ungodly: neither let them wink with their eyes that hate me without a cause. 20 And why? their communing is not for peace: but they imagine deceitfull words against them that are quiet in the land. 21 They gaped on me with their mouths: and said, Fie on thee, fie on thee, we saw it with our eyes. 22 This thou hast seen, O Lord: hold not thy tongue then, goe not far from me, O Lord. 23 Awake and stand up to judge my quarrell: avenge thou my cause, my God, and my Lord. 24 Judge me, O Lord my God, according to thy righteousnesse: and let them not triumph over me. 25 Let them not say in their hearts, There, there, so would we have it: neither let them say, we have devoured him. 26 Let them be put to confusion and shame together that rejoyce at my trouble: let them be cloathed with rebuke and dishonour that boast themselves against me. 27 Let them be glad and rejoyce that favour my righ∣teous dealing: yea, let them say alway, Blessed be the Lord, which hath pleasure in the prosperity of his servant. 28 And as for my tongue it shall be talking of thy righteousnesse: and of thy praise all the day long. The Prayer. O Lord our God, who art the shield of the oppressed, and the Buckler of all that trust in thee, deliver us from all the assaults and in∣tendments of our enemies against us, who
without cause make pits for our souls: let the Angel of the Lord scatter all their mischievous imaginations, lest they triumph over us, and say, we have devoured them: strive thou with them that strive with us, and fight against them that fight against us. Preserve us in innocency, that we neither sin against thee, nor do inju∣stice to them, and restore us to our Peace, so shall we talk of thy righteousnesse, and thy praise all the day long, and give thee thanks in the great congregation of Saints, because thou hast pleasure in the prosperity of thy servants, and hast redeemed them from the hands of their enemies through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 36. A Prayer desiring the joyes of Heaven, the bles∣sings of Eternity. MY heart sheweth me the wickednesse of the ungod∣ly: that there is no fear of God before his eyes. 2 For he flattereth himself in his own sight: untill his abominable sin be found out. 3 The words of his mouth are unrighteous, and full of deceit: he hath left off to behave himselfe wisely, and to doe good. 4 He imagineth mischiefe upon his bed, and hath set himself in no good way: neither doth he abhorre any thing that is evill. 5 Thy mercy (O Lord) reacheth unto the heavens: and thy faithfulnesse unto the clouds. 6 Thy righteousnesse standeth like the strong moun∣tains:
thy judgements are like the great deep. 7 Thou Lord shalt save both man and beast, how ex∣cellent is thy mercy, O God: and the children of men shall put their trust under the shadow of thy wings. 8 They shall be satisfied with the plenteousnesse of thy house: and thou shalt give them drink of thy pleasures, as out of the river. 9 For with thee is the well of life: and in thy light shall we see light. 10 O continue forth thy loving kindnesse unto them that know thee: and thy righteousnesse unto them that are true of heart. 11 O let not the foot of pride come against me: and let not the hand of the ungodly cast me down. 12 There are they fallen (all) that work wickednesse: they are cast down, and shall not be able to stand. The Prayer. O God whose mercy reacheth unto the Heavens and thy righteousnesse unto the clouds, teach us to abhorre every thing that is evill, and to set our selves in every good way, that thy fear being always before our eyes, and our trust being under the shadow of thy wings, thou maist continue forth thy loving kindnesse to us, all the dayes of our life, that at last we may be satisfied with the plenteousnesse of thy house, and may drink down rivers of pleasures, deriving from thee the eternall fountain and well of life, and in the light of thy countenance, may see everla∣sting light, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Evening Prayer. PSALME 37. A Prayer that we may trust and delight in God, and that our lot may be amongst the godly, and not in the seeming prosperity of the wicked. FRet not thy self because of the ungod∣ly: neither be thou envious against the evill doers. 2 For they shall soon be cut down like the grasse: and be withered even as the green hearb. 3 Put thou thy trust in the Lord, and be doing good: dwell in the land, and verily thou shalt be fed. 4 Delight thou in the Lord: and he shall give thee thy hearts desire. 5 Commit thy way unto the Lord, and put thy trust in him: and he shall bring it to passe. 6 He shall make thy righteousnesse as clear as the light: and thy just dealing as the noon day. 7 Hold thee still in the Lord, and abide patiently upon him: but grieve not thy self at him whose way doth pro∣sper, against the man that doth after evill counsels. 8 Leave off from wrath, and let goe displeasure: fret not thy self, else shalt thou be moved to do evill. 9 Wicked doers shall be rooted out: and they that pa∣tiently abide the Lord, those shall inherit the land. 10 Yet a little while, and the ungodly shall be clean gone: thou shalt look after his place, and he shall bee away. 11 But the meek spirited shall possesse the earth: and shall be refreshed in the multitude of peace. 12 The ungodly seeketh counsell against the just:
and gnasheth upon him with his teeth. 13 The Lord shall laugh him to scorn: for hee hath seen that his day is comming. 14 The ungodly have drawn out the sword, and have bent their bow: to cast down the poor and needy, and to slay such as be of a right conversation. 15 Their sword shall goe through their own heart: and their bow shall be broken. 16 A small thing that the righteous hath: is better then great riches of the ungodly. 17 For the arms of the ungodly shall be broken: and the Lord upholdeth the righteous. 18 The Lord knoweth the days of the godly: and their inheritance shall endure for ever. 19 They shall not be confounded in the perilous time: and in the days of dearth they shall have enough. 20 As for the ungodly, they shall perish, and the ene∣mies of the Lord shall consume as the fat of lambs: yea, even as the smoak shall they consume away. 21 The ungodly borroweth, and payeth not again: but the righteous is mercifull and liberall. 22 Such as be blessed of God shall possesse the land: and they that be cursed of him shall be rooted out. 23 The Lord ordereth a good mans going: and ma∣keth his way acceptable to himself. 24 Though he fall, he shall not be cast away: for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand. 25 I have been young and now am old: and yet saw I never the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread. 26 The righteous is ever mercifull, and lendeth: and his seed is blessed. 27 Flee from evill, and doe the thing that is good, and dwell for evermore. 28 For the Lord loveth the thing that is right: he for∣saketh not his that bee godly, but they are preserved for ever.
29 The righteous shall be punished: as for the seed of the ungodly, it shall be rooted out. 30 The righteous shall inherit the land: and dwell therein for ever. 31 The mouth of the righteous is exercised in wise∣dome: and his tongue will be talking of judgement. 32 The law of his God is in his heart: and his goings shall not slide. 33 The ungodly seeth the righteous: and seeketh oc∣casion to slay him. 34 The Lord will not leave him in his hand: nor con∣demne him when he is judged. 35 Hope thou in the Lord, and keep his way, and hee shall promote thee, that thou shalt possesse the land: when the ungodly shall perish, thou shalt see it. 36 I my self have seen the ungodly in great power: and flourishing like a green bay-tree. 37 And I went by, and lo he was gone: I sought him, but his place could no where be found. 38 Keep innocency, and take heed unto the thing that is right: for that shall bring a man peace at the last. 39 As for the transgressours, they shall perish together: and the end of the ungodly is, they shall be rooted out at the last. 40 But the salvation of the righteous commeth of the Lord: which is also their strength in the time of trouble. 41 And the Lord shall stand by them and save them: he shall deliver them from the ungodly, and shall save them, because they put their trust in him. The Prayer. O God Almighty, who never forsakest the godly, but preservest them for ever, let thy Law bee in our hearts, fixed and groun∣ded, that we may keep innocency, and take
heed to the thing that is right: order our go∣ings, and make thy way acceptable to thy self, that we delighting in thee alone, committing our ways wholly to thy providence, and put∣ting our trust in thy mercies, we may not be confounded in the perillous times, but may be refreshed in the multitude of peace, ha∣ving peace all our dayes, and peace at the last, in the inheritance of Saints, who have refused the guilded glories of this world, which is the lot of the wicked and ungodly people, and are satisfied with the expectati∣on of true joyes, and the rewards of innocen∣cy, through the merits of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Morning Prayer. PSALME 38. A Prayer for remission of sins. PUt me not to rebuke (O Lord) in thine anger: nei∣ther chasten me in thine heavy displeasure. 2 For thine arrows stick fast in me: and thy hand presseth me sore. 3 There is no health in my flesh, because of thy displea∣sure: neither is there any rest in my bones, by reason of my sinne. 4 For my wickednesses are gone over my head: and are like a sore burden too heavy for me to bear. 5 My wounds stink and are corrupt: through my foo∣lishnesse.
6 I am brought into so great trouble and misery: that I goe mourning all the day long. 7 For my loyns are filled with a sore disease: and there is no whole part in my body. 8 I am feeble and sore smitten: I have roared for the very disquietnesse of my heart. 9 Lord, thou knowest all my desire: and my groan∣ing is not hid from thee. 10 My heart panteth, my strength hath failed me: and the sight of mine eyes is gone from me. 11 My lovers and my neighbours did stand looking upon my trouble: and my kinsmen stood afarre off. 12 They also that sought after my life, laid snares for me: and they that went about to doe me evill, talked of wickednesse, and imagined deceit all the day long. 13 As for me, I was like a deaf man, and heard not: and as one that is dumb, which doth not open his mouth. 14 I became even as a man that heareth not: and in whose mouth are no reproofs. 15 For in thee, O Lord, have I put my trust: thou shalt answer for me, O Lord my God. 16 I have required that they (even mine enemies) should not triumph over me: for when my foot slipt, they rejoyced greatly against me. 17 And I truly am set in the plague: and my heavi∣nesse is ever in my sight. 18 For I will confesse my wickednesse: and be sorry for my sin. 19 But mine enemies live and are mighty: and they that hate me wrongfully, are many in number. 20 They also that reward evill for good, are against me: because I follow the thing that good is. 21 Forsake me not, O Lord my God: be not thou farre from me. 22 Haste thee to help me: O Lord God my salvation.
The Prayer. O Lord who knowest all our desires, and from whom our groaning is not hid, wee confesse before thee our many wickednesses, and are truly sorry for our sins; our wicked∣nesses are gone over our head, and are a sore burden too heavy for us to bear, our enemy the Devill is malicious and mighty, our weak∣nesses many, our temptations strong, our con∣sciences doe busily accuse us. Where shall we appear in the day of Judgement? How shall we stand upright in the eternall scrutiny? Our trust is in thy merits. O blessed Jesu, thou art our Judge and our Advocate, thou shalt answer for us, O Lord our God. Put us not to re∣buke, O Lord, in thine anger, for it is insup∣portable, neither let thy whole displeasure arise, for that is vast and mountainous as our sinnes, and will break us in pieces. O let not the arrows of thy vengeance stick fast in us, for our sins are wounds enough, and make us rest∣lesse and miserable. Touch our sores gently, and let not thy hands presse us, unlesse to drive forth our corruption, then shall we follow the thing that good is, and rejoyce greatly in thy mercies, O Lord God of our salvation, who hast redeemed us, and saved us, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
PSALME 39. A meditation of the shortnesse and vanity of our life, and a prayer preparatory to death. I Said, I will take heed to my ways: that I offend not in my tongue. 2 I will keep my mouth as it were with a bridle: while the ungodly is in my sight. 3 I held my tongue, and spake nothing: I kept silence, yea, even from good words, but it was pain and grief to mee. 4 My heart was hot within me, and while I was thus musing, the fire kindled: and at the last I spake with my tongue. 5 Lord let me know mine end, and the number of my days: that I may be certified how long I have to live. 6 Behold, thou hast made my days as it were a span long: and mine age is even as nothing in respect of thee, and verily every man living is altogether vanity. 7 For man walketh in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain: he heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them. 8 And now Lord, what is my hope: truly my hope is even in thee. 9 Deliver me from all mine offences: and make mee not a rebuke unto the foolish. 10 I became dumb, and opened not my mouth: for it was thy doing. 11 Take thy plague away from me: I am even con∣sumed by the means of thy heavy hand. 12 When thou with rebukes dost chasten man for sin, thou makest his beauty to consume away like as it were a moth fretting a garment: every man therefore is but va∣nity. 13 Hear my prayer, O Lord, and with thine ears con∣sider my calling: hold not thy peace at my tears.
14 For I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner: as all my fathers were. 15 O spare me a little, that I may recover my strength before I goe hence, and be no more seen. The Prayer. O Eternall God, who art without begin∣ning or end of days, thou hast given us a short portion of time in the generations of this world; our condition is vain, unsatisfying, and full of disquiet, and we have no hope but in thee, O Lord. O teach us to number our days, to remember and to know our end, that so we may never sin against thee; and grant that we may live as always dying, being of mortified souls and bodies, of bridled tongues and affe∣ctions, and that in stead of heaping up riches, we may strive for a treasure of good works, laying up in store against the time to come, that having recovered our strength, lost by the commission of sins, when we go hence, and are no more seen, we may have a resi∣dence in those mansions which are prepared for the Saints, by our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. PSALME 40. A thanksgiving to God for his deliverances, and a prayer for redemption from sins, and defence against our enemies. I Waited patiently for the Lord: and he enclined unto me, and heard my calling.
2 He brought me also out of the horrible pit, out of the mire and clay: and set my feet upon the rock, and or∣dered my goings. 3 And hee hath put a new song in my mouth: even a thanksgiving unto our God. 4 Many shall see it, and fear: and shall put their trust in the Lord. 5 Blessed is the man that hath set his hope in the Lord: and turned not unto the proud, and to such as goe about with lies. 6 O Lord my God, great are thy wondrous works which thou hast done: like as be also thy thoughts which are to us-ward, and yet there is no man that ordereth them unto thee. 7 If I would declare them and speak of them: they should be moe then I am able to expresse. 8 Sacrifice and meat-offering thou wouldest not have: but mine ears hast thou opened. 9 Burnt-offerings and sacrifice for sinne hast thou not required: then said I, Lo, I come. 10 In the volume of the book it is written of me, that I should fulfill thy will, O my God: I am content to doe it, yea, thy Law is within my heart. 11 I have declared thy righteousnesse in the great con∣gregation: lo, I will not refrain my lips, O Lord, and that thou knowest. 12 I have not hid thy righteousnesse within my heart: my talking hath been of thy truth, and of thy salvation. 13 I have not kept back thy loving mercy and truth: from the great congregation. 14 Withdraw not thou thy mercy from me, O Lord: let thy loving kindnesse and thy truth alway preserve me. 15 For innumerable troubles are come about me, my sins have taken such hold upon me, that I am not able to look up: yea, they are moe in number then the hairs of mine head, and my heart hath failed me. 16 O Lord, let it be thy pleasure to deliver me: make hate (O Lord) to help me.
17 Let them bee ashamed and confounded together that seek after my soul to destroy it: let them be driven backward and put to rebuke that wish me evill. 18 Let them be desolate and rewarded with shame, that say unto me: Fie upon thee, fie upon thee. 19 Let all those that seek thee, be joyfull and glad in thee: and let such as love thy salvation, say alway, The Lord be praised. 20 As for me, I am poor and needy: but the Lord careth for me. 21 Thou art my helper and redeemer: make no long tarrying, O my God. The Prayer. O Lord our God whose works are wondrous, and thy thoughts which are to us-ward full of mercy and admirable in wisdome; we adore and worship thy infinite perfections, and thy providence in the disposing of all thy crea∣tures, and the effects of all causes, which in an infinite variety thou orderest to thy glory, and the good of all faithfull people. Thou hast dealt with us in mercy; and although our sins are so multiplied that they are moe in number then the hairs of our head, yet thou hast not suffered us to fall into the horrible pit of eter∣nall misery and destruction, but hast set our feet upon the Rock Christ Jesus, and by his graces and holy Laws hast ordered our goings. Let it be thy pleasure still to deliver us, for we are not able of our selves to look up, and our enemies still seek after our souls to destroy
us. Make no long tarrying, O God, shew thy self our helper and redeemer, so shall we talk of thy truth and of thy salvation, in the assem∣blies of thy servants in this life, hoping that we shall hereafter declare thy righteousnesse in the great congregation of Saints and An∣gels, singing eternall praises to God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. Amen. Evening Prayer. PSALME 41. A Prayer for the grace of charity, for pardon of sins, and for deliverance from false friends and Traitors. BLessed is he that considereth the poor (and needy:) the Lord shall deliver him in the time of trouble. 2 The Lord preserve him and keep him alive, that he may be blessed upon earth: and deliver not thou him into the will of his enemies. 3 The Lord comfort him when he lieth sick upon his bed: make thou all his bed in his sicknesse. 4 I said, Lord, be mercifull unto me: heal my soul, for I have sinned against hee. 5 Mine enemies speak evill of me: when shall he dye, and his name perish? 6 And if he come to see me, he speaketh vanity: and his heart conceiveth falshood within himself, and when he commeth forth, he telleth it. 7 All mine enemies whisper together against me: even against me doe they imagine this evill. 8 Let the sentence of guiltinesse proceed against him:
and now that he lieth, let him rise up no more. 9 Yea, even mine own familiar friend whom I trusted: which did also eat of my bread, hath laid great wait for me. 10 But be thou mercifull unto me, O Lord: raise thou me up again, and I shall reward them. 11 By this I know thou favourest me: that mine ene∣my doth not triumph against me. 12 And when I am in my health, thou upholdest me: and shalt set me before thy face for ever. 13 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel: world without end. Amen. The Prayer. O Blessed Jesu, Saviour of the world, be mercifull unto us, and heal our sins, for we have sinned against thee, and are no more wor∣thy to be called thy children, but yet make us thy servants, and give us testimony that we are translated from death to life, by charity and love to all our brethren. O make our bowels yearn with pity and compassion over the ne∣cessities of the poor and needy, and give us grace and power to help them and relieve thir miseries, that we being mercifull as our Hea∣venly Father is, may receive such blessings and assistances as thou hast provided for the chari∣table, deliverance from our open enemies, safe∣ty from private treachery and conspiracies, comfort in our sicknesses, health of body and pardon of our sins, through thy mercies and blessed charity, O most mercifull Saviour and Redeemer Jesu. Amen.
PSALME 42. A Prayer for comfort in spirituall desertion, and drinesse of affection, and that we may long and sigh after God. LIke as the hart desireth the water brooks: so longeth my soul after thee, O God. 2 My soul is a thirst for God, yea, even for the living God: when shall I come to appear before the presence of God? 3 My tears have been my meat day and night: while they daily say unto me, Where is now thy God? 4 Now when I think thereupon, I poure out my heart by my self: for I went wit the multitude, and brought them forth into the house of God. 5 In the voice of praise and thanksgiving: among such as keep holy day. 6 Why art thou so full of heavinesse (O my soul:) and why art thou so disquieted within me? 7 Put thy trust in God: for I will yet give him thanks for the help of his countenance. 8 My God, my soul is vexed within me: therefore will I remember thee concerning the land of Jordan, and the little hill of Hermon. 9 One deep calleth another, because of the noise of the water-pipes, all thy waves and storms are gone over mee. 10 The Lord hath granted his loving kindnesse on the day time: and in the night season did I sing of him, and made my prayer unto the God of my life. 11 I will say unto the God of my strength, Why hast thou forgotten me: why goe I thus heavily while the ene∣my oppresseth me? 12 My bones are smitten asunder as with a sword: while mine enemies (that trouble me) cast me in the teeth.
13 Namely, while they say dayly unto me: Where is now thy God? 14 Why art thou so vexed, O my soul: and why art thou so disquieted within me? 15 O put thy trust in God: for I will yet thank him which is the help of my countenance, and my God. The Prayer. O Eternall and living God, thou art the help of our countenance and our God, thou art the thing that we long for, and our hearts are vexed within us, and disquieted when we feel not the comforts of thy Spirit, and those actu∣all exultations, and that spirituall gust, which thou doest often give to thy people, as earnests of a glorious immortality. O Lord pity our in∣firmities, and give us earnest longings for the fruition of thee our God in the actions of holy Religion: Grant unto us vivacity of spirit, unweariednesse in devotion, delight and com∣placency in spirituall exercises, that when our souls are vexed with temptations and sadnes∣ses, we may remember thee concerning the land of promise, and be comforted and encouraged in our duties, by the expectation of those glo∣ries which thou hast laid up for them that love the appearing of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen.
PSALME 43. A Prayer for chearfulnesse of spirit in our devo∣tions. GIve sentence with me, O God, and defend my cause against the ungodly people: O deliver me from the deceitfull and wicked man. 2 For thou art the God of my strength, why hast thou put me from thee: and why goe I so heavily while the enemy oppresseth me? 3 O send out thy light and thy truth, that they may lead me: and bring me unto thy holy hill, and to thy dwlling. 4 And that I may goe unto the altar of God, even un∣to the God of my joy and gladnesse: and upon the harp will I give thanks unto thee, O God my God. 5 Why art thou so heavy, O my soul: and why art thou so disquieted within me? 6 O put thy trust in God: for I will yet give him thanks, which is the help of my countenance, and my God. The Prayer. O God our defender and deliverer, thou art the God of our strength, and our ghostly confidence: let the light of thy countenance produce the beams of spirituall joy in our souls, and let thy truth lead us in the way of thy salvation, that when we go unto thy dwel∣ling places where thou manifestest thy pre∣sence, we may approach unto thee with joy and gladnesse, rejoycing in nothing more then in doing thee service, and singing praises to thy name for the help of thy countenance, which thou givest us in our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen.
Morning Prayer. PSALME 44. A Prayer in time of Warre. WE have heard with our eares, O God, our fathers have told us: what thou hast done in their time of old. 2 How thou hast driven out the Heathen with thy hand, and plnted them in: how thou hast destroyed the Nations, and cast them out. 3 For they gat not the Land in possession through their own sword: neither was it their own arm that helped them. 4 But thy right hand and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance: because thou hadst a favour unto them. 5 Thou art my King (O God:) send help unto Ja∣cob. 6 Through thee will we overthrow our enemies: and in thy name will we tread them under that rise up against us. 7 For I will not trust in my bow: it is not my sword that shall help me. 8 But it is thou that savest us from our enemies: and puttest them to confusion that hate us. 9 We make our boast of God all day long: and will praise thy name for ever. 10 But now thou art far off, and puttest us to confus∣on: and goest not forth with our Armies. 11 Thou makest us to turn our backs upon our en∣mies: so that they which hate us spoil our goods. 12 Thou lettest us to be eaten up like sheep: and hast scattered us among the Heathen. 13 Thou sellst thy people for nouht: and takst no money for them.
14 Thou makest us to be rebuked of our neighbours: to be laughed to scorn, and had in derision of them that are round about us. 15 Thou makest us to be a by-word among the hea∣then: and that the people shake their heads at us. 16 My confusion is daily before me: and the shame of my face hath covered me. 17 For the voice of the slanderer and blasphemer: for the enemy and avenger. 18 And though all this be come upon us, yet do we not forget thee: nor behave our selves frowardly in thy cove∣nant. 19 Our heart is not turned back: neither our steps gone out of thy way. 20 No not when thou hast smitten us into the place of Dragons: and covered us with the shadow of death. 21 If we have forgotten the name of our God, and holden up our hands to any strange God: shall not God search it out? for hee knoweth the very secrets of the heart. 22 For thy sake also are we killed all the day long: and are counted as sheep appointed to be slain. 23 Up Lord, why sleepest thou: awake, and be not ab∣sent from us for ever. 24 Wherefore hidest thou thy face: and forgettest our misery and trouble? 25 For our soul is brought low even unto the dust: our belly cleaveth unto the ground. 26 Arise and help us: and deliver us for thy mercie s¦ake. The Prayer. O Lord God of hosts, who for our sins hast suffered the sword to take vengeance up∣on us, and to plead thy cause against us, O hide not thy face from us, and forget not our mise∣ry
and trouble. We are killed all day long, and are accounted as sheep appointed to be slain, we are covered with the shadow of death, and they which hate us, spoile our goods. Deal with us in pity, and as thou hast done to our Fathers of old time, when they called upon thee in their trouble, so deal with us: thou overthrewest their enemies, and didst tread them under that arose up against them. Arise, and help us, and deliver us also for thy mercy sake: our own sword cannot help us, but let thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance work deliverance and sal∣vation for us. Go forth with our Armies, O thou God of Hosts, do thou fight our Battels, that we may not turn our backs upon our ene∣mies, but crown us with Victory and Peace, that we may make our boast of thee all day long, and praise thy Name for ever, who art holy, and just, and mercifull, the great God of Battels and recompences. From thee let mer∣cy now and ever proceed, and to thy Name let honour be for ever ascribed of all the Hosts of Heaven and Earth, world without end. Amen. PSALME 45. A Prayer for the conversion of the Heathen, and prosperity of the Church. MY heart is enditing of a good matter: I speak of the things which I have made unto the King.
2 My tongue is the pen of a ready writer. 3 Thou art fairer then the children of men: full of grace are thy lips, because God hath blessed thee for ever. 4 Gird thee with thy sword upon thy thigh, O thou most mighty: according to thy worship and renown. 5 Good luck have thou with thine honour: ride on, because of the word of truth, of meeknesse and righteous∣nesse, and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things. 6 Thy arrows are very sharp, and the people shall be subdued unto thee: even in the midst among the Kings enemies. 7 Thy seat (O God) endureth for ever: the scepter of thy Kingdome is a right scepter. 8 Thou hast loved righteousnesse, and hated iniquity: wherefore God (even thy God) hath anointed thee with the oyl of gladnesse above thy fellows. 9 All thy garments smell of myrrhe, aloes, and cassia: out of the ivory palaces, whereby they have made thee glad. 10 Kings daughters were among thy honourable wo∣men: upon thy right hand did stand the Queen in a ve∣sture of gold (wrought about with divers colous.) 11 Hearken (O daughter) and consider, encline thine eare: forget also thine own people, and thy fathers house. 12 So shall the King have pleasure in thy beauty: for he is thy Lord (God) and worship thou him. 13 And the daughter of Tyre shall be there with a gift: like as the rich also among the people shall make their sup∣plication before thee. 14 The Kings daughter is all glorious within: her clothing is of wrought gold. 15 She shall be brought unto the King in raiment of needle-work: the virgins that be her fellows shall beare her company, and shall be brought unto thee. 16 With joy and gladnesse shall they be brought: and shall enter into the Kings Palace. 17 In stead of thy fathers thou shalt have children: whom thou mayest make Princs in all Lands.
18 I will remember thy name from one generation unto another: therefore shall the people give thanks unto thee world without end. The Prayer. O Blessed Jesu, Prince of the Catholike Church, thou art fairer then the children of men, thy lips are full of grace, thine Armies mighty, thy head is Crowned with Majesty, and clothed with worship and renown: have mer∣cy upon thy holy Church, blesse her for ever with righteousnesse, and let the oyle of glad∣nesse refresh her amidst the multitude of her sorrows and afflictions: And because she is the daughter of a King, and thou takest pleasure in her beauty, let her not alwaies be clothed in mourning garments, but let her be decked with exteriour Ornaments and secular ad∣vantages, such as may truly promote the in∣terests of holy Religion. Let Kings and Queens be nursing Fathers, and nursing Mothers unto her, and so let the sound of thy Gospell go in∣to all the Earth, that her children may be Princes in all Lands, and Ministers of thy King∣dome, advancing thy honour, and furthering the salvation of all men, for whom thou didst give thy precious bloud, that all people may worship thee, and give thee thanks for ever, who together with the Father and the holy Ghost, livest and reignest one God world with∣out end. Amen.
PSALME 46. A Prayer for protection, and for confidence in God in times of publike distractions, and for the peace of Christendome. GOD is our hope and strength: a very present help in trouble. 2 Therefore will we not fear though the earth be mo∣ved: and though the hills be carried into the midst of the Sea. 3 Though the waters thereof rage and swell: and though the mountains shake at the tempest of the same. 4 The rivers of the floud thereof shall make glad the City of God: the holy place of the tabernacle of the most Highest. 5 God is in the midst of her, therefore shall she not be removed: God shall help her, and that right early. 6 The Heathen make much adoe, and the Kingdomes are moved: but God hath shewed his voyce, and the earth shall melt away. 7 The Lord of hosts is with us: the God of Jacob is our refuge. 8 O come hither, and behold the works of the Lord: what destruction he hath brought upon the earth. 9 He maketh Wars to cease in all the World: he brea∣keth the bow, and knappeth the spear in sunder, and bur∣neth the Chariots in the fire. 10 Be still then, and know that I am God: I will bee exalted among the Heathen, and I will be exalted in the earth. 11 The Lord of hosts is with us: the God of Jacob is our refuge.
The Prayer. O Most mercifull Saviour Jesu, Prince of Peace, at whose birth all the Kingdomes of the World were in peace and tranquillity, bethou in the midst of us for our refuge and present help in times of trouble and publick calamities, when the Kingdome is moved, and the hearts of men shake at the tempest of the same. Dear God, unite all the parts of Chri∣stendome with the union of Faith and Charity, and the fruits of them, a blessed and universall Peace. Break the bow of the mighty, knappe the spear of the Warriour in sunder, and burn the Chariots in the fire, that Warres may cease in all the World, and we all may feel the pro∣mised blessing of the Gospel, that our Swords may be converted into plowshares, and our Spears into pruning hooks, that thy Name and thy Kingdome may be exalted among the heathen, and in all the Nations of the earth, who livest the reignest over all, in the unity of the blessed Trinity, God eternall, world with∣out end. Amen.
Evening Prayer. PSALME 47. A Prayer for the exaltation of Christs Kingdom, and that all the Princes of the world may joynt∣ly adore Jesus reigning in the Heavens. O Clap your hands together (all ye people:) O sing unto God with the voice of me∣lody. 2 For the Lord is high, and to bee feared: he is the great King upon all the earth. 3 He shall subdue the people under us: and the nations under our feet. 4 He shall chuse out an heritage for us: even the wor∣ship of Jacob whom he loved. 5 God is gone up with a merry noise: and the Lord with the sound of the trump. 6 O sing praises, sing praises unto (our) God: O sing praises, sing praises unto our King. 7 For God is the King of all the earth: sing ye praises with understanding. 8 God reigneth over the heahen: God sitteth upon his holy seat. 9 The Princes of the people are joyned unto the peo∣ple of the God of Abraham: for God (which is very high exalted) doth defend the earth as it were with a shield. The Prayer. O Lord God King of Heaven, who raignest a great King in all the Earth; thou art high above all creatures, and art to be feared in all the Kingdomes of the earth, let the seed of thy Gospel be disseminated in all the cor∣ners
of the habitable World: let thy grace break down all the strong holds of sin and Sa∣tan, subduing all people under thee, and the Nations under thy feet, that the Princes of the Nations, that have not known thy Name, may be joyned to thy people, the people of the God of Abraham, becomming one sheepfold under one Shepheard, Iesus Christ our blessed Lord, our Saviour and Redeemer. Amen. PSALME 48. A Prayer for the prosperity of the Church. GReat is the Lord, and highly to be praised: in the City of our God, even upon his holy hill. 2 The hill of Sion is a fair place, and the joy of the whole earth: upon the north side lieth the City of the great King, God is well known in her palaces as a sure refuge. 3 For lo, the Kings of the earth are gathered, and gone by together. 4 They marvelled to see such things: they were asto∣nied and suddenly cast down. 5 Fear came there upon them, and sorrow: as upon a woman in her travell. 6 Thou shalt break the ships of the sea: through the east winde. 7 Like as wee have heard, so have we seen in the City of the Lord of hosts, in the City of our God: God uphol∣deth the same for ever. 8 We wait for thy loving kindnesse (O God:) in the midst of thy temple. 9 O God, according unto thy name, so is thy praise unto the worlds end: thy right hand is full of righteous∣nesse. 10 Let the mount Sion rejoyce, and the daughters of
Juda be glad: because of thy judgements. 11 Walk about Sion, and goe round about her: and tell the towers thereof. 12 Mark well her bulwarks, set up her houses: that yee may tell them that come after. 13 For this God is our God for ever and ever: he shall be our guide unto death. The Prayer. O Great God, who art highly to be praised, who hast manifested thy power and thy mercy in the constitution, propagation, and de∣fence of thy Holy Church, by the miraculous assistances and effects of thy Holy Spirit, inso∣much that the Kings of the earth marvelled to see such things, and were astonied and sudden∣ly cast down, acknowledging the powers of thy Kingdome, and submitting to thy laws with faith and obedience: be pleased, accor∣ding to thy gracious promise, to uphold the same for ever, let not the gates of hell prevail against thy Church, be thou known in her pa∣laces as a sure refuge, make her the joy of the whole earth, and let her be glad and rejoyce because of thy judgements: so shall we praise thee in the midst of thy Temple, waiting for thy loving kindnesse, that according as thy Name is, so may thy praise be, infinite, and eternall, world without end. Amen.
PSALME 49. A Prayer that we may despise perishing riches, and put our trust in God onely. O Hear ye this, all ye people: ponder it with your eares all ye that dwell in the world. 2 High and low, rich and poor: one with another. 3 My mouth shall speak of wisdom: and my heart shall muse of understanding. 4 I will encline mine eare to the parable: and shew my dark speech upon the harp. 5 Wherefore should I fear in the days of wickednesse: and when the wickednesse of my heels compasse me round about? 6 There be some that put their trust in their goods: and boast themselves in the multitude of their riches. 7 But no man may deliver his brother: nor make an agreement to God for him. 8 For it cost more to redeem their souls: so that hee must let that alone for ever. 9 Yea, though he live long, and see not the grave. 10 For he seeth that wise men also die, and perish toge∣ther: as well as the ignorant and foolish, and leave their riches for other. 11 And yet they think that their houses shall continue for ever: and that their dwelling places shall endure from one generation to another, and call the lands after their own names. 12 Neverthelesse, man will not abide in honour: see∣ing he may be compared unto the beasts that perish, this is the way of them. 13 This is their foolishnesse: and their posterity praise their saying. 14 They lie in the hell like sheep, death gnaweth upon them, and the righteous shall have domination over them in the morning: their beauty shall consume in the sepul∣chre out of their dwelling.
15 But God hath delivered my soul from the place of hell: for he shall receive me. 16 Be not thou afraid though one be made rich: or if the glory of his house be increased. 17 For he shall carry nothing away with him when he dieth: neither shall his pomp follow him. 18 For while he lived, he counted himself an happy man: and so long as thou dost well unto thy self, men will speak good of thee. 19 He shall follow the generation of his fathers: and shall never see light. 20 Man being in honour hath no understanding: but is compared unto the beasts that perish. The Prayer. O Blessed Iesu, thou only Redeemer of souls, who by thy death and passion hast delive∣red us from the place of Hell, give us grace to put our whole trust in thee, and in the riches of thy mercy and loving kindnesse, always remembring our end, the vanity and shortnes of our lives, the certainty of our departure: Teach us to despise the world and worldly things, and to lay our treasure up in heaven by charity and actions of religion, that while we live here, wee may have our conversation in heaven, by love, by hope, and by desires, that when our beauty shall consume in the sepul∣chre out of our earthly dwellings, we may be received into everlasting habitations, always to enjoy thee, who livest and reignest eternall God world without end. Amen.
Morning Prayer. PSALME 50. A Prayer that we may lead a holy life, and find mercy in the day of judgement. THe Lord, even the most mighty God hath spo∣ken: and called the world, from the rising up of the sunne, unto the going down thereof. 2 Out of Sion hath God appeared: in perfect beauty. 3 Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence there shall goe before him a consuming fire, and a mighty tempest shall be stirred up round about him. 4 He shall call the heaven from above: and the earth, that he may judge his people. 5 Gather my Saints together unto me: those that have made a covenant with me, with sacrifice. 6 And the heavens shall declare his righteousnesse: for God is Judge himself. 7 Hear, O my people, and I will speak: I my self will testifie against thee, O Israel, for I am God, even thy God. 8 I will not reprove thee because of thy sacrifices, or for thy burnt-offerings: because they were not alway be∣fore mee. 9 I will take no bullock out of thine house: nor hee-goats out of thy folds. 10 For all the beasts of the forest are mine: and so are the cattels upon a thousand hils. 11 I know all the fowls upon the mountains: and the wilde beasts of the field are in my sight. 12 If I be hungry I will not tell thee: for the whole world is mine, and all that is therein. 13 Thinkest thou that I will eat buls flesh: and drink the bloud of goats?
14 Offer unto God thanksgiving: and pay thy vowes unto the most Highest. 15 And call upon me in the time of trouble: so will I hear thee, and thou shalt praise me. 16 But unto the ungodly said God: Why dost thou preach my Laws, and takest my Covenant in thy mouth? 17 Whereas thou hatest to be reformed: and hast cast my words behinde thee. 18 When thou sawest a Theef, thou consentedst unto him: and hast been partaker with the Adulterers. 19 Thou hast let thy mouth speak wickednesse: and with thy tongue thou hast set forth deceit. 20 Thou satest and spakest against thy brother: yea, and hast slandered thine own mothers son. 21 These things hast thou done, and I held my tongue, and thou thoughtest wickedly, that I am even such a one as thy self: but I will reprove thee, and set before thee the things that thou hast done. 22 O consider this, ye that forget God: lest I pluck you away, and there be none to deliver you. 23 Whoso offereth me thanks and praise, he honoureth me: and to him that ordereth his conversation right, will I shew the salvation of God. The Prayer. O Most mighty God, who art more pleased with the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and the oblation of our souls in the vows of obedience and a holy life, then with the burnt-offerings and sacrifices of Bullocks and Goats: let thy grace reform our lives and manners: keep our mouth from slander and obloquy, from guile and deceit: let us never consent to actions of injustice or uncleannesse, that we partake not
with Thieves or with Adulterers, either in their sin or punishment, that when thou shalt appear in perfect beauty with a consuming fire before thee, and a tempest round about thee, with terrors and glorious Majesty, calling the hea∣vens and the earth together, that thou maist judge all thy people, thou maist gather us among thy Saints, and give us the mercies and the portion of thine inheritance, that so we may honour thee by an eternall oblation of praise and thanksgiving in the Heavens, where thou, O God, declarest thy salvation to all thy elect people, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 51. A Prayer for pardon of sinnes, and the restitution of Gods favour. HAve mercy upon me, O God, after thy great good∣nesse: according to the multitude of thy mercies do away mine offences. 2 Wash me throughly from my wickednesse: and cleanse me from my sinne. 3 For I knowledge my faults: and my sinne is ever be∣fore me. 4 Against thee onely have I sinned, and done this evill in thy sight: that thou mightest be justified in thy saying, and clear when thou art judged. 5 Behold, I was shapen in wickednesse: and in sinne hath my mother conceived me. 6 But lo, thou requirest truth in the inward parts: and shalt make me to understand wisdome secretly. 7 Thou shalt purge me with hyssope, and I shall be
clen: thou shalt wash me, & I shall be whiter then snow. 8 Thou shalt make me hear of joy and gladnesse: that the bones that thou hast broken may rejoyce. 9 Turn thy face from my sins: and put out all my misdeeds. 10 Make me a clean heart, O God: and renew a right spirit within me. 11 Cast me not away from thy presence: and take not thy holy Spirit from me. 12 O give me the comfort of thy help again: and sta∣blish me with thy free Spirit. 13 Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked: and sinners shall be converted unto thee. 14 Deliver me from bloud-guiltinesse, O God, thou that art the God of my health: and my tongue shall sing of thy righteousnesse. 15 Thou shalt open my lips (O Lord:) and my mouth shall shew thy praise. 16 For thou desirest no sacrifice, else would I give it thee: but thou delightest not in burnt-offerings. 17 The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit: a broken and a contrite heart (O God) shalt thou not despise. 18 O be favourable and gracious unto Sion: build thou the wals of Jerusalem. 19 Then shalt thou bee pleased with the sacrifice of righteousnesse, with the burnt-offerings, and oblations: then shall they offer young bullocks upon thine altar. The Prayer. O Most mercifull God, whose goodnesse is great, and the multitudes of thy mercies are innumerable, have mercy upon us, for our sins are ever before us presented, by the con∣tinuall accusations of a troubled conscience. We have sinned against thee, and done evill in
thy sight, and yet because thou art the God of mercy, and fountain of eternall purity, deligh∣ting in the conversion and salvation of a sin∣ner, we present unto thee the sacrifice of a troubled spirit, of broken and contrite hearts, beseching thee to let the dew of thy favour, and the fire of thy love wash away our sinnes, and purifie our souls. Make us clean hearts, O God, and pure hands: though our sins be as scarlet, yet make them like wooll, though they be as purple, yet make them as white as snow. Restore the voice of joy and gladnesse to us, let us not be for ever separate from the sweet re∣freshings of thy favour and presence, but give us the comforts of thy help again, and let thy free Spirit loose us from the bondage of sin, and establish us in the freedome and liberty of the Sons of God, so shall we sing of thy righte∣ousnesse, and our lips shall give thee praise in the congregation of thy redeemed ones, now, henceforth, and for ever. Amen. PSALME 52. A Prayer for deliverance from tyranny, oppressi∣on, and slander. WHy boastest thou thy self, thou yrant: that thou canst doe mischief? 2 Whereas the goodnesse of God: endureth yet daily. 3 Thy tongue imagineth wickednesse: and with lies thou cuttest like a sharp rasour. 4 Thou hast loved unrighteousnesse more then good∣nesse: and to talk of lies more then righteousnesse.
5 Thou hast loved to speak all words that may do hurt: O thou false tongue. 6 Therefore shall God destroy thee for ever: hee shall take thee, and pluck thee out of thy dwelling, and root thee out of the land of the living. 7 The righteous also shall see this, and fear: and shall laugh him to scorn. 8 Lo, this is the man that took not God for his strength: but trusted unto the multitude of his riches, and strengthe∣ned himself in his wickednesse. 9 As for me, I am like a green olive-tree in the house of God: my trust is in the tender mercy of God for ever and ever. 10 I will alwayes give thanks unto thee for that thou hast done: and I will hope in thy name, for thy Saints like it well. The Prayer. O Almighty God, whose goodnesse endureth daily, extend this thy goodnesse towards us thy servants, and defend us from the tyranny and malice of all our Enemies, who boast them∣selves in mischief: keep us from the obloquy of false tongues, and from the slander of lying per∣sons, who talk of lies more then righteousness, that we being nourished by thy goodnesse, and watered with the dew of divine blessings, may flourish like a green olive in the house of God, bringing forth the fruits of tender mercy, and abounding in peace, and that we may by the suffusion of anointing of the holy Ghost, be consign'd to thy everlasting Kingdome, there to reign with thee, who reignest eternally, one God world without end. Amen.
Evening Prayer. PSALME 53. A Prayer for Redemption of the Church from the persecution of Atheists, and persons irreli∣gious. THE foolish body hath said in his heart: There is no God. 2 Corrupt are they and become abominable in their wickednesse: there is none that doth good. 3 God looked down from heaven upon the children of men: to see if there were any that would understand and seek after God. 4 But they are all gone out of the way, they are altoge∣ther become abominable: there is also none that doth good, no not one. 5 Are not they without understanding that work wick∣ednesse: eating up my people as if they would eat bread? they have not called upon God. 6 They were afraid where no fear was: for God hath broken the bones of him that besieged thee: thou hast put them to confusion, because God hath despised them. 7 Oh that the salvation were given unto Israel out of Sion: oh that the Lord would deliver his people out of captivity! 8 Then should Jacob rejoyce: and Israel should be right glad. The Prayer. O Lord God who dwellest in heaven, and lookest down from thence upon the chil∣dren of men, be pleased to give salvation to thy people out of Sion thy holy habitation, and
preserve thy Church from the malice of such persons as have not called upon thee, but would eate up thy people, as they would eate bread: that we being delivered from the cap∣tivity of sins and miseries, may serve thee with freedome of spirit, in joy and spirituall rejoy∣cing, all the dayes of our life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 54. A prayer for deliverance from our Enemies. SAve me, O God, for thy names sake: and avenge me in thy strength. 2 Hear my prayer, O God: and hearken unto the words of my mouth. 3 For strangers are risen up against me: and tyrants (which have not God before their eyes) seek after my soul. 4 Behold, God is my helper: the Lord is with them that uphold my soul. 5 He shall reward evill unto mine enemies: destroy thou them in thy truth. 6 An offering of a free heart will I give thee, and praise thy name (O Lord:) because it is so comfortable. 7 For he hath delivered me out of all my trouble: and mine eye hath seen his desire upon mine enemies. The Prayer. O Blessed Jesu, our God and our helper, whose Name is comfortable, the hope of all that are miserable, and the relief of the op∣pressed, hearken unto our prayers, and for thy Names sake, save us from the tyranny of
those that are risen up against us, and seek af∣ter our soules. Give us thy grace, that we may set thee always before our eyes, to obey thy Laws, to follow thy example, to trust in thy protection, to give praises unto thy holy Name, who livest and reignest with the Father and the holy Ghost, one God world without end. Amen. PSALME 55. A Prayer for deliverance from treachery, and the conspiracies of our secret Enemies. HEar my prayer, O God: and hide not thy selfe from my petition. 2 Take heed unto me, and hear me: how I mourn in my prayer, and am vexed. 3 The enemy crieth so, and the ungodly commeth on so fast: for they are minded to do me some mischief, so maliciously are they set against me. 4 My heart is disquieted within me: and the feare of death is fallen upon me. 5 Fearfulnesse and trembling are come upon me: and an horrible dread hath overwhelmed me. 6 And I said, O that I had wings like a dove: for then would I flie away, and be at rest. 7 Lo then would I get me away afarre off: and remain in the wildernesse. 8 I would make haste to escape: because of the stormy winde and tempest. 9 Destroy their tongues (O Lord) and divide them: for I have spied unrighteousnesse and strife in the City. 10 Day and night they goe about within the walls thereof: mischief also and sorrow are in the mids of it. 11 Wickednesse is therein: deceit and guile go not out of their streets.
12 For it is not an open enemy that hath done me this dishonour: for then I could have born it. 13 Neither was it mine adversary that did magnifie himself against me: for then (peradventure) I would have hid my self from him. 14 But it was even thou my companion: my guide and mine own familiar friend. 15 We took sweet counsell together: and walked in the house of God as friends. 16 Let death come hastily upon them, and let them go down quick into hell: for wickednesse is in their dwel∣lings, and among them. 17 As for me, I will call upon God: and the Lord shall save me. 18 In the evening, and morning, and at noon day will I pray, and that instantly: and he shall hear my voyce. 19 It is he that hath delivered my soul in peace, from the battell that was against me: for there were many with mee. 20 Yea, even God that endureth for ever, shall heare me, and bring them down: for they will not turn, nor feare God. 21 He laid his hands upon such as be at peace with him: and he brake his covenant. 22 The words of his mouth were softer then butter, having warre in his heart: his words were smoother then oyle, and yet be they very swords. 23 O cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee: and shall not suffer the righteous to fall for ever. 24 And as for them: thou, O God, shalt bring them into the pit of destruction. 25 The bloud-thirsty and deceitfull men shall not live out half their dayes: neverthelesse, my trust shall be in thee, O Lord.
The Prayer. O Eternall God, who hast promised to nou∣rish and defend all them that cast their burden upon thee, deliver the souls of thy ser∣vants in peace from the battell that is against us: Fearfulnesse and trembling are come up∣on us, and the fear of death is fallen upon us, for our Enemies are maliciously set against us, and minded to do us mischief, and we know not whither to flee away or be at rest, for mis∣chief and sorrow are round about us. O rescue us from the publike enmity of our open adver∣saries, and from the secret conspiracies of all our private Enemies, so shall we pray unto thee, and that instantly, and praise thy Nme, in the Evening, in the Morning, and in the noon day, dedicating to thy honour and worship, the beginning, the growth, and the decrease of our life, even all our days, because thou hast not suffered us to fall for ever, but hast brought us from the pit of destruction, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Morning Prayer. PSALME 56. A Prayer that we may trust in God, and have such carefulnesse over our ways, that we give our Enemies no advantage. BE mercifull unto me, O God, for man goeth about to devour me: he is daily fighting and troubling me. 2 Mine enemies are daily in hand to swallow me up:
for they be many that fight against me, O thou most Highest. 3 Neverthelesse though I am sometime afraid: yet put I my trust in thee. 4 I will praise God because of his word: I have put my trust in God, and will not feare what flesh can doe unto mee. 5 They daily mistake my words: all that they imagine is to do me evill. 6 They hold all together, and keep themselves close: and mark my steps when they lay wait for my soul. 7 Shall they escape for their wickednesse: thou (O God) in thy displeasure shalt cast them down. 8 Thou tellst my flittings, put my tears into thy bot∣tle: are not these things noted in thy book? 9 Whensoever I call upon thee, then sall mine ene∣mies be put to flight: this I know, for God is on my side. 10 In Gods word will I rejoyce: in the Lords word will I comfort me. 11 Yea, in God have I put my trust: I will not be afraid what man can doe unto me. 12 Unto thee (O God) will I pay my vowes: unto thee will I give thanks. 13 For thou hast delivered my soul from death, and my feet from falling: that I may walk before God in the light of the living. The Prayer. O Lord God, in whom we have trusted, have mercy upon us, who are daily troubled with sadnesses in the world, temptations of the Devill, weaknesses of the flesh, malicious sur∣misings and mistakings of our Enemies, and whatsoever may make us miserable, and disturb
our peace: give us great assistances of thy grace, that we may walk without scandall, resist and overcome the Devill, despise the things of this world, and be strengthened in our spirits with ghostly confidence, that whensoever we call upon thee, we may have thee on our side, and our enemies be put to flight; that our souls being delivered from death, and our feet from falling, we may at last be admitted into the light of the living, there to walk eternally be∣fore thee our God, who livest and reignest in the Unity of the blessed Trinity, world with∣out end. Amen. PSALME 57. A Prayer to be delivered from the power of the Devill, and slander of men, and that we may put our confidence in God. BE mercifull unto me, O God, be mercifull unto me, for my soul trusteth in thee: and under the shadow of thy wings shall be my refuge untill this tyranny be over∣past. 2 I will call unto the most high God: even unto the God that shall perform the cause which I have in hand. 3 He shall send from heaven: and save me from the re∣proof of him that would eat me up. 4 God shall send forth his mercy and truth: my soule is among Lions. 5 And I lie even among the children of men (that are set on fire:) whose teeth are spears and arrows, and thir tongue a sharp sword. 6 Set up thy self, O God, above the heavens: and  glory above all the earth.
7 They have laid a net for my feet, and pressed down my soul: they have digged a pit before me, and are fallen into the midst of it themselves. 8 My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed: I will sing and give praise. 9 Awake up my glory, awake lute and harp: I my self will awake right early. 10 I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the people: and I will sing unto thee among the Nations. 11 For the greatnesse of thy mercy reacheth unto the Heavens: and thy truth unto the Clouds. 12 Set up thy self, O God, above the heavens: and thy glory above all the earth. The Prayer. O Most high and mighty God, who hast set thy self above the heavens, and thy glory above all the earth, do thou send from heaven and save us from the reproof of all our ghostly Enemies, who would eate us, for our soul is among Lions, and the Devil is busie seeking to devour us. O send out thy mercy and truth, deliver us from the malicious slander of men, and from the dreadfull accusations of the De∣vils at the day of judgement, who are set on fire against us, and their teeth are spears and ar∣rows, gnashing at us to tear us in pieces. Let thy mercy sustain us, let thy righteousnesse be interpos'd in answer for us, that as our enemies accuse us, thy mercies may acquit us, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
PSALME 58. A Prayer that Gods people may be delivered from the malice of wicked men. ARE your minds set upon righteousnesse, O ye con∣gregation: and doe ye judge the thing that is right, O ye sons of men? 2 Yea, ye imagine mischiefe in your heart upon the earth: and your hands deal with wickednesse. 3 The ungodly are froward even from their mothers wombe: assoon as they be born, they go astray, and speak lies. 4 They are as venemous as the poyson of a serpent: even like the deaf adder that stoppeth her eares. 5 Which refuseth to hear the voyce of the charmer: charm he never so wisely. 6 Break their teeth (O God) in their mouthes, smite the jaw-bones of the Lions, O Lord: let them fall away like water that runneth apace, and when they shoot their arrows, let them be rooted out. 7 Let them consume away like a snaile, and be like the untimely fruit of a woman: and let them not see the sun. 8 Or ever your pots be made hot with thorns: so let in∣dignation vexe him even as a thing that is raw. 9 The righteous shall rejoyce when he seeth the ven∣geance: he shall wash his footsteps in the bloud of the ungodly. 10 So that a man shall say, Verely there is a reward for the righteous: doubtlesse there is a God that judgeth the earth. The Prayer. O Almighty Lord, thou God that judgest the earth, who preparest rewards for the righ∣teous, and executest vengeance against the ungodly, deliver all thy chosen people from
the peevishnesse of froward and ungodly men, whose hands deale with wickednesse, and they imagine mischief in their hearts. And to thy servants give thy grace, that our minds may be set upon righteousnesse, that we may judge the thing that is right, never refusing to hear thy voyce, or stopping our ears like the deaf adder against thy holy precepts, that we may have no iniquity in our mouths, nor unrighte∣ousnesse in our actions, and at last we may have the reward of the righteous, the inheritance of thy Kingdome, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Evening Prayer. PSALME 59. A Prayer against Hereticks, and all other Ene∣mies of the Church. DEliver me from mne enemies, (O God:) defend me from them that rise up against me. 2 O deliver me from the wicked doers: and save me from the bloud-thirsty men. 3 For lo, they lie waiting for my soul: the mighty men are gathered against me, without any offence or fault of me, O Lord. 4 They run and prepare themselves without my fault: arise thou therefore to help me, and behold. 5 Stand up (O Lord God of hosts) thou God of Israel, o visit all the heathen: and be not mercifull unto them that offend of malicious wickednesse. 6 They go to and fro in the evening: they grin like a dog, and run about through the city.
7 Behold, they speak with their mouth, and swords are in their lips: for who doth hear? 8 But thou, O Lord, shalt have them in derision: and thou shalt laugh all the heathen to scorn. 9 My strength will I ascribe unto thee: for thou art the God of my refuge. 10 God sheweth me his goodnesse plenteously: and God shall let me see my desire upon mine enemies. 11 Slay them not, lest my people forget it: but scatter them abroad among the people, and put them down, O Lord our defence. 12 For the sin of their mouth, and for the words of their lips, they shall be taken in their pride: and why? their preaching is of cursing and lies. 13 Consume them in thy wrath, consume them that they may perish: and know that it is God which ruleth in Jacob, and unto the ends of the world. 14 And in the evening they will return: grin like a dog, and will goe about the City. 15 They will run here and there for meat: and grudge if they be not satisfied. 16 As for me, I will sing of thy power, and will praise thy mercy betimes in the morning: for thou hast been my defence and refuge, in the day of my trouble. 17 Unto thee (O my strength) will I sing: for thou, O God, art my refuge, and my mercifull God. The Prayer. O Lord God of Israel, visit us with thy sal∣vation, and deliver us from the malice of wicked doers, and the violences of blood-thir∣sty men. Let not them prosper, O Lord, in their machinations, whose preaching is of cur∣sing and lies, and who offend of malicious wick∣ednesse: shew us thy goodnesse plenteously,
that we may never forget thy mercies or thy Laws, for thou art our defence and refuge, and our mercifull God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 60. A Prayer in time of Warre, or Temptation. O God, thou hast cast us out, and scattered us abroad: thou also hast been displeased, O turn thee to us again. 2 Thou hast moved the land, and divided it: heal the sores thereof, for it shaketh. 3 Thou hast shewed thy people heavy things: thou hast given us a drink of deadly wine. 4 Thou hast given a token for such as fear thee: that they may triumph because of the truth. 5 Therefore were thy beloved delivered: help me with thy right hand, and hear me. 6 God hath spoken in his holinesse, I will rejoyce and divide Sichem: and mete out the valley of Succoth. 7 Gilead is mine, and Manasses is mine: Ephraim also is the strength of my head, Judah is my law-giver. 8 Moab is my wash-pot, over Edom will I cast out my shoe: Philistia be thou glad of me. 9 Who will lead me into the strong city: who will bring me into Edom? 10 Hast thou not cast us out, O God: wilt not thou, O God, goe out with our hosts? 11 O be thou our help in trouble: for vain is the help of man. 12 Through God will we doe great acts: for it is hee that shall tread down our enemies.
The Prayer. O Lord God, who for our sins hast shewed us heavy things, and given us a drink of deadly Wine, and yet hast never failed them that fear thee, but hast given them a token that they may triumph because of thy truth and mercy, consigning them to redemption and deliverance by the testimony and comforts of the holy Spirit: O be thou our help in trouble, for all our hope is in thee, and we disclaim all confidence in our selves, or in the arm of flesh, praying thee for aid, that in thy strength we may tread down our enemies, and give thee thanks who art the fountain of strength, and the disposer of Victories, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 61. A Prayer for the King, and for comfort in sad∣nesse. HEar my crying, O God: give ear vnto my prayer. 2 From the ends of the earth will I call unto thee: when my heart is in heavinesse. 3 O set me up upon the rock that is higher then I: for thou hast been my hope, and a strong tower for me against the enemy. 4 I will dwell in thy tabernacle for ever: and my trust shall be under the covering of thy wings. 5 For thou, O Lord, hast heard my desires: and hast given an heritage unto those that feare thy name. 6 Thou shalt grant the King a long life: that his years
may endure throughout all generations. 7 He shall dwell before God for ever: O prepare thy loving mercy and faithfulnesse, that they may preserve him. 8 So will I always sing praise unto thy name: that I may daily perform my vows. The Prayer. O Blessed Jesu, thou that art the rock high∣er then all the world, upon whom thy Church is built, and all our hopes rely: be mer∣cifull unto us, and give ear unto our prayers, be unto us a fountain of comfort whensoever our heart is in heavinesse, for under the covering of thy wings there is joy, and health, and safe∣ty: save all those that fear thy name, and give thy blessing to thine heritage; and that the blessings of thy people may be lasting, and perpetuall, give unto thy servant the King long life, let thy loving kindnesse and faith∣fulnesse alway preserve him, be a strong tower for him against all his enemies, and at last bring him to an eternall Kingdome, where no ene∣mies shall assault or disturb his Peace, that he may dwell before thee for ever, and rejoyce in the participation of the blessings of thy kingdome, who livest and reignest ever one God world without end. Amen.
Morning Prayer. PSALME 62. A Prayer that we may trust in God onely in all our troubles. MY soul truly waiteth still upon God: for of him commeth my salvation. 2 He verily is my strength and my sal∣vation: he is my defence, so that I shall not greatly fall. 3 How long will yee imagine mis∣chiefe against every man: ye shall be slain all the sort of you, yea, as a tottering wall shall ye be, and like a broken hedge. 4 Their device is onely how to put him out whom God will exalt: their delight is in lies, they give good words with their mouth, but curse with their heart. 5 Neverthelesse, my soul, wait thou still upon God: for my hope is in him. 6 He truly is my strength and my salvation: he is my defence, so that I shall not fall. 7 In God is my health and my glory: the rock of my might, and in God is my trust. 8 O put your trust in him alway (ye people:) poure out your hearts before him, for God is our hope. 9 As for the children of men, they are but vain: the children of men are deceitfull upon the weights, they are altogether lighter then vanity it self. 10 O trust not in wrong and robbery, give not your selves unto vanity: if riches increase, set not your heart upon them. 11 God spake once and twice: I have also heard the same, that power belongeth unto God. 12 And that thou Lord art mercifull: for thou re∣wardest every man according to his work.
The Prayer. O Lord God of whom commeth our salva∣tion, thou art our defence and strength, our health and our glory, give us thy grace, that we may put our whole trust in thee alway, that we may pour out our hearts before thee in all our troubles, that we may wait still upon thee for the performance of our expectation in all our longings and desires. Be thou our defence, uphold us that we may not fall into those great sins, which lay waste our consciences, or into such miseries as make us without hope or remedy, the miseries of despair, obstinate ma∣lice, or the woes of a sad eternity. Teach us to despise riches, to disclaim all trust in the creatures, not to delight in lies, or vanity, not to multiply wrongs and robbery, that when thou shalt come with power and great glory, to reward every man according to his work, thou maist be mercifull unto us, pardoning our sinnes, and accepting us to life eternall, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 63. A Prayer for deliverance from the miseries of our pilgrimage; with longing and desires after God, and the joyes of Heaven. O God, thou art my God: early will I seek thee. 2 My soul thirsteth for thee, my flesh also longeth
after thee: in a barren and dry land where no water is. 3 Thus have I looked for thee in holinesse: that I might behold thy power and glory. 4 For thy loving kindnesse is better then the life it self: my lips shall praise thee. 5 As long as I live will I magnifie thee on his man∣ner: and lift up my hands in thy name. 6 My soul shall be satisfied even as it were with marrow and fatnesse: when my mouth praiseth thee with joyfull lips. 7 Have I not remembred thee in my bed: and thought upon thee when I was waking? 8 Because thou hast been my helper: therefore under the shadow of thy wings will I rejoyce. 9 My soul hangeth upon thee: thy right hand hath up∣holden me. 10 These also that seek the hurt of my soul: they shall go under the earth. 11 Let them fall upon the edge of the sword: that they may be a portion for foxes. 12 But the King shall rejoyce in God, all they also that swear by him shall be commended: for the mouth of them that speak lies, shall be stopped. The Prayer. O Mercifull and deare God, whose loving kindnesse is better then the life it self, de∣fend us against the malice and designes of all them, that seek the hurt of our souls, and make us to rejoyce in thy help, and under the sha∣dow of thy wings. O let the day-spring of thy favour visit us from on high, that we may seek thee with an early devotion, pursue after thee with a constant, and an active industry, and at
last possesse thee with the firm comprehensions of love and charity; that in this world, we loo∣king for thee in holinesse of living, longing and thirsting after thee with fervent desires, may for ever hereafter behold thy power and glo∣ry, and our souls be eternally satisfied, even as with marrow and fatnesse, when our lips and hearts shall praise thee to all eternity. Grant this, for the love and honour of Jesus Christ, our onely Mediator and Redeemer. Amen. PSALME 64. A Prayer for deliverance from the slander and mischiefs of all wicked persons. HEar my voyce, O God, in my prayer: preserve my life from fear of the enemy. 2 Hide me from the gathering together of the froward: and from the insurrection of wicked doers. 3 Which have whet their tongue like a sword: and shoot out their arrows, even bitter words. 4 That they may privily shoot at him that is perfect: suddenly do they hit him, and fear not. 5 They courage themselves in mischief: and commune among themselves how they may lay snares, and say that no man shall see them. 6 They imagine wickednesse, and practise it: that they keep secret among themselves, every man in the deep of his heart. 7 But God shall suddenly shoot at them with a swift arrow: that they shall be wounded. 8 Yea, their own tongues shall make them fall: inso∣much that whoso seeth them shall laugh them to scorn. 9 And all men that see it, shall say, This hath God done: for they shall perceive that it is his work.
10 The righteous shall rejoyce in the Lord, and put his trust in him: and all they that are true of heart shall be glad. The Prayer. O Lord God, thou that hearest the voice of our prayers, and considerest the cries of them that flie unto thee for succour, deliver us and all thy whole Church from the gathe∣ring together of the froward and from the in∣surrection of wicked doers. Disappoint their snares, infatuate their Counsels, distract their consultations, and blast all their designes; let the swords and arrows of their tongues be shot in vain, that they may never hit any of thy servants, nor wound him that is perfect. Make them to fall (O God) in their hopes whereby they courage themselves in mischief and fear not, and do thou laugh them to scorn, that we who have put our trust in thee, may rejoyce in thee, and confesse, that it is thy work, to give salvation and deliverance to thy people whom thou lovest in our Lord and Sa∣viour Jesus Christ. Amen.
Evening Prayer. PSALME 65. A Prayer for spirituall blessings, and for fruit∣fulnesse of the earth. THou, O God, art praised in Sion: and unto thee shall the vow be performed in Jerusalem. 2 Thou that hearest the prayer: unto thee shall all flesh come. 3 My misdeeds prevail against me: O be thou mercifull unto our sins. 4 Blessed is the man whom thou choosest and receivest unto thee: he shall dwell in thy Court, and shall be sa∣tisfied with the pleasures of thy house, even of thy holy temple. 5 Thou shalt shew us wonderfull things in thy righte∣ousnesse, O God of our salvation: thou that art the hope of all the ends of the earth, and of them that remain in the broad sea. 6 Which in his strength setteth fast the mountains: and is girded about with power. 7 Which stilleth the raging of the sea: and the noise of his waves, and the madnesse of his people. 8 They also that dwell in the uttermost parts of the earth, shall be afraid at thy tokens: thou that makest the out-goings of the morning and evening to praise thee. 9 Thou visitest the earth, and blessest it: thou makest it very plenteous. 10 The river of God is full of water: thou preparest their corn, for so thou providest for the earth. 11 Thou waterest her furrows, thou sendest rain into the little valleys thereof: thou makest it soft with the drops of rain, and blessest the increase of it.
12 Thou crownest the year with thy goodnesse: and thy clouds drop fatnesse. 13 They shall drop upon the dwellings of the wilder∣nesse: and the little hils shall rejoyce on every side. 14 The folds shall be full of sheep: the valleys also shall stand so thick with corn, that they shall laugh and sing. The Prayer. O God the hope of all the ends of the earth, and of them that remaine in the broad sea, be thou mercifull unto our sinnes, and let not our misdeeds prevail against us, so as ei∣ther to make us habitually sinfull, or endlesly miserable, but give us the blessings of thy chosen; let us receive the influences of thy graces and benediction, by the participation of thy Word and Sacraments in thy holy tem∣ple. And as thou embracest us with thy right hand, shewing us wonderfull things in thy righteousnesse and salvation, so let thy left hand be under our heads, and give us such a portion of temporall blessings, as shall be ne∣cessary for us. Make the earth plenteous, and blesse the increase of it, crown the yeare with goodnesse, and let the clouds drop fatnesse, that the valleys standing thick with corn, may laugh and sing thy praises, and that we being refreshed with the multitude of thy blessings, may praise thee in Sion, and at last be satisfied with the pleasures of thy house in the celestiall Jerusalem, where thou livest and reignest, one God world without end. Amen.
PSALME 66. A Prayer that God would support us in times of trouble and deliver us. O Be joyfull in God all ye lands: sing praises unto the honour of his name, make his praise to be glorious. 2 Say unto God, O how wonderfull art thou in thy works: through the greatnesse of thy power shall thine enemies be found liers unto thee. 3 For all the world shall worship thee: sing of thee, and praise thy name. 4 O come hither, and behold the works of God: how wonderfull he is in his doing towards the children of men. 5 He turned the sea into dry land: so that they went through the water on foot, there did we rejoyce thereof. 6 He ruleth with his power for ever, his eyes behold the people: and such as will not beleeve, shall not be able to exalt themselves. 7 O praise our God (ye people:) and make the voyce of his praise to be heard. 8 Which holdeth our soul in life: and suffereth not ou feet to slip. 9 For thou (O God) hast proved us: thou also hast tri∣ed us, like as silver is tried. 10 Thou broughtest us into the snare: and layedst trouble upon our loyns. 11 Thou sufferedst men to ride over our heads: we went through fire and water, and thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place. 12 I will go into thy house with burnt-offerings: and will pay thee my vows which I promised with my lips, and spake with my mouth when I was in trouble. 13 I will offer unto thee fat burnt-sacrifices, with the incense of rams: I will offer bullocks and goats. 14 O come hither and hearken all ye that fear God: and I will tell you what he hath done for my soul.
15 I called unto him with my mouth: and gave him praises with my tongue. 16 If I encline unto wickednesse with my heart: the Lord will not hear me. 17 But God hath heard me: and considered the voyce of my prayer. 18 Praised be God, which hath not cast out my prayer: nor turned his mercy from me. The Prayer. O Lord God, who art wonderfull in thy works, and in thy doings, towards the children of men, thou chastisest every one whō thou receivest, proving us and trying us, like as silver is tried, let thy mercifull hands lead us through the fire of afflictions, and the waters of temporall chastisements, so as we may not be consumed with the flames of thy wrath, nor the waters go over our souls, but that we be∣ing sustained by the comforts of thy Spirit, and refreshed with the dew of thy graces, we may at last be brought out into a wealthy place, even the place of eternall treasures. O give us thy grace, that our hearts encline not to wick∣ednesse, and that our feet slip not, that so we regarding thy laws, and having respect to obey thy holy will and pleasure, thou mayest hear our prayers, the greatnesse of thy power may cast down all our enemies, that they may never be able to exalt themselves; that while thou holdest our souls in life, we may never cease praising thee, who hast never turn'd thy
mercy from us, through Jesus Christ our Lord· Amen. PSALME 67. A prayer that all men may blesse God, and God may blesse all men. GOd be mercifull unto us, and blesse us: and shew us the light of his countenance, and be mercifull un∣to us. 2 That thy way may be known upon earth: thy saving health among all Nations. 3 Let the people praise thee, O God: yea, let all the people praise thee. 4 O let the Nations rejoyce and be glad: for thou shalt judge the folk righteously, and govern the Nations upon earth. 5 Let the people praise thee, O God: let all the peo∣ple praise thee. 6 Then shall the earth bring forth her increase: and God even our own God shall give us his blessing. 7 God shall blesse us: and all the ends of the world shall fear him. The Prayer. O Lord God, thou Governour of all Nati∣ons, and the righteous Judge of the whole earth, be mercifull unto us and blesse us. Thou makest the Sun to shine upon all the corners of the habitable world, giving his light both to the good and bad; let the light of thy coun∣tenance diffuse it self to all Nations, and to all men. Lighten all our darknesses with the beams of thy divine favour, teach thy wayes unto all the people of the earth, and give thy
saving health to all Nations, that while all joyn with one consent to fear thee, and to give thee praises, thou mayest govern us all in peace and righteousnesse, and when tho shalt come to judge us, we may receive thy everlasting mercies. Grant this, for Jesus Christ his sake, our onely Mediator and Advocate. Amen. Morning Prayer. PSALME 68. A Prayer for defence and propagation of the Ca∣tholike Church. LEt God arise, and let his enemies be scat∣tered: let them also that hate him flee before him. 2 Like as the smoak vanisheth, so shalt thou drive them away: and like as waxe melteth at the fire, so let the ungodly perish at the presence of God. 3 But let the righteous be glad and rejoyce before God: let them also be merry and joyfull. 4 O sing unto God, and sing praises unto his name: magnifie him that rideth upon the Heavens, as it were up∣on an horse, praise him in his name, yea, and rejoyce be∣fore him. 5 He is a father of the fatherlesse, and defendeth the cause of the widows: even God in his holy habitation. 6 He is the God that maketh men to be of one minde in an house, and bringeth the prisoners out of captivity: but letteth the runnagates continue in scarcenesse.
7 O God, when thou wentest forth before the people: when thou wentest through the wildernesse. 8 The earth shook, and the heavens dropped at the presence of God: even as Sinai also was moved at the presence of God, which is the God of Israel. 9 Thou, O God, sentest a gracious rain upon thine in∣heritance: and refreshedst it when it was weary. 10 Thy congregation shall dwell therein: for thou, O God, hast of thy goodnesse prepared for the poor. 11 The Lord gave the word: great was the company of the preachers. 12 Kings with their Armies did flee and were discom∣fited: and they of the houshold divided the spoil. 13 Though ye have lien among the pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of a dove: that is covered with silver wings, and her feathers like gold. 14 When the Almighty scattered Kings for their sake: then were they as white as snow in Salmon. 15 As the hill of Basan, so is Gods hill: even an high hill, as the hill of Basan. 16 Why hop ye so ye high hils? this is Gods hill, in the which it pleaseth him to dwell: yea, the Lord will abide in it for ever. 17 The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels: and the Lord is among them as in the holy place of Sinai. 18 Thou art gone up on high, thou hast led captivity captive, and received gifts for men: yea, even for thine enemies, that the Lord God may dwell among them. 19 Praised bee the Lord daily: even the God which helpeth us, and poureth his benefits upon us. 20 He is our God, even the God of whom commeth salvation: God is the Lord by whom we escape death. 21 God shall wound the head of his enemies: and the hairy scalp of such a one as goeth on still in his wicked∣nesse. 22 The Lord hath said, I will bring my people again,
as I did from Basan: mine own will I bring again, as I did sometime from the deep of the sea. 23 That thy foot may bee dipped in the bloud of thine enemies: and that the tongue of thy dogges may be red through the same. 24 It is well seen, O God, how thou goest: how thou my God and King goest in the snctuary. 25 The singers go before, the Minstrels follow after: in the midst are the damsels playing with the timbrels. 26 Give thanks, O Israel, unto God the Lord, in the congregations: from the ground of the heart. 27 There is little Benjamin their ruler, and the Prin∣ces of Judah their counsell: the princes of Zabulon, and the Princes of Nephthali. 28 Thy God hath sent forth strength for thee: stablish the thing, O God, that thou hast wrought in us. 29 For thy temples sake at Jerusalem: so shall Kings bring presents unto thee. 30 When the company of the Spear-men, and multi∣tude of the mighty, are scattered abroad among the beasts of the people (so that they humbly bring pieces of sil∣ver:) and when he hath scattered the people that delight in warre. 31 Then shall the Princes come out of Egypt: the Mo∣rians land shall soon stretch out her hands unto God. 32 Sing unto God, O ye kingdomes of the earth: O sing praises unto the Lord. 33 Which sitteth in the heavens over all from the be∣ginning: lo, he doth send out his voyce, yea, and that a mighty voyce. 34 Ascribe ye the power to God over Israel: his wor∣ship and strength is in the clouds. 35 O God, wonderfull art thou in thy holy places: even the God of Israel, he will give strength and power▪ unto his people, blessed be God.
The Prayer. O Lord God, mighty and mercifull, thou ri∣dest upon the heavens, as it were upon an horse, thou art the father of the fatherlesse, and defendest the cause of the widow; have mercy upon thy holy Church; and since her Lord and Spouse is gone up on high, even to his holy ha∣bitation, leave us not comfortlesse, but send the holy Ghost in assistances and gifts to dwel amongst us; that by his aid, we may escape death spirituall, and the bitternesse of the temporall. Send a gracious rain, even the dew of thy divine favours upon thine inheritance, to refresh us in our wearinesse and sadnesses. Make thy people innocent and chast as the dove; and besides the beauty of internall san∣ctity, let thy Church be covered with silver wings, and her feathers like gold, decked and assisted with exteriour advantages, as may best promote thy honour and the services of reli∣gion. Let all the Princes and lands of the earth, stretch their hands out unto thee, O God, and confesse thy mightinesse and thy honour; that thy Gospel going forth into all lands, peace and all thy blessings may follow it, and thy praise be multiplied from generation to gene∣ration, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Evening Prayer. PSALME 69. A prayer in times of persecution for the cause of Religion. SAve me, O God: for the watrs are come in, even unto my soul. 2 I stick fast in the deep mire where no ground is: I am come into deep wa∣ters, so that the flouds run over me. 3 I am weary of crying, my throat is dry: my sight faileth me for waiting so long upon my God. 4 They that hate me without a cause, are moe then the hairs of my head: they that are mine enemies, and would destroy me guiltlesse, are mighty. 5 I payed them the things that I never took: God thou knowest my simplenesse, and my faults are not hid from thee. 6 Let not them that trust in thee, O Lord God of hosts, be ashamed for my cause: let not them that seek thee, be confounded through me, O Lord God of Israel. 7 And why? for thy sake have I suffered reproof: shame hath covered my face. 8 I am become a stranger unto my brethren: even an aliant unto my mothers children. 9 For the zeal of thy house hath even eaten me: and the rebukes of them that rebuked thee, are fallen upon me. 10 I wept and chastned my self with fasting: and that was turned to my reproof. 11 I put on sackcloth also: and they jested upon me. 12 They that sit in the gate speak against me: and the drunkards make songs upon me. 13 But Lord, I make my prayer unto thee: in an ac∣ceptable time.
14 Hear me, O God, in the multitude of thy mercy: even in the truth of thy salvation. 15 Take me out of the mire that I sink not: oh let me be delivered from them that hate me, and out of the deep waters. 16 Let not the water-floud drown me, neither let the deep swallow me up: and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me. 17 Hear me, O Lord, for thy loving kindnesse is com∣fortable: turn thee unto me according to the multitude of thy mercies. 18 And hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am in trouble: oh haste thee, and hear me. 19 Draw nigh unto my soul, and save it: oh deliver me, because of mine enemies. 20 Thou hast known my reproof, my shame, and my dishonour: mine adversaries are all in thy sight. 21 Thy rebuke hath broken my heart, I am full of hea∣vinesse: I looked for some to have pity on me, but there was no man, neither found I any to comfort me. 22 They gave me gall to eat: and when I was thirsty, they gave me vinegar to drink. 23 Let their table be made a snare to take themselves withall: and let the things (that should have been for their wealth) be unto them an occasion of falling. 24 Let their eyes be blinded that they see not: and ever bow down their backs. 25 Poure out thine indignation upon them: and let thy wrathfull displeasure toke hold of them. 26 Let their habitation be void: and no man to dwell in their tents. 27 For they persecute him whom thou hast smitten: and they talk how they may vex them whom thou hast wounded. 28 Let them fall from one wickednesse to another: and not come into thy righteousnesse. 29 Let them be wiped out of the book of the living:
and not bee written among the righteous. 30 As for me, when I am poor and in heavinesse: thy help (O God) shall lift me up. 31 I will praise the name of God with a song: and magnifie it with thanksgiving. 32 This also shall please the Lord: better then a bul∣lock, that hath horns and hoofs. 33 The humble shall consider this, and be glad: seek ye after God, and your soul shall live. 34 For the Lord heareth the poor: and despiseth not his prisoners. 35 Let heaven and earth praise him: the sea, and all that moveth therein 36 For God will save Sion, and build the Cities of Ju∣da: that men may dwell there, and have it in possession. 37 The posterity also of his servants shall inherit it: and they that love his name, shall dwell therein. The Prayer. O Blessed Jesu, whose loving kindnesse is comfortable, who for our sakes didst taste vineger and gall that thou mightest redeem us from the bitternesse of death and sin, and esta∣blish to thy self a Church in holy Religion, and defend it with thy favour and power: have mercy upon thy servants, who suffer from the hands of their enemies, for the testimony of a good conscience, and the doctrines of a Cath∣like faith. Let not them that trust in thee, O Lord God of hosts, be ashamed, but let them, who for thy sake have suffered reproof, be deli∣vered from them that hate them, and from the deep waters of persecutions and discomforts, that we and all thy faithfull people, being sa∣ved
from our enemies, may praise thee and thy faithfulnesse in this world, and may finally in∣herit the land of promise, which thou hast made to all that suffer persecution for a cause of righteousnesse, even the possession of thine inheritance, thy Kingdome in Heaven, where thou livest and reignest ever one God world without end. Amen. PSALME 70. A prayer to God for blessings upon faithfull peo∣ple, and deliverance from our enemies. HAste thee, O God, to deliver me: make haste to help me, O Lord. 2 Let them be ashamed and confounded that seek after my soul: let them be turned backward and put to confusi∣on, that wish me evill. 3 Let them (for their reward) be soon brought to shame: that cry over me, There, there. 4 But let all those that seek thee, be joyfull and glad in thee: and let all such as delight in thy salvation, say al∣way, The Lord be praised. 5 As for me, I am poor and in misery: haste thee unto me (O God.) Thou art my helper and my redeemer: O Lord, make no long tarrying. The Prayer. O Lord God our Helper and Redeemer, have mercy upon us, and all thy faithful people: make haste & help us, O God, against all those
that seek after our souls to do us mischief: make us to delight in thee, to wait for thy sal∣vation, to trust in thy mercies, to rejoyce in thy excellencies and perfection: that our feet being directed by thy guidance, our weaknesses strengthened by thy power, our sins pardoned by thy mercies, and our souls justified by thy free grace, we may always give thee praise with the humble addresses of devotion and thank∣fulnesse, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Morning Prayer. PSALME 71. A Prayer for the continuance of Gods favours to us, even to our old age, and a longing for a hap∣py departure. IN thee, O Lord, have I put my trust, let me never be put to confusion: but rid me and deliver me in thy righ∣teousnesse, encline thine ear unto me, and save me. 2 Be thou my strong hold, where∣unto I may alway resort: thou hast promised to help me, for thou art my house of defence, and my castle. 3 Deliver me, O my God, out of the hand of the un∣godly: out of the hand of the unrighteous and cruell man. 4 For thou, O Lord God, art the thing hat I long for: thou art my hope even from my youth. 5 Through thee have I been holden up evr since I
was born: thou art he that took me out of my mothers womb, my praise shall be alway of thee. 6 I am become as it were a monster unto many: but my sure trust is in thee. 7 O let my mouth be filled with thy praise: (that I may sing of thy glory) and honour all the day long. 8 Cast me not away in the time of age: forsake mee not when my strength faileth me. 9 For mine enemies speak against me, and they that lay wait for my soul, take their counsell together, saying: God hath forsaken him, persecute him, and take him, for there is none to deliver him. 10 Goe not frre from me, O God: my God haste thee to help me. 11 Let them be confounded and perish, that are against my soul: let them be covered with shame and dishonour, that seek to do me evill. 12 As for me, I will patiently abide alway: and will praise thee more nd more. 13 My mouth shall daily speak of thy righteousnesse and salvation: for I know no end thereof. 14 I will goe forth in th strength of the Lord God: and will make mention of thy righteousnesse onely. 15 Thou, O God, hast taught me from my youth up untill now: therefore will I tell of thy wondrous works. 16 Forsake me not, O God, in mine old age, when I am gray-headed: untill I have shewn thy strength unto this generation, and thy power to all them that are yet for to come. 17 Thy righteousnesse, O God, is very high: and great things are they that thou hast done, O God, who is like unto thee? 18 O what great troubles and adversities hast thou shewed me, and yet didst thou turn and refresh mee: yea, and broughtest mee from the deep of the earth again!
19 Thou hast brought me to great honour: and com∣forted me on every side. 20 Therefore will I praise thee and thy faithfulnesse (O God) playing upon an instrument of musick: unto thee will I sing upon the harp, O thou holy one of Israel. 21 My lips will be fain when I sing unto thee: and so will my soule whom thou hast delivered. 22 My tongue also shall talk of thy righteousnesse all the day long: for they are confounded and brought unto shame that seek to do me evill. The Prayer. O Lord God our house of defence and our Castle, who by thy mercies and thy loving Spirit, hast taught us and led us in thy ways, from our first years until now, thou hast brought us to great honour, even the honour of being Christians, the honour of adoption to be thy Children, and heirs of thy glorious promises, coheirs with thy Son Jesus Christ, and hast comforted us on every side, with a continuall stream of thy mercies and refreshments: give us thy grace that we may love thee, and long for thee above all the things of this World: and as thou hast holden us up ever since we were born, so let thy mercy go along with us all our days. Cast us not away in the time of age, and give us grace that we may never cast thee or thy Laws from us. Let not thy grace, and the ghostly strength we derive from thee, forsake us when our naturall strength fails us, but let our spirit grow upon the disadvantages
of the flesh, and begin to receive the happiness of eternity, by an absolute conquest over the weakned and decaying body; that after we have by thy aid passed through the great trou∣bles and adversities thou shewest unto all thy Children in this world, we may lie down in righteousnesse and with thy favour: that when thou bringest us out from the deep of the earth again, we may have a joyfull resurrection to the society of Saints and Angels, and the full fruition of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. PSALME 72. A Prayer for the exaltation and propagation of Christs Kingdome. GIve the King thy judgements (O God:) and thy righteousnesse unto the Kings son. 2 Then shall he judge the people according unto right: and defend the poor. 3 The mountains also shall bring peace: and the little hils righteousnesse unto the people. 4 He shall keep the simple folk by their right: defend he children of the poor, and punish the wrong doer. 5 They shall fear thee as long as the sunne and moon endureth, from one generation to another. 6 He shall come down like the rain into a fleece of wooll: even as the drops that water the earth. 7 In his time shall the righteous flourish: yea, and abun∣dance of peace, so long as the moon endureth. 8 His dominion shall be also from the one sea to the other: and from the floud unto the worlds end. 9 They that dwell in the wildernesse shall kneel be∣fore
him: his enemies shall lick the dust. 10 The kings of Tharsis and of the Isles shall give presents: the kings of Arabia and Saba shall bring gifts. 11 All kings shall fall down before him: all nations shall doe him service. 12 For he shall deliver the poor when he crieth: the needy also, and him that hath no helper. 13 He shall be favourable to the simple and needy: and hall preserve the souls of the poor. 14 Hee shall deliver their soules from falshood and wrong: and dear shall their bloud be in his sight. 15 He shall live, and unto him shall be given of the gold of Arabia: prayer shall be made ever unto him, and daily shall he be praised. 16 There shall be an heap of corn in the earth high up∣on the hils: his fruit shall shake like Libanus, and shall be green in the city, like grasse upon the earth. 17 His name shall endure for ever, his name shall re∣main under the sun among the posterities: which shall be blessed through him, and all the heathen shall prais him. 18 Blessed be the Lord God, even the God of Israel: which onely doth wondrous things. 19 And blessed be the name of his majesty for ever: and all the earth shall be filled with his majesty. Amen, Amen. The Prayer. O Blessed Jesu, who didst descend from hea∣ven into the womb of the blessed Virgin, like rain into a fleece of wooll, thou that pu∣nishest the wrong doer, and defendest the chil∣dren of the poor, and them that have no hel∣per; have mercy upon thy Holy Church, be pleased by her ministery to extend thy bles∣sings
and thy dominion from the one Sea to the other, even unto the worlds end, that all Kings of the earth may fall down before thee, and all Nations may do thee service. Make thy righteous people to flourish, and so subdue their enemies under them, delivering them from falshood and wrong, that they may be blessed with abundance of Peace, and be satis∣fied with thy righteousnesse and salvation through thy mercies, O blessed Saviour and Redeemer Jesu. Amen. Evening Prayer. PSALME 73. A Prayer that we may have our portion in God, and not in the good things of the men of this world. TRuly God is loving unto Israel: even unto such as are of a clean heart. 2 Neverthelesse my feet were almost gone: my treadings had welnigh slipt. 3 And why? I was grieved at the wicked: I doe also see the ungodly in such prosperity. 4 For they are in no perill of death: but are lusty and strong. 5 They come in no misfortune like other folk: neither are they plagued like other men. 6 And this is the cause that they be so holden with pride: and overwhelmed with cruelty. 7 Their eyes swell with fatnesse: and they doe even what they lust.
8 They corrupt other, and speak of wicked blasphemy: their talking is against the most Highest. 9 For they stretch forth their mouth unto the heaven: and their tongue goeth through the world. 10 Therefore fall the people unto them: and thereout suck they no small advantage. 11 Tush (say they) how should God perceive it: is there knowledge in the most Highest? 12 Lo, these are the ungodly, these prosper in the World, and these have riches in possession: and I said, Then have I cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocency. 13 All the day long have I been punished: and chaste∣ned every morning. 14 Yea, and I had almost said even as they: but lo, then should I have condemned the generation of thy chil∣dren. 15 Then thought I to understand this: but it was too hard for me. 16 Untill I went into the sanctuary of God: then un∣derstood I the end of these men. Namely, how thou dost set them in slippery places: and castest them down, and destroyest them. 18 Oh how suddenly doe they consume: perish, and come to a fearfull end! 19 Yea, even like as a dream when one awaketh: so shalt thou make their image to vanish out of the City. 20 Thus my heart was grieved: and it went even through my reins. 21 So foolish was I and ignorant: even as it were a beast before thee. 22 Neverthelesse I am alway by thee: for thou hast holden me by my right hand. 23 Thou shalt guide me with thy counsll: and after that receive me with glory. 24 Whom have I in heaven but thee: and there is none upon earth that I desire in comparison of thee.
25 My flesh and my heart faileth: but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. 26 For lo, they that forsake thee, shall perish: thou hast destroyed all them that commit fornication against thee. 27 But it is good for me to hold me fast by God, to put my trust in the Lord God: and to speak of all thy works (in the gates of the daughter of Sion.) The Prayer. O Lord God who art loving unto all thy Church, even unto all such as are of a clean heart, give unto us hearts humble and merci∣full, that we may never be holden with pride, nor overwhelmed with cruelty; and sanctifie our words and lips, that we may never blas∣pheme thy holinesse, nor our talking be ever against thee, or thy honour. O God most Highest, give unto us such religious and morti∣fied affections, that we may never thirst after the temporall advantages and prosperities of the wicked: set not our feet in slippery places, lest we be suddenly cast down, and have our portion in the lot of the wicked, who perish and come to a fearfull end: guide us with thy ounsell, that we holding us fast by thee, and putting our trust in thee, ô God, thou mayest be the strength of our hearts, the hope of our souls, and the ground of all our confidence and content in this life, and after this life is ended, thou maiest receive us with glory, and be our portion for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
PSALME 74. A Prayer against Sacrilegious persons, and all the Enemies of the Church. O God wherefore art thou absent from us so long: why is thy wrath so hot against the sheep of thy pasture? 2 O think upon thy congregation: whom thou hast purchased and redeemed of old. 3 Think upon the tribe of thy inheritance: and mount Sion wherein thou hast dwelt. 4 Lift up thy feet, that thou maist utterly destroy every enemy: which hath done evill in thy sanctuary. 5 Thine adversaries roar in the midst of thy congrega∣tions: and set up their banners for tokens. 6 He that hewed timber afore out of the thick trees: was known to bring it to an excellent work. 7 But now they break down all the carved work there∣of: with axes and hammers. 8 They have set fire upon thy holy places: and have defiled the dwelling place of thy name, even unto the ground. 9 Yea, they said in their hearts, Let us make havock of them altogether: thus have they burnt up all the house of God in the land. 10 We see not our tokens, there is not one Prophet more: no not one is there among us that understandeth any more. 11 O God, how long shall the adversary do this disho∣nour: how long shall the enemy blaspheme thy name, for ever? 12 Why withdrawest thou thy hand: why pluckest not thou thy right hand out of thy bosome to consume the nemy? 13 For God is my King of old: the help that is done upon earth, he doth it himself. 14 Thou diddest divide the sea through thy power:
thou brakest the heads of the dragons in the waters. 15 Thou smotest the heads of leviathan in pieces: and gavest him to be meat for the people in the wildernesse. 16 Thou broughtest out fountains and waters out of the hard rocks: thou driedst up mighty waters. 17 The day is thine, and the night is thine: thou hast prepared the light and the sunne. 18 Thou hast set all the borders of the earth: thou hast made summer and winter. 19 Remember this, O Lord, how the enemy hath re∣buked: and how the foolish people have blasphemed thy name. 20 O deliver not the soule of thy turtle dove unto the multitude of the enemies: and forget not the congregati∣on of the poor for ever. 21 Look upon the covenant: for all the earth is full of darknesse, and cruell habitations. 22 Oh let not the simple go away ashamed: but let the poor and needy give praise unto thy name. 23 Arise, O God, maintain thine own cause: remem∣ber how the foolish man blasphemeth thee daily. 24 Forget not the voyce of thine enemies: the pre∣sumption of them that hate thee, increaseth ever more and more. The Prayer. O Lord God Blessed Jesu, who with thy pre∣cious bloud hast purchased to thy self, and redeemed a Church, that it should serve thee in holinesse and righteousnesse, being delive∣red from fear of all their adversaries, forget not the congregation of thy poor people for ever, maintain thine own cause, deliver the soul of thy Turtle dove from the multitude of her
enemies. Preserve with thy right hand all the places appointed for thy publike service, let a guard of flaming Cherubins (as at the gate of Paradise) stand sentinell, and keep from the invasions of sacrilegious persons, and the pol∣lutions of all impure Church-robbers, all thy dwelling places, that thou mayest for ever dwell among us, defending the poor, bringing help to all thy people, and particular blessings and assistances to the tribe of thine own inhe∣ritance, which thou hast sanctified to thy wor∣ship and service, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Morning Prayer. PSALME 75. A Prayer against the terrors of the day of Judge∣ment. VNto thee (O God) doe we give thanks: yea, unto thee doe we give thanks. 2 Thy name also is so nigh: and that do thy wondrous works declare. 3 When I receive the congregation: I shall judge according unto right. 4 The earth is weak, and all the inhabiters thereof: I bear up the pillars of it. 5 I said unto the fools, Deal not so madly: and to the ungodly, Set not up your horn. 6 Set not up your horn on high: and speak not with a stiffe neck. 7 For promotion cometh neither from the East nor from the West: nor yet from the South.
8 And why? God is the judge: he putteth down one, and setteth up another. 9 For in the hand of the Lord there is a cup, and the wine is red: it is full mixt, and he poureth out of the same. 10 As for the dregs thereof: all the ungodly of the earth shall drink them, and suck them out. 11 But I will talk of the God of Jacob: and praise him for ever. 12 All the horns of the ungodly also will I break: and the horns of the righteous shall be exalted. The Prayer. O Lord God the Judge of all the world, from whom commeth all promotion and all punishment, have mercy upon us now, at the hour of death, and in the day of Judgement, when thou shalt judge all the congregations of men and Angels according unto right: O give us grace to expect thy comming in humi∣lity and charity, that we be not stiffe-necked and exalted in our own opinions and concep∣tions, but may submit to thy yoke with meek∣nesse and obedience, that when thou shalt pour forth the cup of thy vengeance upon the un∣godly, we may not drink or tast of the dregs of it, but may sit down at thy Table in the Supper of the Lamb, and be satisfied with the blessings of eternity, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
PSALME 76. A prayer that we may fear Gods Judgements, and be freed from the terrors of men. IN Jury is God know: his name is great in Israel. 2 At Salem is his tabernacle: and his dwelling in Sion. 3 There brake he the arrows of the bow: the shield, of sword, and the battell. 4 Thou art of more honour and might: then the hils of the robbers. 5 The proud are robbed, they have slept their sleep: and all the men (whose hands were mighty) have found nothing. 6 At thy rebuke (O God of Jacob:) both the chariot and horse are fallen. 7 Thou, even thou art to be feared: and who may stand in thy sight when thou art angry? 8 Thou didst cause thy judgement to be heard from heaven: the earth trembled and was still. 9 When God arose to judgement: and to help all the meek upon earth. 10 The fiercenesse of man shall turn to thy praise: and the fiercenesse of them shalt thou refrain. 11 Promise unto the Lord your God, and keep it, all ye that be round about him: bring presents unto him that ought to be feared. 12 He shall refrain the spirit of Princes: and is won∣derfull among the Kings of the earth. The Prayer. O Lord God, whose dwelling is in heaven, and thy Name is great in all the world, plant the dread and reverence of thee and thy power in our hearts: let thy threatnings and
thy judgements which are heard from heaven, and executed upon disobedient and gainsaying people, make us to tremble at the remem∣brance of our sins, and in the consideration of our weaknesses and demerits: and let thy mercies and the remembrance of thy infinite loving kindnesses make our hearts still, full of eavennesse and tranquillity, that we may not fear the fiercenesse of man, or the wrath of those, whose spirits thou canst refrain, lest we be disturbed in our duties towards thee, but let us so fear thee, that we may never offend against thee, but may passe from fear to love, from apprehensions of thy wrath, to the sense and comforts of thy mercies, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 77. A Prayer that the experience of Gods goodnesse may produce hope in us, and remove from us all fearfulnesse and doubting. I Will cry unto God with my voyce: even unto God will I cry with my voyce, and he shall hearken unto me. 2 In the time of my trouble I sought the Lord: my sore ran and ceased not, in the night season my soul refu∣sed comfort. 3 When I am in heavinesse I will think upon God: when my heart is vexed, I will complain. 4 Thou holdest mine eyes waking: I am so feeble that I cannot speak. 5 I have considered the dayes of old: and the yeares that are past. 6 I call to remembrance my song: and in the night I
commune with mine own heart, and search out my spirits. 7 Will the Lord absent himself for ever: and will hee be no more intreated? 8 Is his mercy clean gone for ever: and is his promise come utterly to an end for evermore? 9 Hath God forgotten to be gracious: and will he shut up his loving kindnesse in displeasure? 10 And I said, It is mine own infirmity: but I will re∣member the yeares of the right hand of the most highest. 11 I will remember the works of the Lord: and call to minde thy wonders of old time. 12 I will think also of all thy works: and my talking shall be of thy doings. 13 Thy way, O God, is holy: who is so great a God (as our God?) 14 Thou art the God that doth wonders: and hast de∣clared thy power among the people. 15 Thou hast mightily delivered thy people: even the sons of Jacob and Joseph. 16 The waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw thee, and were afraid: the depths also were troubled. 17 The clouds poured out water, the aire thundred: and thine arrows went abroad. 18 The voyce of thy thunder was heard round about: the lightnings shone upon the ground, the earth was mo∣ved, and shook withall. 19 Thy way is in the sea, and thy paths in the great waters: and thy footsteps are not known. 20 Thou leddest thy people like sheep: by the hand of Moses and Aaron. The Prayer. O God who dost wonders, and hast declared thy power amongst all people, let the ob∣servation of thy mercies, and loving kindnesses, make such deep impression in our hearts and
memories, that when we are in heavinesse, we may remember the years of thy right hand, and call to mind the wonders of old time, that al∣though thou somtimes withdrawest the bright∣nesse of thy countenance from us, and shuttest up thy loving kindnesse in a short displeasure, yet the experience of thy old mercies, which never fail, may sustain our infirmities, and the expectation of thy loving kindnesses, may cure all our impatience, till in thy due time, the sense of thy favours may actually relieve all our di∣stresses, and thy right hand lead us like sheep into the folds of eternall rest and security, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Evening Prayer. PSALME 78. A Commemoration of Gods blessings to his Church of old, of his Judgements upon sinners, and his mercies to the penitent. HEar my law, O my people: encline your eares unto the words of my mouth. 2 I will open my mouth in a parable: I will declare hard sentences of old. 3 Which we have heard and known: and such as our fathers have told us. 4 That we should not hide them from the children of the generations to come: but to shew the honour of the Lord, his mighty and wonderfull works that hee hath done.
5 He made a covenant with Jacob, and gave Israel a law: which he commanded our forefathers to teach their children. 6 That their posterity might know it: and the children which were yet unborn. 7 To the intent that when they came up: they might shew their children the same. 8 That they might put their trust in God: and not to forget the works of God, but to keep his Commande∣ments. 9 And not to be as their forefathers, a faithlesse and stubborn generation: a generation that set not their heart aright, and whose spirit cleaved not stedfastly unto God. 10 Like as the children of Ephraim: which being har∣nessed and carrying bows, turned themselves back in the day of battell. 11 They kept not the covenant of God: and would not walk in his law. 12 But forgat what he had done: and the wonderfull works that he had shewed for them. 13 Marvellous things did he in the sight of our fore∣fathers in the land of Egypt: even in the field of Zoan. 14 He divided the sea, and let them goe through: he made the waters to stand on a heap. 15 In the day time also he led them with a cloud: and all the night through with a light of fire. 16 Hee clave the hard rocks in the wildernesse: and gave them drink thereof, as it had been out of the great depth. 17 He brought waters out of the stony rock: so that it gushed out like the rivers. 18 Yet for all this they sinned more against him: and provoked the most Highest in the wildernesse. 19 They tempted God in their hearts: and required meat for their lust. 20 They spake against God, also, saying: Shall God prepare a table in the wildernesse?
21 He smote the stony rock indeed, that the water gu∣shed out, and the streams flowed withall: but can he give bread also, or provide flesh for his people? 22 When the Lord heard this he was wroth: so the fire was kindled in Jacob, and there came up heavy displeasure against Israel. 23 Because they beleeved not in God: and put not their trust in his help. 24 So he commanded the clouds above: and opened the doores of heaven. 25 He rained down Manna also upon them for to eat: and gave them food from heaven. 26 So man did eat Angels food: for he sent them meat enough. 27 He caused the east winde to blow under heaven: and through his power he brought in the south-west-winde. 28 He rained flesh upon them as thick as dust: and fea∣thered fowls like as the sand of the sea. 29 He let it fall among their tents: even round about their habitation. 30 So they did eat and were well filled, for hee gave them their own desire: they were not dissapointed of their lust. 31 But while the meat was yet in their mouthes, the heavy wrath of God came upon them, and slew the weal∣thiest of them: yea, and smote down the chosen men that were in Israel. 32 But for all this they sinned yet more: and beleeved not his wondrous works. 33 Therefore their days did he consume in vanity: and their years in trouble. 34 When he slew them, they sought him: and turned them early, and enquired after God. 35 And they remembred that God was their strength: and that the high God was their Redeemer: 36 Neverthelesse, they did but flatter him with their mouth: and dissembled with him in their tongue.
37 For their heart was not whole with him: neither con∣tinued they stedfast in his covenant. 38 But he was so mercifull, that hee forgave their mis∣deeds: and destroyed them not. 39 Yea many a time turned he his wrath away: and would not suffer his whole displeasure to arise. 40 For he considered that they were but flesh: and that they were even a winde that passeth away, and cometh not again. 41 Many a time did they provoke him in the wilder∣nesse: and grieved him in the desert. 42 They turned back and tempted God: and moved the holy One in Israel. 43 They thought not of his hand: and of the day when he delivered them from the hand of the enemy. 44 How hee had wrought his miracles in Egypt: and his wonders in the field of Zoan. 45 He turned their waters into bloud: so that they might not drink of the rivers. 46 He sent lice among them and devoured them up: and frogs to destroy them. 47 He gave their fruit unto the caterpiller: and their labour unto the grashopper. 48 He destroyed their vines with hailstones: and their mulberry trees with the frost. 49 He smote their cattell also with hailstones: and their flocks with hot thunderbolts. 50 He cast upon them the furiousnesse of his wrath, an∣ger, displeasure, and trouble: and sent evil Angels among them. 51 He made a way to his indignation, and spared not their soul from death: but gave their life over to the pe∣stilence. 52 And smote all the first-born in Egypt: the most principall and mightiest in the dwellings of Ham. 53 But as for his own people, hee led them forth like sheep: and carried them in the wildernesse like a flock.
54 He brought them out safely that they should not fear: and overwhelmed their enemies with the sea. 55 And brought them within the borders of his san∣ctuary: even to his mountain, which he purchased with his right hand. 56 He cast out the heathen also before them: caused their land to be divided among them for an heritage, and made the tribes of Israel to dwell in their tents. 57 So they tempted and displeased the most high God: and kept not his testimonies. 58 But turned their backs, and fell away like their fore∣fathers: starting aside like a broken bow. 59 For they grieved him with their hill altars: and pro∣voked him to displeasure with their images. 60 When God heard this, he was wroth: and took fore displeasure at Israel. 61 So that he forsook the tabernacle in Silo: even the tent that he had pitched among them. 62 He delivered their power into captivity: and their beauty into the enemies hand. 63 He gave his people over also unto the sword: and was wroth with his inheritance. 64 The fire consumed their young men: and their mai∣dens were not given to marriage. 65 Their Priests were slain with the sword: and there were no widows to make lamentation. 66 So the Lord awaked as one out of sleep: and like a Giant refreshed with wine. 67 He smote his enemies in the hinder parts: and put them to a perpetuall shame. 68 He refused the tabernacle of Joseph: and chose not the tribe of Ephraim. 69 But chose the tribe of Juda: even the hill of Sion, which he loved. 70 And there he builded his temple on high: and laid the foundation of it like the ground which he hath made continually.
71 He chose David also his servant: and took him away from the sheepfolds. 72 As he was following th ewes great with young ones, he took him: that he might feed Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance. 73 So he fed them with a faithfull and true heart: and ruled them prudently with all his power. The Prayer. O Lord God of our Fathers, God of Abra∣ham, Isaac, and Jacob, thou that leddest thy people through the Wildernesse with a light and with a cloud, and with thy bright Angel, for their sakes turning rocks into a springing well, and making the Sea and the River become dry land, so making demonstra∣tion of the greatnesse of thy mercy, by the greatnesse of thy miracles, and didst still go on to make all thy creatures leave their natures to serve them, even then when they tempted and provoked thee ten times in the desert: O be pleased to do unto us as thou didst to them: lead us through the desert of this World with the light of thy holy Spirit; and from the rock, which for our sakes thou didst smite with thy heavy rod, the rock Christ Jesus, let water and bloud stream forth, to cleanse and to refresh us. Give us of the bread that came down from heaven, the flesh of thy dear Son to eat, that we being purified by his bloud, and nourished by that celestiall Manna, our hearts may be set
aright, and our spirits may cleave stedfastly un∣to thee, O God, that we may remember thy works, and trust in thy mercies, and may keep thy Commandements. O never let the fire of thy wrath be kindled towards us, nor thy hea∣vy displeasure come up against us; let us not consume our days in folly and vanity, lest our years be spent in trouble, but when through infirmity we fall, let thy gentle correction call us home, that we may turn us early, and seek after thee our God, who art our strength and our mercifull Redeemer, that we may never feel the furiousnesse of thy eternall wrath, nor have our portion amongst the evill Angels, but may be conducted by thy mercies and provi∣dence, to the border of thy sanctuary, and to the mountain where thou reignest over all the creatures, one God world without end. Amen. Morning Prayer. PSALME 79. A Prayer that God would deliver his Church from the cruelty of all her persecutors. O God, the heathen are come into thine in∣heritance: thy holy temple have they defiled, and made Jerusalem an heap of stones. 2 The dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto the fowls of the air: and the flesh of thy saints unto the beasts of the and.
3 Their bloud have they shed like water on every side of Ierusalem: and there was no man to bury them. 4 Wee are become an open shame to our enemies: a very scorn and derision unto them that are round about us. 5 Lord, how long wilt thou be angry: shall thy jea∣lousie burn like fire for ever? 6 Pour out thine indignation upon the heathen that have not known thee: and upon the Kingdomes that have not called upon thy name. 7 For they have devoured Jacob: and laid waste his dwelling place. 8 O remember not our old sinnes, but have mercy upon us, and that soone: for we are come to great mi∣sery. 9 Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name: O deliver us, and be mercifull unto our sinnes for thy names sake. 10 Wherefore do the heathen say: Where is now their God? 11 O let the vengeance of thy servants bloud that is shed: be openly shewed upon the heathen in our sight. 12 O let the sorrowfull sighing of the prisoners come before thee: according to the greatnsse of thy power pre∣serve thou those that are appointed to die. 13 And for the blasphemy wherewih our neighbours have blasphemed thee: reward thou them (O Lord) seven fold into their bosome. 14 So we that be thy people, and sheep of thy pasture, shall give thee thanks for ever: and will alway be shewing forth thy praise from generation to generation. The Prayer. O Lord God of thine inheritance, who con∣veyest many blessings to the children of men, by the prayers and ministery of thy
Church, let our prayers obtain of thee mer∣cies and deliverances for her. O Lord thou hast planted thy Church in the humility, and poverty, and death of thy Son, thou hast wa∣tered it with the bloud of thy Apostles and Martyrs, thou hast made it flourish, and spread forth its branches, by the warmth, and heat, and graces of thy holy Spirit, and hast accor∣ding to thy promise, still preserved it in the midst of all enmities and disadvantages. Thy Laws and righteous Commandements have been a scorn and derision to Jews and Gen∣tiles, the flesh of thy servants have been meat for the beasts of the Land, and still she wears the purple robe of mockery, and the crown of thorns which at first she took from the head and side of her dearest Lord: At last, O Lord, be gracious unto thine inheritance, help us, ô God of our salvation, for the glory of thy Name, let not thine enemies devour the Church, and lay waste her dwelling places: be mercifull unto our sins, preserve all those that by malice of their enemies are appointed to death, or prison, or any other misery: let us still enjoy the freedom of thy Gospel, the food of thy word, the sweet refreshings of thy Sacraments, publike Communions in thy Church, and all the benefits of the soci∣ety of Saints, and let not our sins cause thee to remove the Candlestick from us, but make
thy people and the sheep of thy pasture secure and glad in thy salvation, that we may shew forth thy praise in this world, and in the world to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 80. A Prayer for the Church. HEar me, O thou Shepheard of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a sheep: shew thy self also thou that sit∣test upon the cherubims. 2 Before Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasses: stirre up thy strength, and come and help us. 3 Turn us again, O God: shew the light of thy counte∣nance, and we shall be whole. 4 O Lord God of hosts: how long wilt thou be angry with thy people that prayeth? 5 Thou feedest them with the bread of teares: and gi∣vest them plenteousnesse of tears to drink. 6 Thou hast made us a very strife unto our neighbours: and our enemies laugh us to scorn. 7 Turn us again thou God of hosts: shew the light of thy countenance, and we shall be whole. 8 Thou hast brought a vine out of Egypt: thou hast cast out the heathen, and planted it. 9 Thou madest room for it: and when it had taken root, it filled the land. 10 The hils were covered with the shadow of it: and the boughs thereof were like the goodly cedar-trees. 11 She stretched out her branches unto the sea: and her boughs unto the river. 12 Why hast thou then broken down her hedge: that all they that goe by, pluck off her grapes? 13 The wilde bore out of the wood doth rot it up▪
and the wilde beasts of the field devoure it. 14 Turn thee again, thou God of hosts, look down from heaven: behold, and visit this vine. 15 And the place of the vineyard that thy right hand hath planted: and the branch that thou madest so strong for thy self. 16 It is burnt with fire, and cut down: and they shall perish at the rebuke of thy countenance. 17 Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand: and upon the sonne of man whom thou madest so strong for thine own self. 18 And so will not we go back from thee: O let us live, and we shall call upon thy name. 19 Turn us again, O Lord God of hosts: shew the light of thy countenance, and we shall be whole. The Prayer. O Thou Shepheard of Israel, thou that fit∣test upon the Cherubims, stirre up thy strength, and come and help thy people that prayeth unto thee for mercy and protection. Thou hast made affliction the portion of thy children in this life, thou feedest them with bread of tears, and givest them plenteous∣nesse of teares to drink; yet bee pleased to shew the light of thy countenance upon us, to lighten our darknesses, to relieve ou miseries, to heal our sicknesses, and let not thy Church become a strife unto her neigh∣bours, but reunite her divisions, and make her not a prey to them that would devour her, and then laugh her to scorn. O Lord
fiedge her about with thy mercies, with the custody of Angels, with the patronage of Kings and Princes, with the hearts and hands of Nobles, and the defence of the whole secular arm, lest the wilde beasts of the field pluck off her grapes, destroy the vintage, and root up the vine it self: but let her so flourish under the beams of thy favour and providence, that it may take root and spread and fill all lands, that the name of the man of thy right hand, the God and Man Christ Jesus may be glorified, thy Church enlarged and defended, and we blessed with thy health and salvation. Grant this, O Lord, for Jesus Christ his sake our only Saviour and Redeemer. Amen. PSALME 81. A Festivall song, and a Prayer for the grace and blessings of obedience to Gods Laws. SIng we merrily unto God our strength: make a chear∣full noise unto the God of Jacob. 2 Take the psalm, bring hither the tabret: the merry harp with the lute. 3 Blow up the trumpet in the new moon: even in the time appointed, and upon our solemne feast day. 4 For this was made a statute for Israel: and a law of the God of Jacob. 5 This he ordained in Joseph for a testimony: when he came out of the land of Egypt, and had heard a strange language. 6 I eased his shoulder from the burden: and his hands were delivered from making the pots.
7 Thou calledst upon me in troubles, and I delivered thee: and heard thee what time as the storm fell upon thee. 8 I proved thee also: at the waters of strife. 9 Hear, O my people, and I will assure thee, O Israel: if thou wilt hearken unto me. 10 There shall no strange god be in thee: neither shalt thou worship any other god. 11 I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt: open thy mouth wide, and I shall fill it. 12 But my people would not hear my voyce: and Is∣rael would not obey me. 13 So I gave them up unto their own hearts lust: and let them follow their own imaginations. 14 O that my people would have hearkned unto me: for if Israel had walked in my waies, 15 I should soon have put down their enmies: and urned my hand against their adversaries. 16 The haters of the Lord should have been found li∣ers: but their time should have endured for ever. 17 He should have fed them also with the finest wheat∣floure: and with hony out of the stony rock should I have satisfied thee. The Prayer. O Lord God our strength, whose mercies are infinite, whose Majesty is glorious, whose goodnesse is amiable above all the ex∣cellencies in the world, enlarge our hearts with joy and rejoycings in thy glories, open our mouths wide, and fill our lips with thy praises, that upon the solemne feast days we may commemorate thy excellencies and mer∣cies, and the great mysteries of our redempti∣on
and Religion, adoring thee with thanks and joyfulnesse, who art mysterious in thy words, and marvellous and mercifull in all thy works: and that we may in the best manner expresse our thankfulnesse to thee, give us thy grace that we may hear thy voice, that we may obey thee and walk in thy Laws, that we follow not our own imaginations, nor be given to our own hearts lusts, but that we resigning our selves only to thy holy will and pleasure, thou mayest hear our prayers when ever any storm of trouble fals upon us, and turn thine hand against our adversaries, and that we being de∣livered from the burden of our sins, may be fed with the choicest of thy viands, and with food from the Rock Christ Jesus, even his most precious body and bloud, nourishing us up to life eternall, through the same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Evening Prayer. PSALME 82. A prayer for the Princes and Judges of the world, that they may doe right judgement. GOd standeth in the congregation of Princes: he is a Judge among gods. 2 How long will ye give wrong judgement: and accept the persons of the ungodly? 3 Defend the poor and fatherlesse: see that such as be
in need and necessity, have right. 4 Deliver the outcast and poor: save them from the hand of the ungodly. 5 They will not be learned, nor understand, but walk on still in darknesse: all the foundations of the earth be out of course. 6 I have said, ye are gods: and yee all are children of the most Highest. 7 But ye shall die like men: and fall like one of the Princes. 8 Arise, O God, and judge thou the earth: for tho shalt take all the heathen to thine inheritance. The Prayer. O Almighty Judge of Men and Angels, thou God of Gods, and Prince of Princes, let thy Spirit of anointing rest upon the Princes and Rulers within the pale of the Universall Church, and let thy righteousnesse and judge∣ments guide all those that sit in the seat of the Judges, that they may minister justice and true judgement unto the people, defending and promoting the interests of true Religion, relie∣ving the oppressed, encouraging vertue, and dishonouring vicious persons, delivering the poor, and saving them from the hand of the ungodly, that men may not walk on still in darknesse, but their evil deeds may be discove∣red and brought to light, that we may all live before thee in righteousnesse, expecting the great day of righteous judgement, which we egge we may all behold with confidence, re∣ceiving
thy mercies, and beholding thy face in glory through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 83. A Prayer against the enemies of the Church, par∣ticularly, sacrilegious persons. HOld not thy tongue, O God, keep not still silence: refrain not thy self, O God. 2 For lo, thine enemies make a murmuring: and they that hate thee have lift up their head. 3 They have imagined craftily against thy people: and taken counsell against thy secret ones. 4 They have said, Come, and let us root them out, that they be no more a people: and that the name of Is∣rael may be no more in remembrance. 5 For they have cast their heads together with one con∣sent: and are confederate against thee. 6 The tabernacles of the Edomites, and the Ismaelites: the Moabites and Hagarenes. 7 Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek: the Philistines, with them that dwell at Tyre. 8 Assur also is joyned unto them: and have holpen the children of Lot. 9 But doe thou to them as unto the Madianites: unto Sisera, and unto Jabin, at the brook of Kison. 10 Which perished at Endor: and became as the dung of the earth. 11 Make them and their Princes like Oreb and Zeb: yea, make all their Princes like as Zeba and Salmana. 12 Which say, Let us take to our selves: the houses of God in possession. 13 O my God, make them like unto a wheel: and as the stubble before the winde. 14 Like as the fire that burneth up the wood: and a the flame that consumeth the mountains.
15 Persecute them even so with thy tempest: and make them afraid with thy storm. 16 Make their faces ashamed, O Lord: that they may seek thy name. 17 Let them be confounded and vexed ever more and more: let them be put to shame and perish. 18 And they shall know that thou (whose name is Je∣hovah:) art onely the most highest over all the earth. The Prayer. O Lord God who wert known to thy people Israel by thy name Jehovah, thou art only the highest over all the earth, arise and defend thy people, and deliver thy secret ones from the murmurings, councels, and crafty imagina∣tions of thine enemies against them. Fixe the foundations of the Church upon a Rock, and preserve thine inheritance in peace and safety. Infatuate the counsels, restrain the sacrilegious appetites of all such persons who would rob all thy houses, and take them to their own pos∣session, and make their faces so ashamed and their hearts afraid, that they may return from covetousnesse and impiety, and seek thy Name, repenting of all their sins, and living in justice and religion, that at last they may come into an everlasting possession of thy house, and of thy Temple where thine Honour dwelleth and reigneth eternally world without end. Amen.
PSALME 84. A Prayer of desire and longings after the joyes of Heaven. O How amiable are thy dwellings: thou Lord of hosts! 2 My soul hath a desire and longing to enter into the courts of the Lord: my heart and my flesh rejoyce in the living God. 3 Yea, the sparrow hath found her an house, and the swallow a nest, where she may lay her young: even thy al∣tars, O Lord of hosts, my King and my God. 4 Blessed are they that dwell in thy house: they will be alway praising thee. 5 Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee: in whose heart are thy ways. 6 Which going through the vale of misery, use it for a well: and the pools are filled with water. 7 They will goe from strength to strength: and unto the God of gods appeareth every one of them in Sion. 8 O Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer: hearken, O God of Jacob. 9 Behold, O God, our defender: and look upon the face of thine Anointed. 10 For one day in thy courts: is better then a thou∣sand. 11 I had rather be a door-keeper in the house of my God: then to dwell in the tents of ungodlinesse. 12 For the Lord God is a light and defence: the Lord will give grace and worship, and no good thing shall hee withhold ftom them that live a godly life. 13 O Lord God of hosts: blessed is the man that put∣teth his trust in thee.
The Prayer. O Lord God of sts, who dwellest in the heavens, seated in essentiall and eternall felicities; fill our hearts with desires and long∣ings to enter into those Courts where thou sittest, attended with the beauteous orders of Angels, and millions of beatified spirits; and that our desires may receive infinite satisfacti∣ons, give us thy help, that we going through the vale of misery; the pools may be filled with water, our hearts and eyes may run over with tears of repentance, and overflow with sorrow and contrition for our sins, that we li∣ving a godly life, going from strength to strength, from vertue to vertue, at last we may appear in Sion unto the God of gods, behol∣ding the face of thine Anointed, thy Christ, and our Jesus, and may dwell one day in thy Courts, even all the long day of eternity, through the same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 85. A thanksgiving for Gods free mercy in the par∣don of our sinnes, and a prayer for the continu∣ance and increase of his mercies to us. LOrd, thou art become gracious unto thy land: thou hat turned away the captivity of Jacob.
2 Thou hast forgiven the offence of thy people: and overed all their sins. 3 Thou hast taken away all thy displeasure: and tur∣ed thy self from thy wrathfull indignation. 4 Turn us then, O God our Saviour: and let thine nger cease from us. 5 Wilt thou be displeased at us for ever: and wilt thou stretch out thy wrath from one generation to another? 6 Wilt thou not turn again and quicken us: that thy people may rejoyce in thee? 7 Shew us thy mercy, O Lord: and grant us thy salva∣tion. 8 I will hearken what the Lord God will say concer∣ning me: for he shall speak peace unto his people, and to is saints, that they turn not again. 9 For his salvation is nigh them that fear him: that glory may dwell in our land. 10 Mercy and truth are met together: righteousnesse and peace have kissd each other. 11 Truth shall flourish out of the earth: and righte∣ousnesse hath looked down from heaven. 12 Yea, the Lord shal shew loving kindnesse: and our land shall give her encrease. 13 Righteousnesse shall goe before him: and he shall direct his going in the way. The Prayer. O Most gracious God, who art reconciled unto us in our Saviour Jesus, having for his sake forgiven the offences of thy people & covered all their sins with the robe of his most immaculate sanctity and righteousnesse, let thy grace convert and quicken us, that we may re∣joyce in thee and thy salvation, in faith of thy promises, in the hope of actuall communication
of thy mercies to us, and in love to thee for so great blessings and redemption; and when thou hast spoken peace unto our souls and reconci∣led us to thy self in the bloud of thy Son, give us the grace of perseverance that we may ne∣ver turn again to folly, but may follow mercy and truth all our days, and at last be satisfied with thy righteousnesse and peace eternall, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Morning Prayer. PSALME 86. A Prayer for sanctity and preservation. BOw down thine ear, O Lord, and hear me: for I am poor and in misery. 2 Preserve thou my soule, for I am holy: my God save thy servant that putteth his trust in thee. 3 Be mercifull unto me, O Lord: for I will call daily upon thee. 4 Comfort the soul of thy servant: for unto thee (O Lord) do I lift up my soul. 5 For thou Lord art good and gracious: and of great mercy unto all them that call upon thee. 6 Give ear, Lord, unto my prayer: and ponder the voyce of my humble desires. 7 In the time of my trouble I will call upon thee: for thou hearest me. 8 Among the gods there is none like unto thee (O Lord:) there is not one that can do as thou doest. 9 All nations whom thou hast made, shall come and
orship thee, O Lord: and shall glorifie thy Name. 10 For thou art great, and doest wondrous things: ou art God alone. 11 Teach me thy way (O Lord) and I will walk in hy truth: O knit my heart unto thee, that I may fear thy Name. 12 I will thank thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart: and will praise thy Name for evermore. 13 For great is thy mercy toward me: and thou hast delivered my soul from the nethermost hell. 14 O God, the proud are risen against me: and the congregations of naughty men have sought after my soul, and have not set thee before their eyes. 15 But thou (O Lord God) art full of compassion nd mercy: long-suffering, plenteous in goodnesse and truth. 16 O turn thee then unto me, and have mercy upon me: give thy strength unto thy servant, and help the son of thine handmaid. 17 Shew some good token upon mee for good, that they which hate me, may see it, and be ashamed: because thou Lord hast holpen me, and comforted me. The Prayer. O Lord God, good and gracious, and of great mercy unto all them that call upon thee, give ear unto our prayers, & ponder the voice of our desires when ever we call upon thee in our trouble. Let the souls of thy servants be refreshed with thy comforts, and defend us from the congregations of proud and naugh∣ty men. Turn thee unto us with mercy, give thy strength unto us, teach us thy laws, make us to walk in thy truth, give us the fear of thy
Name, and knit our hearts to thee with the in∣dissoluble bands of charity and obedience, that our souls being saved from the nethermost hell, we may worship thee, O Lord, and glorifie thy name, who art full of compassion and mercy, long-suffering and plenteous in goodnesse and truth, which thou hast manifested to us in our deliverance and redemption, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 87. A contemplation of the excellencies of Sion, or the celestiall Jerusalem. HEr foundations are upon the holy hils: the Lord lo∣veth the gates of Sion more then all the dwellings of Jacob. 2 Very excellent things are spoken of thee: thou city of God. 3 I will think upon Rahab and Babylon: with them that know thee. 4 Behold yee the Philistines also: and they of Tyre, with the Morians, lo, there was he born. 5 And of Sion it shall be reported, that he was born in her: and the most High shall stablish her. 6 The Lord shall rehearse it, when he writeth up the people: that he was born there. 7 The singers also and trumpeters shall be rehearse: all my fresh springs shall be in thee.
The Prayer. O Lord God who dwellest in Sion, and delightest to have thy habitation in the hearts of men, thou hast built the Church as a City upon a hill, and laid the foundation of it upon the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the chief Corner-stone, make us to be a spirituall building fit for thy habitation, and a residence for thy holy Spirit, grounding us in faith, building us up in hope, and perfecting us in charity, that we being joyned in the commu∣nion of Saints, in the union of the holy Catho∣lique Church militant on earth, may all par∣take of the blessings of thy Church triumphant in the City of thee our God, in the celestiall Jerusalem, where thou livest and reignest ever one God world without end. Amen. PSALME 88. A Prayer in time of sicknesse and danger of death. O Lord God of my salvation, I have cryed day and night before thee: O let my prayer enter into thy presence, incline thine ear unto my calling. 2 For my soul is full of trouble: and my life draweth nigh unto hell. 3 I am counted as one of them that goe down into the pit: and I have been even as a man that hath no strength. 4 Free among the dead, like unto them that be woun∣ded and lie in the grave: which be out of remembrance, and are cut away from thy hand.
5 Thou hast laid me in the lowest pit: in a place of darknesse, and in the deep. 6 Thine indignation lieth hard upon me: and thou hast vexed me with all thy storms. 7 Thou hast put away mine acquaintance far from me: and made me to be abhorred of them. 8 I am so fast in prison: that I cannot get forth. 9 My sight faileth for very trouble: Lord, I have cal∣led daily upon thee, I have stretched out my hands unto thee. 10 Doest thou shew wonders among the dead: or shall the dead rise up again and praise thee? 11 Shall thy loving kindnesse be shewed in the grave: or thy faithfulnesse in destruction? 12 Shall thy wondrous works be known in the dark: and thy righteousnesse in the land where all things are for∣gotten? 13 Unto thee have I cried, O Lord: and early shall my prayer come before thee. 14 Lord, why abhorrest thou my soul: and hidest thou thy face from me? 15 I am in misery, and like unto him that is at the point to die: (even from my youth up) thy terrours have I suffered with a troubled minde. 16 Thy wrathfull displeasure goeth over me: and the fear of thee hath undone me. 17 They came round about me dayly like water: and compssed me together on every side. 18 My lovers and friends hast thou put away from me: and hid mine acquaintance out of my sight. The Prayer. O Lord God of our salvation, who for our sakes wert wounded and didst die and lie in the grave, but yet alone of all that ever died wert free among the dead, and by thine own
power didst arise again with victory and tri∣umph; have mercy upon thy servant, for thine indignation lieth hard upon me, and thou hast vexed me with all thy storms; my soul is full of trouble by reason of my sins, and my life draweth nigh unto the grave; restore me unto thy favour, and let me not go down into the dark, nor my life into the place where all things are forgotten, but let me shew forth thy loving kindnesse amongst thy redeemed ones in the land of the living: for the living, the living he shall praise thee and confesse the holinesse and the mercies of thy holy Name. O hide not thou thy face from me, but give me health of body, and restore and preserve me in the life of righteousnesse, and so blesse me with opportunities of doing thee service, that I may redeem the time past, and by thy grace may grow rich in good works, always abounding in the work of the Lord, that when thou shalt demand my soul to be rendred up into thy hands, my soul may not be abhorred of thee, nor suffer thy terrors, but may feel an eterni∣ty of blessings in the resurrection of the just, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Evening Prayer. PSALME 89. A Prayer for the King in time of Wars or any publike calamity. MY song shall be alway of the loving kind∣nesse of the Lord: with my mouth will I ever be shewing thy truth from one gene∣ration to another. 2 For I have said, mercy shall be set up for ever: thy truth shalt thou stablish in the heavens. 3 I have made a covenant with my chosen: I have sworn unto David my servant. 4 Thy seed will I stablish for ever: and set up thy throne from one generation to another. 5 O Lord, the very heavens shall praise thy wondrous works: and thy truth in the congregation of the saints. 6 For who is he among the clouds: that shall be com∣pared unto the Lord? 7 And what is he among the gods: that shall be like unto the Lord? 8 God is very greatly to be feared in the counsell of the Saints: and to be had in reverence of all them that are round about him. 9 O Lord God of hosts, who is like unto thee: thy truth (most mighty Lord) is on every side. 10 Thou rulest the raging of the sea: thou stillest the waves thereof when they arise. 11 Thou hast subdued Egypt, and destroyed it: thou hast scattered thine enemies abroad with thy mighty arm. 12 The heavens are thine, the earth also is thine: thou hast laid the foundation of the round world, and all that therein is.
13 Thou hast made the North and the South: Tabor and Hermon shall rejoyce in thy Name. 14 Thou hast a mighty arm: strong is thy hand, and high is thy right hand. 15 Righteousnesse and equity is the habitation of thy seat: mercy and truth shall goe before thy face. 16 Blessed is the people (O Lord) that can rejoyce in thee: they shall walk in the light of thy countenance. 17 Their delight shall be daily in thy Name: and in thy righteousnesse shall they make their boast. 18 For thou art the glory of their strength: and in thy loving kindnesse thou shalt lift up our horns. 19 For the Lord is our defence: the holy one of Israel is our King. 20 Thou spakest sometimes in vision unto thy Saints, and saidest: I have laid help upon one that is mighty, I have exalted one chosen out of the people. 21 I have found David my servant: with my holy oyle have I anointed him. 22 My hand shall hold him fast: and my arme shall strengthen him. 23 The enemy shall not be able to doe him violence: the son of wickednesse shall not hurt him. 24 I shall smite down his foes before his face: and plague them that hate him. 25 My truth also and my mercy shall be with him: and in my Name shall his horn be exalted. 26 I will set his dominion also in the sea: and his right hand in the flouds. 27 He shall call me, Thou art my Father: my God, and my strong salvation. 28 And I will make him my first-born: higher then the Kings of the earth. 29 My mercy will I keep for him for evermore: and my covenant shall stand fast with him. 30 His seed also will I make to endure for ever: and his throne as the days of heaven.
31 But if his children forsake my law: and walk not in thy judgements. 32 If they break my statutes, and keep not my com∣mandements: I will visit their offences with the rod, and their sin with scourges. 33 Neverthelesse, my loving kindnesse will I not utter∣ly take from him: nor suffer my truth to fail. 34 My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips: I have sworn once by my ho∣linesse, that I will not fail David. 35 His seed shall endure for ever: and his seat is like as the sun before me. 36 He shall stand fast for evermore as the moon: and as the faithfull witnesse in Heaven. 37 But thou hast abhorred and forsaken thine anoin∣ted: and art displeased at him. 38 Thou hast broken the covenant of thy servant: and cast his crown to the ground. 39 Thou hast overthrown all his hedges: and broken down his strong holds. 40 All they that goe by spoil him: and hee is become a rebuke to his neighbours. 41 Thou hast set up the right hand of his enemies: and made all his adversaries to rejoyce. 42 Thou hast taken away the edge of his sword: and givest him not victory in the battell. 43 Thou hast put out his glory: and cast his throne down to the ground. 44 The days of his youth hast thou shortned: and co∣vered him with dishonour. 45 Lord, how long wilt thou hide thy self, for ever: and shall thy wrath burn like fire? 46 Oh remember how short my time is: wherefore hast thou made all men for nought? 47 What man is he that liveth, and shall not see death: and shall he deliver his soul from the hand of hell? 48 Lord, where are thy old loving kindnesses: which
thou swarest unto David in thy truth? 49 Remember (Lord) the rebuke that thy servants have: and how I doe bear in my bosome the rebukes of many people. 50 Wherewith thine enemies have blasphemed thee, and slandered the foot-steps of thine anointed: praised be the Lord for evermore. Amen, Amen. The Prayer. O Lord God of hosts, thou art greatly to be feared in the councell of the saints, and to be had in reverence of all the world, let thy strong hand and thy mighty arm blsse and preserve thine Anointed the King; as thou hast exalted thy chosen from among the People, so let the greatnesse of thy blessings and assistances distinguish him from all the world: make his throne as the days of heaven, smite down his enemies before his face, let thy hand hold him fast that the enemy may not be able to do him violence, and let thine arm strengthen him that the sonnes of wickednesse may not hurt him. O do thou never put his glory out, nor cover him with dishonour, but give him victory in battels, honour and rejoy∣cing in time of peace, confidence in thee, re∣verence amongst his people, and continuall defence in thy salvation, that when thou hast finished his days in peace and honour, his seed may be established in his throne and endure
for ever like as the sun before thee. Grant this, O King of Kings, for his sake to whom thou hast given all power and dominion in heaven and earth, even our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. Morning Prayer. PSALME 90. A meditation of death, and a prayer preparatory to it. LOrd, thou hast been our refuge: from one ge∣neration to another. 2 Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever the earth and the world were made: thou art God from everlasting, and world with∣out end. 3 Thou turnest man to destruction: again thou sayest, Come again ye children of men. 4 For a thousand years in thy sight, are but as yester∣day: seeing that is past as a watch in the night. 5 As soon as thou scatterest them, they are even as a sleep: and fade away suddenly like the grasse. 6 In the morning it is green, and groweth up: but in the evening it is cut down, dried up, and withered. 7 For wee consume away in thy displeasure: and are afraid at thy wrathfull indignation. 8 Thou hast set our misdeeds before thee: and our secret sins in the sight of thy countenance. 9 For when thou art angry, all our days are gone: we bring our years to an end, as it were a tale that is told. 10 The days of our age are threescore years and ten,
and though men be so strong that they come to fourscore years: yet is their strength then but labour and sorrow, so soon passeth it away, and we are gone. 11 But who regardeth the power of thy wrath: for even thereafter as a man feareth, so is thy displeasure. 12 O teach us to number our days: that we may apply our hearts unto wisdome. 13 Turn thee again (O Lord) at the last: and be gra∣cious unto thy servants. 14 O satisfie us with thy mercy, and that soon: so shall we rejoyce and be glad all the days of our life. 15 Comfort us again now after the time that thou hast plagued us: and for the years wherein we have suffered adversity. 16 Shew thy servants thy work: and their children ty glory. 17 And the glorious majesty of the Lord our God be upon us: prosper thou the work of our hands upon us, O prosper thou our handy work. The Prayer. O Eternall God, whose beeing was before the mountains were brought forth, be∣fore the earth and the world were made, even from everlasting and world without end, have mercy upon us weak and impotent people, the children of men, who fade away suddenly like the grasse: remove our misdeeds from before thee, and our secret sins from the sight of thy countenance: be not angry with us, neither consume us in thy displeasure; teach us to number all the days of our life, and to reckon on still to the day of death, that when
our days are gone, and our years are brought to an end like a tale that is told, thou mayest turn unto us at the last, and be gracious unto us in the pardon of our sins, in the restraining the power and malice of all our ghostly ene∣mies, in giving us opportunity of all spirituall assistances and advantages, that our lamps being trimmed and burning bright with chari∣ty and devotion, wee may enter into the bride-chamber, there for ever to behold the glorious majesty of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. PSALME 91. A Prayer for protection in all dangers. WHoso dwelleth under the defence of the most High: shall abide under the shadow of the Al∣mghty. 2 I will say unto the Lord, Thou art my hope and my strong hold: my God, in him will I trust. 3 For he shall deliver thee from the snare of the hunter: and from the noisome pestilence. 4 He shall defend thee under his wings, and thou shalt be safe under his feathers: his faithfulnesse and truth shall be thy shield and buckler. 5 Thou shalt not be afraid for any terror by night: nor for the arrow that flieth by day. 6 For the pestilence that walketh in darknesse: nor for the sicknesse that destroyeth in the noon day. 7 A thousand shall fall beside thee, and ten thousand at thy right hand: but it shall not come nigh thee. 8 Yea, with thine eyes shalt thou behold: and see the reward of the ungodly.
9 For thou Lord art my hope: thou hast set thine house of defence very high. 10 There shall no evill happen unto thee: neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling. 11 For he shall give his Angels charge over thee: to keep thee in all thy ways. 12 They shall bear thee in their hands: that thou hurt not thy foot against a stone. 13 Thou shalt go upon the lion and adder: the young lion and the dragon shalt thou tread under thy feet. 14 Because he hath set his love upon me, therefore shall I deliver him: I shall set him up, because he hath known my name. 15 He shall call upon me, and I will hear him: yea, I am with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and bring him to honour. 16 With long life will I satisfie him: and shew him my salvation. The Prayer. O Lord God our hope and our strong hold, have mercy upon us, and defend us under the shadow of thy wings, that we trusting un∣der thy defence, may by thy faithfulnesse and truth be covered as with a shield and buckler. Give thy Angels charge concerning us and our habitations, that we may be preserved and kept in all our ways that no evill happen u∣to us, no plague come nigh our dwelling, no terrors of the night, no arrows of thy ven∣geance by day may disturb our peace or safe∣ty. Let thy ministring Spirits bear us in their hands, and keep us from precipice, fom fr∣cture of bones, from dislocations, noisome
sharp diseases, stupidities, and deformities, that we may tread under our feet all the snares of the roaring lion and the great dragon the De∣vill, who seeks our bodily and ghostly hurt. Doe thou set thy love upon us, and deliver us from all our troubles, and at the end of our days shew us thy salvation, and satisfie us with long life, even of a blessed eternity in thy Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 92. A meditation of the great works of God in the de∣struction of the wicked, and the preservation of the godly. IT is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord: and to sing praises unto thy name, O most Highest. 2 To tell of thy loving kindnesse early in the morning: and of thy truth in the night season. 3 Upon an instrument of ten strings, and upon the lute: upon a loud instrument, and upon the harp. 4 For thou Lord hast made me glad through thy works: and I will rejoyce in giving praise for the operations of thy hands. 5 O Lord, how glorious are thy works: and thy thoughts are very deep. 6 An unwise man doth not well consider this: and a fool doth not understand it. 7 When the ungodly are green as the grasse, and when all the workers of wickednesse doe flourish: then shall they be destroyed for ever, but thou Lord art the most highest for evermore. 8 For lo, thine enemies (O Lord) lo thine enemies shall prish: and all the workers of wickedness shall be destoyed. 9 But mine horn shall bee exalted like the horn of
an unicorn: for I am anointed with fresh oyle. 10 Mine eye also shall see his lust of mine enemies: and mine eare shall heare his desire of the wicked that rise up against me. 11 The righteous shall flourish like a palm-tree: and hall spread abroad like a cedar in Lebanus. 12 Such as be planted in the house of the Lord: shall flourish in the courts of the house of our God. 13 They also shall bring forth more fruit in their age: and shall be fat and well liking. 14 That they may shew how true the Lord my strength is: and that there is no unrighteousnesse in him. The Prayer. O Lord God, thou art the most highest for evermore, thy works are glorious, and thy thoughts are very deep, make our hearts and tongues loud instruments of thy praises, that we may tell of thy mercy in the morning, of thy truth in the night, and that we may re∣joyce in giving thee thanks for the operations of thy hands all the days and nights of our life. Let thy mercifull kindnesse descend ever∣more upon the righteous, that they may flou∣rish like a palm tree being continually wate∣red with the dew of temporall and spirituall blessings, and may bring forth fruits of a holy conversation; and grant that we thy servants, being planted in the house of God, and firmly fixed in the blessed communion of Saints, may flourish in the Courts of thy house, thy celestial temple to all eternity. O let not our portion
be amongst the ungodly and unrighteous: make us, not to communicate in their wicked∣nesse, so much as by consent or approbation, that we may never perish and be destroyed in the furiousnesse of thine anger, which thou treasurest up against the day of vengeance, and righteous judgement, even the day of the ap∣pearing of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. Evening Prayer. PSALME 93. A Prayer that God would preserve his Church against the storms and flouds of persecution. THE Lord is King, and hath put on glorious apparell: the Lord hath put on his apparell, and girded himself with strength. 2 He hath made the round world so sure: that it cannot be moved. 3 Ever since the world began hath thy seat been prepa∣red: thou art from everlasting. 4 The flouds are risen (O Lord) the flouds have lift up their voice: the flouds lift up their waves. 5 The waves of the sea are mighty, and rage horribly: but the Lord that dwelleth on high is mightier. 6 Thy testimonies, O Lord, are very sure: holinesse becommeth thine house for ever.
The Prayer. O Lord our King, who art girded with strength, and hast prepared thy seat from everlasting, establish thy testimonies in our hearts, as a sure foundation of temporall and eternall happinesse. Presere thy house, the holy Catholique Church in peace and holinesse which is its defence and ornament; and al∣though the flouds of persecution and secular disadvantages have lift up their waves to over∣throw it, yet because it is built upon a rock, the rock Christ Jesus, make it to stand firm and sure against all the malice of hell and earth, and all the powers of them both; for thou, ô Lord, art mightier the all the waves and storms of her enemies: To thee, O Lord, who dwellest on high, and art mightier, be all ho∣nour, and glory now and for ever. Amen. PSALME 94. A Prayer for patience, comfort, and assistance to the godly, and that God would disappoint the designes of the wicked. O Lord God, to whom vengeance belongeth: thou God to whom vengeance belongeth, shew thy self. 2 Arise thou judge of the world: and reward the proud after their deserving. 3 Lord, how long shall the ungodly: how long shall the ungodly triumph? 4 How long shall all wicked doers speak so disdainful∣ly: and make such proud boasting?
5 They smite down thy people, O Lord: and trouble thine heritage. 6 They murder the widow and the stranger: and put the fatherlesse to death. 7 And yet they say, Tush, the Lord shall not see: nei∣ther shall the God of Jacob regard it. 8 Take heed ye unwise among the people: O ye fools, when will ye understan? 9 He that planted the eare, shall he not heare: or hee that made the eye, shall he not see? 10 Or he that nurtureth the heathen: it is he that teach∣eth man knowledge, shall not he punish? 11 The Lord knoweth the thoughts of man: that they are but vain. 12 Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest (O Lord:) and teachest him in thy law. 13 That thou mayest give him patience in time of ad∣versity: untill the pit be digged up for the ungodly. 14 For the Lord will not fail his people: neither will he forsake his inheritance. 15 Untill righteousnesse turn again unto judgement: all such as be true of heart, shall follow it. 16 Who will rise up with me against the wicked: or who will take my part against the evill doers? 17 If the Lord had not helped me: it had not failed but my soul had been put to silence. 18 But when I said, My foot hath slipped: thy mercy (O Lord) held me up. 19 In the multitude of the sorrows that I had in my heart: thy comforts have refreshed my soul. 20 Wilt thou have any thing to doe with the stoole of wickednesse: which imagineth mischief as a law? 21 They gather them together against the soul of the righteous: and condemn the innocent bloud. 22 But the Lord is my refuge: and my God is the strength of my confidence. He shall recompence them their wickednesse, and
destroy them in their own malice: yea, the Lord our God shall destroy them. The Prayer. O Lord God, Judge of the world, to whom vengeance belongeth and the execution of righteous judgements, have mercy upon us, chasten us with thy gentlenesse and fatherly correction when we sin against thee, teach us in thy law, be our refuge and our confidence in our troubles, and give us patience in times of adversity, that in the multitude of sorrows thy comforts may refresh us, thy mercies may re∣lieve us, thy grace may pardon and confirm us, that our feet slip not, and our souls be not put to silence. Have pitty upon all distressed and miserable people, do justice upon all that mur∣der the widow, that put the fatherlesse to death, that grinde the face of the poor. Fail not thy people, O Lord, and forsake not thine inheritance, but destroy the devices of all them that imagine mischief as a law, and are confe∣derate against the righteous, to condemne the innocent, to discountenance Religion, to dis∣advantage thy worship and service, that in the day of eternall vengeance when thou shalt re∣ward the proud after their deserving, and the pit be digged for the ungodly, we may have the lot of thine inheritance, and reign in the fel∣lowship of Saints who give honour and praise to thee, O Lord God Almighty, world without end. Amen.
Morning Prayer. PSALME 95. A Hymne invitatory to the worship of God, and a prayer for obedience to his will. O Come, let us sing unto the Lord: let us heartily rejoyce in the strength of our salvation. 2 Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving: and shew our selves glad in him with psalmes. 3 For the Lord is a great God: and a great King above all gods. 4 In his hand are all the corners of the earth: and the strength of the hils is his also. 5 The sea is his and he made it: and his hands prepa∣red the dry land. 6 O come, let us worship and fall down: and kneele before the Lord our maker. 7 For he is (the Lord) our God: and we are the peo∣ple of his pasture, and the sheep of his hands. 8 To day if ye will heare his voyce, harden not your hearts: as in the provocation, and as in the day of tempta∣tion in the wildernesse. 9 When your fathers tempted me: proved mee, and saw my works. 10 Fourty years long was I grieved with this generati∣on, and said: It is a people that doe erre in their hearts, for they have not known my ways. 11 Unto whom I sware in my wrath: that they should not enter into my rest.
The Prayer. O Great God the Lord our Maker, who art a King above all gods, give us the graces of humility and holy religion, that we may worthily praise and worship thy glories, and perfections infinite. We are the people of thy pasture, let thy mercies lead us, and feed and refresh our souls with the divine nutriment of thy Word and Sacraments: we are the sheep of thy hands, do thou guide us that we may never goe astray; or if we do, bring us home into the sheepfold of our great Shepheard, that we hearing his voyce may not harden our hearts, neither tempting thy mercies, nor pro∣voking thy wrath; that our hearts being pre∣served from error, and our ways from obli∣quity and crookednesse, we may at last enter into thy eternall rest, through the merits and guidance of our great Shepheard Jesus Christ our Mediator and Redeemer. Amen. PSALME 96. A hymne of adoration, and magnifying the glo∣ries of God. O Sing unto the Lord a new song: sing unto the Lord all the whole earth. 2 Sing unto the Lord, and praise his name: be telling of his salvation from day to day. 3 Declare his honour unto the heathen: and his won∣ders unto all people.
4 For the Lord is great, and cannot worthily be prai∣sed: he is more to be feared then all gods. 5 As for all the gods of the heathen, they be but idols: but it is the Lord that made the heavens. 6 Glory and worship are before him: power and ho∣nour are in his sanctuary. 7 Ascribe unto the Lord (O ye kindreds of the people:) ascribe unto the Lord worship and power. 8 Ascribe unto the Lord the honour due unto his name: bring presents, and come into his courts. 9 O worship the Lord in the beauty of holinesse: let the whole earth stand in awe of him. 10 Tell it out among the heathen, that the Lord is King: and that it is he which hath made the round world so fast that it cannot be moved, and how that he shall judge the people righteously. 11 Let the heavens rejoyce, and let the earth be glad: let the sea make a noise, and all that therein is. 12 Let the field be joyfull, and all that is in it: then shall all the trees of the wood rejoyce before the Lord. 13 For he cometh, for he cometh to judge the earth: and with righteousnesse to judge the world, and the peo∣ple with his truth. The Prayer. O Lord God in whose sanctuary is power and honour, before whose presence is glory and worship, fill our lips and souls with great devotion and reverence towards thee our God: Make us to love thy goodnesse, to adore thy omnipotency, to reverence thy ju∣stice, to fear thy Majesty, to admire and trem∣ble at thy omniscience and omnipresence, and to contemplate with the greatest zeal and affe∣ctions
all those glories which thou communi∣catest to the sons of men, in the revelations of thy gospel, of thy creatures, and of thy mira∣cles, that we may tell of thy greatnesse, and declare thy salvation from day to day; and when thou commest with righteousnesse to judge the earth, and all people with thy truth, we may rejoyce in thee everlastingly, and sing an eternall Allelujah to thee in thy sanctuary: Grant this for Jesus Christ his sake our Lord and onely Saviour. Amen. PSALME 97. A meditation upon the day of Judgement, and a prayer for mercy and salvation. THE Lord is King, the earth may be glad thereof: yea, the multitude of the Isles may be glad thereof. 2 Clouds and darknesse are round about him: righte∣ousnesse and judgement are the habitation of his seat. 3 There shall goe a fire before him: and burn up his enemies on every side. 4 His lightnings gave shine unto the world: the earth saw it, and was afraid. 5 The hils melted like wax at the presence of the Lord: at the presence of the Lord of the whole earth. 6 The heavens have declared his righteousnesse: and all the people have seen his glory. 7 Confounded be all they that worship carved ima∣ges, and that delight in vain gods: worship him all yee gods. 8 Sion heard of it, and rejoyced: and the daughters of Judah were glad, because of thy judgements, O Lord.
9 For thou, Lord, art higher then all that are in the earth: thou art exalted farre above all gods. 10 O ye that love the Lord, see that ye hate the thing that is evill: the Lord preserveth the souls of his Saints, he shall deliver them from the hand of the ungodly. 11 There is sprung up a light for the righteous: and joyfull gladnesse for such as be true hearted. 12 Rejoyce in the Lord ye righteous: and give thanks for a remembrance of his holinesse. The Prayer. O Lord our King, Lord of the whole earth, have mercy upon us, and sanctifie us with thy grace, that we may hate every thing that is evill, that we may love thee, give thanks unto thy name, and rejoyce in remembrance of thy holinesse, that in the day of judgement and great terrors, when thou shalt fit in thy seat supported with righteousnesse and judgement, and a fire shall go forth from thy presence, to burn up thy enemies on every side, thou maist preserve our souls in safety from the hand of our enemies, and a light may spring up unto us to preserve us from eternall darknesse and the want of the light of thy countenance, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Evening Prayer. PSALME 98. A thanksgiving for the redemption of mankinde by Jesus Christ. O Sing unto the Lord a new song: for hee hath done marvellous things. 2 With his own right hand, and with his holy arm: hath he gotten himself the victory. 3 The Lord declared his salvation: his righteousnesse hath he openly shewed in the sight of the heathen. 4 He hath remembred his mercy and truth toward the house of Israel: and all the ends of the world have seen the salvation of our God. 5 Shew your selves joyfull unto the Lord, all ye lands: sing, rejoyce, and give thanks. 6 Praise the Lord upon the harp: sing to the harp with a psalme of thanksgiving. 7 With trumpets also and shawmes: O shew your selves joyfull before the Lord the King. 8 Let the sea make a noise, and all that therein is: the round world, and they that dwell therein. 9 Let the flouds clap their hands, and let the hils bee joyfull together before the Lord: for he is come to judge the earth. 10 With righteousnesse shall he judge the world: and the people with equity. The Prayer. O Most glorious and powerfull Jesu, who with thine own right hand, and with thy holy arm hast gotten to thy self on our behalf
the victory over sin, hell, and the grave, remem∣ber this thy mercy and truth which thou hast promised to all that beleeve on thee, give us pardon of our sins seal'd unto us by the testi∣mony of the holy Spirit, and of a good consci∣ence, and grant that we by thy strength may fight against our ghostly enemies, and by thy power may overcome them, that we may re∣joyce in a holy peace, and sing, and give thee thanks for our victory and our crown. Extend this mercy, and enlarge the effect of thy great victories to the heathen, that all the ends of the world may sing a new song unto thee, and see the salvation of God, that when thou com∣mest to judge the earth, we may all find mercy, and be joyfull together before thee in the fe∣stivity of a blessed eternity, through thy mer∣cies, O blessed Saviour and Redeemer Jesu. Amen. PSALME 99. A Prayer for the vertue of religion and devotion in holy places. THe Lord is King, be the people never so unpatient: he sitteth between the Cherubims, be the earth never so unquiet. 2 The Lord is great in Sion: and high above all peo∣ple. 3 They shall give thanks unto thy Name: which is great, wonderfull, and holy. 4 The kings power loveth judgement, thou hast prepa∣red
equity: thou hast executed judgement and righteous∣nesse in Jacob. 5 O magnifie the Lord our God: and fall down be∣fore his footstool, for he is holy. 6 Moses and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among such as call upon his Name: these called upon the Lord, and he heard them. 7 He spake unto them out of the cloudy pillar: for they kept his testimonies, and the law that he gave them. 8 Thou heardest them (O Lord our God:) thou for∣gavest them, O God, and punishedst their own inventi∣ons. 9 O magnifie the Lord our God, and worship him upon his holy hill: for the Lord our God is holy. The Prayer. O Great God, and King of Heaven and earth, thou that sittest between the Cherubims unmoved in the centre of thy own felicity and essentiall tranquillity, undisturbed in the great concussions and unquietnesse of the earth: give unto us thy servants venerable and dreadfull apprehensions of the sanctity and perfections of thy Name and Nature, which is great, won∣derfull, and holy. Teach us in all the addresses of our devotion, and in all places appointed for thy service, by all reverence & holinesse of soul and body, to expresse the greatnesse of thy power, and our weaknesse, the majesty of thy glory, and the unworthinesse of our per∣sons, the distance of God and man, of finite and infinite, of Lord and Servant, that the aw∣fulnesse of thy dread majesty may check every
unreverent gesture and thought in us, & teach us to make approaches of humility, and fear, that we calling upon thy Name according to our duties, & by the fear of thee being taught to keep thy testimonies, and never to forget the Law thou givest us, we may be delivered from thy wrath and punishment, and at last praise thee upon thy holy hill in thine ever∣lasting habitation through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 100. A Psalm of praise to God for his mercy & truth: O Be joyfull in the Lord, all ye lands: serve the Lord with gladnesse, and come before him presence with a song. 2 Be ye sure that the Lord he is God: it is he that hath made us, and not we our selves, we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture. 3 O goe your way into his gates with thanskgiving, & into his courts with praise: be thankfull unto him, and speak good of his name. 4 For the Lord is gracious, his mercy is everlasting: and his truth endureth from generation to generation. The Prayer. O Lord our God who hast created us out of nothing, and hast redeemed us from mi∣sery and death when we were thine enemies, shewing great expresses of thy loving kindness when we were vessels of wrath, and inheritors
of perdition, revealing thy truth unto us in the Sermons of the Gospel: teach us to walk as thou hast commanded us, to believe as thou hast taught us, that we may inherit what thou hast promised us, for thou art the way, the truth, and the life: we are thy people and the sheep of thy pasture, thou art our guide and our de∣fence; let thy grace teach us to serve thee, and thy holy Spirit assist and promote our endea∣vours with the blessings of gladnesse and chear∣fulnesse of Spirit, that we may love to speak good of thy Name, and at last may go into the courts of thy Temple with praise and a song in our mouths, to thy honour and eter∣nall glory, whose mercy and truth is everlasting and revealed unto the Church in our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. PSALME 101. A Prayer for a holy life. MY song shall be of mercy and judgement: unto thee, O Lord, will I sing. 2 O let me have understanding: in the way of godli∣nesse. 3 When wilt thou come unto me: I will walk in my house with a perfect heart. 4 I will take no wicked thing in hand, I hate the sins of unfaithfulnesse: there shall no such cleave unto me. 5 A froward heart shall depart from me: I will not know a wicked person. 6 Who so privily slandereth his neighbour: him will I destroy.
7 Whoso hath also a proud look, and high stomack: I will not suffer him. 8 Mine eyes look unto such as be faithfull in the land: that they may dwell with me. 9 Whoso leadeth a godly life: he shall be my servant. 10 There shall no deceitfull person dwell in my house: he that telleth lies shall not tarry in my sight. 11 I shall soon destroy all the ungodly that are in the land: that I may root out all wicked doers from the City of the Lord. The Prayer. O Lord God of eternall purity, who art of pure eyes, and canst behold no unrighte∣ousnesse or impurity: enlighten our understan∣dings, that we may have knowledge in the way of godlinesse; make our paths straight, and our hearts perfect, take from us the sins of unfaithfulnesse, correct and mortifie in us all froward and peevish dispositions, let us love the society of the Saints, and hate the fel∣lowship of the wicked, that we may not be destroyed with the ungodly, nor be rooted out from the City of the Lord, and banished from the sweetnesse of thy presence, for with thee is light, and health, and salvation, to thy Name be all honour, and glory, and praise ascribed, world without end. Amen.
Morning Prayer. PSALME 102. A Prayer for comfort in sadnesse, anxiety of spi∣rit, sicknesse, or any other affliction. HEar my prayer, O Lord: and let my crying come unto thee. 2 Hide not thy face from me in the time of my trouble: encline thine ears unto me when I call, O hear me, and that right soon. 3 For my days are consumed away like smoak: and my bones are burnt up as it were a firebrand. 4 My heart is smitten down, and withered like grasse: so that I forget to eat my bread. 5 For the voyce of my groaning: my bones will scarce cleave to my flesh. 6 I am become like a pelican in the wildernesse: and like an owle that is in the desert. 7 I have watched, and am even as it were a sparrow: that sitteth alone upon the house top. 8 Mine enemies revile me all the day long: and they that are mad upon me, are sworn together against me. 9 For I have eaten ashes as it were bread: and mingled my drink with weeping. 10 And that because of thine indignation and wrath: for thou hast taken me up, and cast me down. 11 My days are gone like a shadow: and I am withered like grasse. 12 But thou (O Lord) shalt endure for ever: and hy remembrance throughout all generations. 13 Thou shalt arise and have mercy upon Sion: for it is time that thou have mercy upon her, yea, the time is come.
14 And why? thy servants think upon her stones: and it piieth them to see her in the dust. 15 The heathen shall fear thy Name, O Lord: and all the kings of the earth thy majesty. 16 When the Lord shall build up Sion: and when his glory shall appear. 17 When he turneth him unto the prayer of the poore dstiute: and despiseth not their desire. 18 This shall be written for those that come after: and the people which shall be born, shall praise the Lord. 19 For he hath looked down from his sanctuary: out of the heaven did the Lord behold the earth. 20 That he might hear the mournings of such as be in captivity: and deliver the children appointed unto death. 21 That they may declare the Name of the Lord in Sion: and his worship at Jerusalem. 22 When the people are gathered together: and the kingdomes also to serve the Lord. 23 He brought down my strength in my journey: and shortened my days. 24 But I said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of mine age: as for thy years, they endure through∣out all generations. 25 Thou Lord in the beginning hast laid the foundati∣on of the earth: and the heavens are the work of thy hands. 26 They shall perish, but thou shalt endure: they all shall wax old as doth a garment. 27 And as a vesture shalt thou change them, and they shall be changed: but thou art the same, and thy years shall not faile. 28 The children of thy servants shall continue: and heir seed shall stand fast in thy sight.
The Prayer. O Eternall God, who endurest for ever, and thy remembrance throughout all generati∣ons, have pity upon us according to the infi∣nite treasures of thy loving kindnesse, hear the voice of our groaning, for thy indignation and thy wrath lieth hard upon us, & our sins have put an edge upon thy sword, and a thorn into our wounded consciences. O build up the ru∣ines of our souls, repair the breaches of our comforts and our hopes, and let thy glory now appear, for that shines brightest in the beams of thy mercy, and when thou turnest unto the prayer of poor wretched destitutes, it becomes an eternall monument and a record of thy ho∣nour, and all generations which shall be born shall praise thee. Look down, O Lord, from thy Sanctuary, hear the mournings of us and of all distressed people; send us health an life so long as it may be a blessing, and do no shorten our days in wrath, but give us grace so to spend all our time in the works of repē∣tance and holinesse, that when our years fail, and our change is come, we may be translated to the new heavens which shall never perish and wax old, there to continue and stand fast in thy sight for ever, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
PSALME 103. A thanksgiving to God for all his benefits and mercies. PRaise the Lord, O my soul: and all that is within me, praise his holy name. 2 Praise the Lord, O my soul: and forget not all his benefits. 3 Which forgiveth all thy sin: and healeth all thy infirmities. 4 Which saveth thy life from destruction: and crow∣neth thee with mercy and loving kindnesse. 5 Which satisfieth thy mouth with good things: ma∣king thee young and lusty as an eagle. 6 The Lord executeth righteousnesse and judgement: for all them that are oppressed with wrong. 7 He shewed his ways unto Moses: his works unto the children of Israel. 8 The Lord is full of compassion and mercy: long-suffering, and of great goodnesse. 9 He will not alway be chiding: neither keepeth he his anger for ever. 10 He hath not dealt with us after our sins: nor rewar∣ded us according to our wickednesse. 11 For look how high the heaven is in comparison of he earth: so great is his mercy also toward them that fear him. 12 Look how wide also the east is from the west: so far hath he set our sins from us. 13 Yea, like as a father pitieth his own children: even so is the Lord mercifull unto them that fear him. 14 For he knoweth whereof we be made: he remem∣breth that we are but dust. 15 The days of man are but as grasse: for hee flouri∣sheth as a flower of the field. 16 For assoon as the winde goeth over it, it is gone:
and the place thereof shall know it no more. 17 But the mercifull goodnesse of the Lord endureth for ever and ever, upon them that fear him: and his righ∣teousnesse upon childrens children. 18 Even upon such as keep his covenant: and think upon his commandements to do them. 19 The Lord hath prepared his seat in heaven: and his kingdome ruleth over all. 20 O praise the Lord, ye angels of his, ye that excell in strength: ye that fulfill his commandement, and hearken unto the voyce of his words. 21 O praise the Lord all ye his hosts: ye servants of his that do his pleasure. 22 O speak good of the Lord all ye works of his, in all places of his dominion: praise thou the Lord, O my soul. The Prayer. O Most merciful God, whose mercy is as high as the heavens, as great and many as the moments of eternity, thou hast opened thy hand wide to fill us with blessings, and the sweet effects of thy loving kindnesse, thou art pitifull as a Father, tender as a Mother, care∣full as a guardian, and exceeding mercifull to all them that fear thee: we pray thee to fill our souls with great apprehensions and impresses of thy unspeakable mercies, that our thankful∣nesse may be as great as our needs of mercy are, and let thy mercifull loving kindnesse en∣dure for ever and ever upon us all. Keep no anger in store for us, chide us not in thy dis∣pleasure, satisfie our mouths with good things,
remove all our sins from us as far as the east is from the west, heal all our infirmities and save our lives from destruction, for these are mer∣cies thou delightest in: and because we cannot praise thee accordingly to thy excellencies, take our souls in thy due time, into the land of everlasting praises, that we may spend a whole eternity in ascribing to thy name, praise, and honour, and dominion. Grant this for Jesus Christ his sake our Lord and onely Saviour. Amen. Evening Prayer. PSALME 104. A contemplation of the wisdome and goodnesse of God, manifested in his creatures. PRaise the Lord, O my soul: O Lord my God, thou art become exceeding glorious, thou art clothed with majesty and honour. 2 Thou deckest thy self with light as it were with a garment: and spreadest out the heavens like a curtain. 3 Which layeth the beams of his chambers in the wa∣ters: and maketh the clouds his chariot, and walketh up∣on the wings of the winde. 4 He maketh his angels spirits: and his ministers a fla∣ming fire. 5 He laid the foundations of the earth: that it never should move at any time. 6 Thou coveredst it with the deep like as with a gar∣ment: the waters stand in the hils.
7 At thy rebuke they flee: at the voice of thy thunder they are afraid. 8 They go up as high as the hils, and down to the val∣leys beneath: even unto the place which thou hast appoin∣ted for them. 9 Thou hast set them their bounds which they shal not passe: neither turn again to cover the earth. 10 He sendeth the springs into the rivers: which run among the hils. 11 All beasts of the field drink thereof: and the wilde asses quench their thirst. 12 Beside them shall the fowls of the air have their ha∣bitation: and sing among the branches. 13 He watereth the hils from above: the earth is filled with the fruit of thy works. 14 He bringeth forth grasse for the cattell: and green herb for the service of men. 15 That he may bring food out of the earth, and wine that maketh glad the heart of man: and oyl to make him a cherful countenance, and bread to strengthen mans heart. 16 The trees of the Lord also are full of sap: even the Cedars of Libanus which he hath planted. 17 Wherein the birds make their nests: and the sirre∣trees are a dwelling for the stork. 18 The high hils are a refuge for the wild goats: and so are the stony rocks for the conies. 19 He appointed the moon for certain seasons: and the sun knoweth his going down. 20 Thou makest darknesse that it may be night: where∣in all the beasts of the forest doe move. 21 The lions roaring after their prey: doe seek their meat at God. 22 The sun ariseth, and they get them away together: and lay them down in their dens. 23 Man goeth forth to his work, and to his labour: untill evening. 24 O Lord, how manifold are thy works: in wisdome
hast thou made them all, the earth is full of thy riches. 25 So is the great and wide sea also: wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small and great beasts. 26 There go the ships, and there is that Leviathan: whom thou hast made to take his pastime therein. 27 These wait all upon thee: that thou mayest give them meat in due season. 28 When thou givest in them, they gather it: and when thou openest thy hand, they are filled with good. 29 When thou hidest thy face they are troubled: when thou takest away their breath, they die, and are turned again to their dust. 30 When thou lettest thy breath go forth, they shall be made: and thou shalt renew the face of the earth. 31 The glorious majesty of the Lord shall endure for ever: the Lord shall rejoyce in his works. 32 The earth shall tremble at the look of him: if he do but touch the hils, they shall smoke. 33 I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live: I will praise my God while I have my being. 34 And so shall my words please him: my joy shall be in the Lord. 35 As for sinners, they shall be consumed out of the earth, and the ungodly shall come to an end: praise thou the Lord, O my soul, praise the Lord. The Prayer. O Lord God who art exceeding glorious, who art clothed with majesty and honor, thou hast created all things with admirable wis∣dome, established them with excellent order, and hast provided for them with mercy & sin∣gular providence, be pleased to give us grace that we may remember thou hast created us all for thy glory, that thou hast planted thine image
on us, and hast crowned all our years with thy mercies and loving kindnesse; let us never disobey thy will, forget thy mercies, or deface thine image in us, but when all thy creatures praise thee in their manner, let not us whom thou hast made in dignity next to Angels di∣sturb the blessed order of Creation by our sins and irregular disobedience. Open thy hand, O Lord, and fill us with good things both spi∣rituall and temporall, that when thou takest away our breath that we die, and turn again to our dust, thou mayest not hide thy face away from us, but communicate to us the light of thy countenance and the glories of thy King∣dome, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Morning Prayer. PSALME 105. A commemoration of Gods care of his Church and blessings to his people. O Give thanks unto the Lord, and call upon his Name: tell the people what things he hath done. 2 O let your songs be of him, and praise him: and let your talking be of all his won∣drous works. 3 Rjoyce in his holy Name: let the heart of them rejoyce that seek the Lord. 4 Seek the Lord and his strength: seek his face ever∣more.
5 Remember the marvellous works that hee hath done: his wonders, and the judgements of his mouth. 6 O ye seed of Abraham his servant: ye children of Jacob his chosen. 7 Hee is the Lord our God: his judgements are in all the world. 8 Hee hath been alway mindfull of his covenant and promise: that he made to a thousand generations. 9 Even the covenant that he made with Abraham: and the oath that he sware unto Isaac. 10 And appointed the same unto Jacob for a law: and to Israel for an everlasting testament. 11 Saying, Unto thee will I give the land of Canaan: the lot of your inheritance. 12 When there were yet but a few of them: and they strangers in the land. 13 What time as they went from one nation to ano∣ther: from one kingdome to another people. 14 He suffered no man to doe them wrong: but re∣proved even Kings for their sakes. 15 Touch not mine Anointed: and doe my Prophets no harm. 16 Moreover, he called for a dearth upon the land: and destroyed all the provision of bread. 17 But he had sent a man before them: even Joseph which was sold to be a bond-servant. 18 Whose feet they hurt in the stocks: the iron entred into his soul. 19 Vntill the time came that his cause was known: the Word of the Lord tried him. 20 The King sent and delivered him: the Prince of the people let him goe free. 21 He made him Lord also of his house: and ruler of all his substance. 22 That he might inform his Princes after his will: and teach his senators wisdome. 23 Israel also came into Egypt: and Jacob was a
stranger in the land of Ham. 24 And he increased his people exceedingly: and made them stronger then their enemies. 25 Whose heart turned so, that they hated his people: and dealt untruly with his servants▪ 26 Then sent he Moses his servant: and Aaron whom he had chosen. 27 And these shewed his tokens among them: and won∣ders in the land of Ham. 28 He sent darknesse, and it was dark: and they were not obedient unto his Word. 29 He turned their waters into bloud: and slew their fish. 30 Their land brought forth frogs: yea, even in their Kings chambers. 31 He spake the word, and there came all manner of flies: and lice in all their quarter. 32 He gave them hailstones for rain: and flames of fire in their land. 33 He smote their vines also and fig-trees: and de∣stroyed the trees that were in their coasts. 34 He spake the word and the grashoppers came, and caterpillers innumerable: and did eat up all the grasse in their land, and devouted the fruit of their ground. 35 He smote all the first-born in their land: even the chief of all their strength. 36 He brought them forth also with silver and gold: there was not one feeble person among their Tribes. 37 Egypt was glad at their departing: for they were afraid of them. 38 He spread out a cloud to be a covering: and fire to give light in the night season. 39 At their desire he brought quailes: and he filled them with the bread of heaven. 40 He opened the rock of stone, and the waters flow∣ed out: so that the rivers ran in dry places. 41 For why? hee remembred his holy promise: and Abraham his servant.
42 And he brought forth his people with joy: and his chosen with gladnesse. 43 And gave them the lands of the heathen: and they took the labours of the people in possession. 44 That they might keep his statutes: and observe his laws. The Prayer. O Lord God, who art alway mindfull of thy covenant and promise to a thousand ge∣nerations, and didst deliver the seed of Abra∣ham the children of Jacob thy chosen from the slavery of Egypt, from the waves of the sea, from the rage of Pharaoh, from the thirst and famine of the wildernesse, continue the like mercies to all Christian people; deliver us from the bondage of our sins, preserve us in the Ark of the Church, that we perish not in the waves of this troublesom world; save us from the fury of all our temporall and ghostly ene∣mies, feed us with food from heaven, and give us competency of good things on earth, that we may keep thy statutes, and observe thy Laws, and at last receive the promises of a bles∣sed eternity, which in the covenant of thy Gospel thou hast made unto all that beleeve in thee, and are obedient to thy Word. Grant this, O blessed Jesu, to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be all honour and glory, world without end. Amen.
vening Prayer. PSALME 106. A commemoration of Gods frequent pardons and mercies to the penitent. O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious: and his mercy endureth for ever. 2 Who can expresse the noble acts of the Lord: or shew forth all his praise? 3 Blessed are they that alway keep judge∣ment: and doe righteousnesse. 4 Remember me, O Lord, according to the favour that thou bearest unto thy people: O visit me with thy salvation. 5 That I may see the felicity of thy chosen: and re∣joyce in the gladnesse of thy people, and give thanks with thine inheritance. 6 Wee have sinned with our fathers: we have done amisse, and dealt wickedly. 7 Our fathers regarded not thy wonders in Egypt, neither kept they thy great goodnesse in remembrance: but were disobedient at the sea, even at the Red sea. 8 Neverthelesse, he helped them for his names sake: that he might make his power to be known. 9 He rebuked the Red sea also, and it was dried up: so he led them through the deep, as through a wildernesse. 10 And he saved them from the adversaries hand: and delivered them from the hand of the enemy. 11 As for those that troubled them, the waters over∣whelmed them: there was not one of them left. 12 Then beleeved they his words: and sang praise unto him. 13 But within a while they forgat his works: and would not abide his counsell.
14 But lust came upon them in the wildernesse: and they tempted God in the desert. 15 And he gave them their desire: and sent leannesse withall into their soul. 16 They angred Moses also in the tents: and Aaron the saint of the Lord. 17 So the earth opened and swallowed up Dathan: and covered the congregation of Abiram. 18 And the fire was kindled in their company: the flame burnt up the ungodly. 19 They made a calf in Horeb: and worshipped the molten image 20 Thus they turned their glory: into the similitude of a calf that eateth hay. 21 And they forgat God their Saviour: which had done so great things in Egypt. 22 Wondrous works in the land of Ham: and fearfull things by the Red sea. 23 So he said he would have destroyed them, had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the gap: to turn a∣way his wrathfull indignation lest he should destroy them. 24 Yea, they thought scorn of that pleasant land: and gave no credance unto his word. 25 But murmured in their tents: and hearkned not unto the voice of the Lord. 26 Then lift he up his hand against them: to over∣throw them in the wildernesse. 27 To cast out their seed among the nations: and to scatter them in the lands. 28 They joyned themselves unto Baal-peor: and ate the offering of the dead. 29 Thus they provoked him to anger with their own inventions: and the plague was great among them. 30 Then stood up Phineas, and prayed: and so the plague ceased. 31 And that was counted unto him for righteousnesse: among all posterities for evermore.
32 They angred him also at the waters of strife: so that he punished Moses for their sakes. 33 Because they provoked his spirit: so that he spake unadvisedly with his lips. 34 Neither destroyed they the heathen: as the Lord commanded them. 35 But were mingled among the heathen: and learned their works. 36 Insomuch that they worshipped their idols, which turned to their own decay: yea, they offered their sonnes and daughters unto devils. 37 And shed innocent bloud, even the bloud of their sons and of their daughters: whom they offered unto the idols of Canaan, and the land was defiled with bloud. 38 Thus were they stained with their own works: and went a whoring with their own inventions. 39 Therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled against his people: insomuch that he abhorred his own inheri∣tance. 40 And he gave them over into the hand of the hea∣then: and they that hated them were Lords over them. 41 Their enemies oppressed them: and had them in subjection. 42 Many a time did he deliver them: but they rebelled against him with their own inventions, and were brought down in their wickednesse. 43 Neverthelesse, when he saw their adversity: hee heard their complaint. 44 He thought upon his covenant, and pitied them ac∣cording unto the multitude of his mercies: yea, he made all those that had led them away captive, to pity them. 45 Deliver us (O Lord our God) and gather us from among the heathen: that we may give thanks unto thy holy Name, and make our boast of thy praise. 46 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting, and world without end: and let all the people say, Amen.
The Prayer. O Lord God, full of mercy and pity, who didst many times deliver thy people from their adversity, when thou for their rebelling against thee with their inventions hadst given them into the hand of the heathen: Remem∣ber us O Lord, according unto the savour thou bearest unto thy people, and visit us with thy salvation, that though we have done amisse, and dealt wickedly against thee and against thy co∣venant, yet be pleased to help us for thy Name sake, and make thy power to be known in the mighty deliverance and redemption of us from so great danger and misery. Give us grace to beleeve thy words, to abide thy counsels, to walk in thy Laws, to relinquish our own sinfull and vain desires, to obey our Governours Ec∣clesiasticall and Civill, that we may not have the lot of Dathan and Abiram, but at last may receive our portion in the felicity of thy cho∣sen, giving thee thanks with thine inheritance, for that thou hast turned from us thy wrath∣full indignation, pitying us, and saving us ac∣cording to the multitude of thy mercies. Thy Name be blessed, O Lord God, everlastingly, and world without end, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Morning Prayer. PSALME 107. A thanksgiving for deliverance from miseries and dangers. O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious: and his mercy endureth for ever. 2 Let them give thanks whom the Lord hath redeemed: and delivered from the hand of the enemy. 3 And gathered them out of the lands, from the East, and from the West: from the North, and from the South. 4 They went astray in the wildernesse out of the way: and found no city to dwell in. 5 Hungry and thirsty: their soul fainted in them. 6 So they cried unto the Lord in their trouble: and he delivered them from their distresse. 7 He led them forth by the right way: that they might go to the city where they dwelt. 8 O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodnesse: and declare the wonders that he doth for the children of men! 9 For he satisfieth the empty soul: and filleth the hun∣gry soul with goodnesse. 10 Such as sit in darknesse and in the shadow of death: being fast bound in misery and iron. 11 Because they rebelled against the word of the Lord: and lightly regarded the counsell of the most High. 12 He also brought down their heart through heavi∣nesse: they fell down, and there was none to help them up. 13 So when they cried unto the Lord in their trouble: he delivered them out of their distresse. 14 For he brought them out of darknesse, and out of the shadow of death: and brake their bonds in sunder.
15 O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodnesse: and declare the wonders that he doth for the children of men! 16 For he hath broken the gates of brasse: and smitten the bars of iron in sunder. 17 Foolish men are plagued for their offence: and be∣cause of their wickednesse. 18 Their soul abhorred all manner of meat: and they were even hard at deaths door. 19 So when they cried unto the Lord in their trouble: he delivered them out of their distresse. 20 He sent his word and healed them: and they were saved from their destruction. 21 O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodnesse: and declare the wonders that he doth for the children of men! 22 That they would offer unto him the sacrifice of thanksgiving: and tell out his works with gladnesse. 23 They that go down to the sea in ships: and occupy their businesse in great waters. 24 These men see the works of the Lord: and his wonders in the deep. 25 For at his word the stormy winde ariseth: which lifteth up the waves thereof. 26 They are caried up to the heaven, and down again to the deep: their soul melteth away because of the trouble. 27 They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man: nd are at their wits end. 28 So when they cry unto the Lord in their trouble: he delivreth them out of their distresse. 29 For he maketh the storm to cease: so that the waves thereof are still. 30 Then are they glad, because they be at rest: and so he brigeth them unto the haven where they would be. 31 O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodnesse: and declare the wonders that he doth for the children of men!
32 That they would exalt him also in the congregation of the people: and praise him in the seat of the elders. 33 Which turneth the flouds into a wildernesse: and drieth up the water springs. 34 A fruitfull land maketh he barren: for the wicked∣nesse of them that dwell therein. 35 Again he maketh the wildernesse a standing water: and water springs of a dry ground. 36 And thre he setteth the hungry: that they may build them a City to dwell in. 37 That they may sow their land, and plant vineyards: to yeeld them fruits of increase. 38 He blesseth them, so that they multiply exceeding∣ly: and suffereth not their cattell to decrease. 39 And again, when they are minished and brought low: through oppression, through any plague or trouble. 40 Though he suffer them to be evill intreated through tyrants: and let them wander out of the way in the wil∣dernesse. 41 Yet helpeth he the poor out of misery: and maketh him housholds like a flock of sheep. 42 The righteous will consider this, and rejoyce: and the mouth of all wickednesse shall be stopped. 43 Who so is wise will ponder these things: and they shall understand the loving kindnesse of the Lord. The Prayer. O Lord God, gracious and good, whose mer∣cy endureth for ever, have mercy upon us when in our trouble we cry unto thee; for when our hearts are brought down through heaviness there is none to help us up, or to de∣liver us out of our distress, but only thou, ô Lord. We have sinned, we have rebelled against thee, and lightly regarded thy counsels, wee have
walked and sate in darknesse and in the sha∣dows of death, being fast bound in the captivi∣ty and misery of sin. O bring us out of dark∣nesse, and break our bonds asunder; guide us through the desert of this world, in which grows nothing but sadnesse and discontent; still the tempests, and smooth the flouds of misery which are ready to overwhelm us, and in thy due time bring us to eternall rest, and to the haven where we would fain be, that in the congregation of thy holy people, we may praise thee for thy goodnesse, and declare the wonders thou hast done for us in delivering us from sin and misery, and death, and bringing us to a City to dwell in, where there is life, and light, and joy eternall in the beholding the face of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. Evening Prayer. PSALME 108. A Prayer for victory against our Enemies. O God, my heart is ready, (my heart is ready) I will sing and give praise with the best member I have. 2 Awake thou lute and harp: I my self will awake right early. 3 I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the people: I will sing praises unto thee among the nations. 4 For thy mercy is greater then the heavens: and thy truth reacheth unto the clouds.
5 Set up thy selfe (O God) above the heavens: and thy glory above all the earth. 6 That thy beloved may be delivered: let thy right hand save them, and hear thou me. 7 God hath spoken in his holinesse: I will rejoyce therefore, and divide Sichem, and mete out the valley of Succoth. 8 Gilead is mine, and Manasses is mine: Ephraim also is the strength of mine head. 9 Juda is my law-giver, Moab is my washpot: over Edm will I cast out my shooe, upon the Philistines will I triumph. 10 Who will lead me into the strong city: and who will bring me into Edom? 11 Hast not thou forsaken us, O God: and wilt not thou, O God, goe forth with our hosts? 12 O help us against the enemy: for vain is the help of man. 13 Through God we shall doe great acts: and it is he that shall tread down our enemies. The Prayer. O Lord God, whose mercy is greater then the Heavens, and thy glory is above all the earth, be thou exalted in thine owne strength, and magnifie thy power and thy mercy in defending us, and all thy holy Church, against all our enemies temporall and spiritu∣all. Forsake us not O God our defence, for vain is the help of man, do thou strengthen us and go forth with our hosts to battell, that we being defended and armed by thee, may doe acts great and good, fighting thy battels, and putting our confidence in thy righteous∣nesse
onely, and salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 109. A Prayer against Gods enemies, and especially Traitors, prophetically intended against the person of Judas. HOld not thy tongue, O God of my praise: for the mouth of the ungodly, yea, and the mouth of the de∣citfull is opened upon me. 2 And they have spoken against me with false tongues: they compassed me about also with words of hatred, and fought against me without a cause. 3 For the love that I had unto them, lo, they take now my contrary part: but I give my self unto prayer. 4 Thus have they rewarded me evill for good: and hatred for my good will. 5 Set thou an ungodly man to be ruler over him: and let Satan stand at his right hand. 6 When sentence is given upon him, let him be con∣demned: and let his prayer be turned into sin. 7 Let his dayes be few: and let another take his of∣fice. 8 Let his children be fatherlesse: and his wife a widow. 9 Let his children be vagabonds, and beg their bread: let them seek it also out of desolate places. 10 Let the extortioner consume all that he hath: and let the stranger spoil his labour. 11 Let there be no man to pity him: nor to have compassion upon his fatherlsse children. 12 Let his posterity be destroyed: and in the next generation let his name be clean put out. 13 Let the wickednesse of his fathers be had in remem∣brance in the sight of the Lord: and let not the sin of his mother be done away.
14 Let them alway be before the Lord: that he may root out the memoriall of them from off the earth. 15 And that because his minde was not to doe good: but persecuted the poor helplesse man, that he might slay him that was vexed at the heart. 16 His delight was in cursing, and it shall happen unto him: he loved not blessing, therefore shall it be far from him. 17 He clothed himself with cursing like as with a rai∣ment: and it shall come into his bowels like water, and like oyle into his bones. 18 Let it be unto him as the cloke that he hath upon him: and as the girdle that he is always girded withall. 19 Let it thus happen from the Lord unto mine ene∣mies: and to those that speak evill against my soul. 20 But deal thou with me (O Lord God) according unto thy name: for sweet is thy mercy. 21 O deliver me, for I am helplesse and poor: and my heart is wounded within me. 22 I goe hence like the shadow that departeth: and am driven away as the grashopper. 23 My knees are weak through fasting: my flesh is dri∣ed up for want of fatnesse. 24 I became also a rebuke unto them: they that loo∣ked upon me shaked their heads. 25 Help me (O Lord my God:) Oh save me accor∣ding to thy mercy. 26 And they shall know how that this is thy hand: and that thou Lord hast done it. 27 Though they curse, yet blesse thou: and let them be confounded that rise up against me, but let thy servant rejoyce. 28 Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame: and let them cover themselves with their own confusion, as with a cloke. 29 As for me, I will give great thanks unto the Lord with my mouth: and praise him among the multitude.
30 For he shall stand at the right hand of the poor: to save his soul from unrighteous judges. The Prayer. O God of our praise, who wast contented that thy Son Jesus Christ should be be∣trayed into the hands of sinners by one of his own Apostles, the Traitor Judas, and in punish∣ment of so great impiety didst suffer Satan to stand at his right hand tempting him to de∣spair, and to give sentence upon himself to condemne himself, and to execute his own judgement, and gavest his Bishoprick to ano∣ther: let thy righteous judgements finde out all those that are Traitors to their Prince, enemies to the Church, Apostates from Religi∣on, Hypocrites under specious pretences, and beauteous titles; that they may be clothed with shame, and may cover themselves with their own confusion as with a cloke; that by thy punishments in this life, they may be dri∣ven to a sharp and salutary repentance, and may be saved in the life to come. Deal thou with us, O Lord, according to thy mercy, take away thy curse, and let not thy blessing be far from us; let not our wickednesse, nor the wickednesse of our fathers be had in remem∣brance in thy sight, let our minds be alway to do good, and our hearts and lips be given un∣to prayer, and our prayers so guided by thy
assistances, that they be not turned into sin; that when we go hence like the shadow that departeth, and are driven away like the gras∣hopper, when the days of our vanity and re∣joycing are past, we may stand at thy right hand, and our souls be saved from the lot and portion of the unrighteous, through the righ∣teousnesse and passion of our Lord and Savi∣our Jesus Christ. Amen. Morning Prayer. PSALME 110. A Hymne in the honour of Christs Kingdom, and Priesthood, and exaltation. THe Lord said unto my Lord: Sit thou on my right hand, untill I make thine enemies thy footstool. 2 The Lord shall send the rod of thy pow∣er out of Sion: be thou ruler even in the midst among thine enemies. 3 In the day of thy power shall the people offer thee free-will-offerings with an holy worship: the dew of thy birth is of the womb of the morning. 4 The Lord sware and will not repent: Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedek. 5 The Lord upon thy right hand: shall wound even kings in the day of his wrath. 6 He shall judge among the heathen, he shall fill the places with the dead bodies: and smite in sunder the heads over divers countreys.
7 He shall drink of the brook in the way: therefore shall he lift up his head. The Prayer. O Eternall God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who when thy Son had drank of the brook in the way to the grave and to our redemption, (beginning his passion by the brook Cedron, and tasting the waters of bit∣ternesse till he had drunk off the whole chalice of thy wrath upon the Crosse) didst lift up his head, and set him at thy right hand till thou shalt make all his enemies his footstool: fill our hearts with his love and praises, that we may pay him the offerings of our souls and bo∣dies in an holy worship, and joyfull thanksgi∣ving for all the parts and mysteries of our re∣demption, for his birth in the womb of his ho∣ly Mother, pure and virginall, like the morning dew, for his Death and Passion, and for his con∣tinuall mediation and intercession by which he does officiate in his eternall Priesthood, which is after the order of Melchisedek. Re∣member us, blessed Jesu, in the Day of thy pow∣er, when thou shalt come to judge the world, and the places fill'd with dead bodies shall give up their dead, that we may sit at thy right hand to magnifie and behold the glories of thy Kingdome for ever and ever. Amen.
PSALME 111. An Eucharisticall Hymne for the benefits of the holy Gospel, particularly of the blessed Sacra∣ment. I Will give thanks unto the Lord with my whole heart: secretly among the faithfull, and in the congregation. 2 The works of the Lord are great: sought out of all them that have pleasure therein. 3 His work is worthy to be praised and had in honour: and his righteousnesse endureth for ever. 4 The mercifull and gracious Lord hath so done his marvellous works: that they ought to be had in remem∣brance. 5 He hath given meat unto them that fear him: he shall ever be mindull of his covenn. 6 He hath shewed his people the power of his works: that he may give them the heritage of the heathen. 7 The works of his hands are verity and judgement: all his commandements are true. 8 They stand fast for ever and ever: and are done in truth and equity. 9 He sent redemption unto his people: he hath com∣manded his covenant for ever, holy and reverend is his Name. 10 The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdome: a good understanding have all they that doe thereafter, the praise of it endureth for ever. The Prayer. O Blessed Jesu, whose righteousnesse endu∣reth for ever, thy work is worthy to be praised and had in honour, for that thou hast
been mercifull and gracious to us, and hast gi∣ven meat, even the food of the blessed Sacra∣ment unto them that fear thee, that by partici∣pation of thy holy Communion we should have thee in remembrance, and ever be mind∣full of thy covenant: plant thy fear in our hearts, give us wisdome and good understan∣ding, and make us to have pleasure in thee, and all thy works, that we obeying the precepts of thy holy Gospel, and performing the con∣ditions of thy covenant, which thou hast esta∣blished for ever in truth and equity, in verity and judgement, we may worthily praise and adore thy reverend and holy Name among the faithfull in this life, and in the great con∣gregation of saints in the life to come, through thy mercies, O blessed Jesu, to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be all honour and glory now and for ever. Amen. PSALME 112. A Prayer for the feare of the Lord, for charity, and the blessings of the righteous. BLessed is the man that feareth the Lord: hee hath great delight in his commandements. 2 His seed shall be mighty upon earth: the generation of the faithfull shall be blessed. 3 Riches and plenteousnesse shall be in his house: and his righteousnesse endureth for ever. 4 Unto the godly there ariseth up light in the darkness: he is mercifull, loving, and righteous. 5 A good man is mercifull, and lendeth: and will guide his words with discretion.
6 For he shall never be moved: and the righteous shall be had in an everlasting remembrance. 7 He will not be afraid for any evill tidings: for his heart standeth fast, and beleeveth in the Lord. 8 His heart is stablished and will not shrink: untill he see his desire upon his enemies. 9 He hath dispersed abroad and given to the poor: and his righteousnesse remaineth for ever, his horn shall bee exalted with honour. 10 The ungodly shall see it, and it shall grieve him: he shall gnash with his teeth, and consume away, the desire of the ungodly shall perish. The Prayer. O Lord God who art to be feared in the ge∣nerations of the world, teach us the fear of thy Name, that we may fear to offend thee, and that delighting in thy Commandements, we may serve thee without fear of our ene∣mies in holinesse and righteousnesse all our days. Let thy light rise upon the darknesse of our understandings; let thy mercies and gen∣tlenesse cure all thoughts of unmercifulnesse in us, and make us charitable, of tender bowels, yearning with pity over the needs of the poor. Teach us to guide our words with discretion, make us never to be moved from our purposes of holy living, stablish our hearts in thy love, that in the day of restitution of all things, thou mayest give us the portion of the charitable, the rewards of thy right hand, and when the wicked shall gnash with their teeth, and con∣sume away in a sad eternity, we may be satisfi∣ed
with the riches and plenteousnesse of thy house for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 113. A thanksgiving to God for his acts of providence, and particular care over the poor and humble. PRaise the Lord (ye servants:) O praise the Name of the Lord. 2 Blessed be the name of the Lord: from this time forth for evermore. 3 The Lords name is praised: from the rising up of the sun, unto the going down of the same. 4 The Lord is high above all heathen: and his glory above the heavens. 5 Who is like unto the Lord our God, that hath his dwelling so high: and yet humbleth himself to behold the things that are in heaven and earth? 6 He taketh up the simple out of the dust: and lifteth the poor out of the mire. 7 That he may set him with the princes: even with the princes of his people. 8 He maketh the barren woman to keep house: and to be a joyfull mother of children. The Prayer. O Lord God whose dwelling is on high, and yet thou humblest thy self to behold the things that are in Heaven and earth, have mer∣cy upon us thy humble servants, and lift us up from the gates of death, take us out of the mire that we sink not into the bottomlesse pit of misery and infelicity, and when for our sinnes thou humblest us as low as the dust, let thy
mercy exalt us and restore us to the light of thy countenance, and the joy of thy salvation; that when thou shalt call all the world to judgement from the rising of the Sun to the going down thereof, we may be set with the Princes of thy people, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in thine eternall Kingdome, to sing praises to thy Name from this time forth for evermore. Amen. Evening Prayer. PSALME 114. A thanksgiving to God for the deliverance of his people from bondage and misery. WHen Israel came out of Egypt: and the house of Jacob from among the strange people. 2 Juda was his sanctuary: and Israel his dominion. 3 The sea saw that and fled: Jordan was driven back. 3 The mountains skipped like rams: and the little hils like young sheep. 5 What aileth thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest: and thou Jordan, that thou wast driven back? 6 Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams: and yee little hils like young sheep? 7 Tremble thou earth at the presence of the Lord: at the presence of the God of Jacob. 8 Which turned the hard rock into a standing wter: and the flint stone into a springing well.
The Prayer. O Lord God, at whose presence the earth trembles, who workest salvation and deli∣verance for thy Church in all ages, and didst de∣liver thy people from the bondage of Egypt with a mighty hand, and an arm stretched out in miraculous effects, deliver us from the bon∣dage of sin, from the tyranny of the devill, from the Empire and Dominion of the flesh, that our bodies and souls being mortified, our flesh brought under subjection of the spirit, our appetites made subordinate to reason, and our souls wholly conformable to thy will, our hard stony hearts may be converted into hearts of flesh, and into a springing well bringing forth the waters of repentance, and fruits springing up to life eternall, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 115. A Prayer against idolatry, and for confidence in the true God. NOt unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give the praise: for thy loving mercy, and for thy truths sake. 2 Wherefore shall the heathen say: Where is now their God? 3 As for our God, he is in heaven: he hath done what∣soever pleased him. 4 Their idols are silver and gold: even the work of mens hands.
5 They have mouthes and speak not: eyes have they and see not. 6 They have eares and hear not: noses have they and smell not. 7 They have hands and handle not, feet have they and walk not: neither speak they through their throat. 8 They that make them are like unto them: and so are all such as put their trust in them. 9 But thou house of Israel, trust thou in the Lord: he is their succour and defence. 10 Ye house of Aaron, put your trust in the Lord: he is their helper and defender. 11 Ye that fear the Lord, put your trust in the Lord: he is their helper and defender. 12 The Lord hath been mindfull of us, and he shall blesse us: even he shall blesse the house of Israel, hee shall blesse the house of Aaron. 13 He shall blesse them that fear the Lord: both small and great. 14 The Lord shall encrease you more and more: you and your children. 15 Ye are the blessed of the Lord: which made heaven and earth. 16 All the whole heavens are the Lords: the earth hath he given to the children of men. 17 The dead praise not thee, O Lord: neither all they that go down into the silence. 18 But we will praise the Lord: from this time forth for evermore. Praise the Lord. The Prayer. O Lord God omnipotent, whose seat is in Heaven, and thou hast done whatsoever pleased thee in Heaven and earth, give us thy grace, that in all our troubles we may make
thee our Succour and Defence, and put our trust in thee onely, that we receiving thy mer∣cies and the satisfaction of all our hopes from thy plenteousnesse and loving kindnesse, we may give praise unto thy Name, never ascri∣bing to our selves any honour, or the glory and thanks of any good action or prosperous successe, but to thee who art the Author and Giver of all good things. Preserve us from all dangers of idolatry, from worshipping or lo∣ving any vain imaginations, and making any thing to be our confidence besides thee our God, that so thou mayest be mindfull of us, and blesse us in all our ways, and when we die and go down into the silence, we may have our portion amongst the blessed of the Lord, in the inheritance of thy Kingdome, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Morning Prayer. PSALME 116. An act of love and thanksgiving to God, for de∣liverance from sin and death. I Am well pleased: that the Lord hath heard the voyce of my prayer. 2 That he hath enclined his eare unto me: there∣fore will I call upon him as long as I live. 4 The snares of death compassed me round about: and the pains of hell gat hold upon me.
4 I shall find trouble and heavinesse, and I shall call up∣on the name of the Lord: O Lord I beseech thee deliver my soul. 5 Gracious is the Lord and righteous: yea, our God is mercifull. 6 The Lord preserveth the simple: I was in misery, and he helped me. 7 Turn again then unto thy rest, O my soul: for the Lord hath rewarded thee. 8 Any why? thou hast delivered my soul from deth: mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling. 9 I will walk before the Lord: in the land of the living. 10 I beleeved, and therefore will I speak, but I was sore troubled: I said in my haste, All men are liars. 11 What reward shall I give unto the Lord: for all the benefits that he hath done unto me? 12 I will receive the cup of salvation: and call upon the name of the Lord. 13 I will pay my vows now in the presence of all his people: right dear in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints. 14 Behold (O Lord) how that I am thy servant: I am thy servant, and the sonne of thine handmaid, thou hast broken my bonds in sunder. I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving: and will call upon the name of the Lord. 16 I will pay my vows unto the Lord, in the sight of all his people: in the courts of the Lords house, even in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem. Praise the Lord. The Prayer. O Lord God of eternall mercies, Gracious and Righteous, give unto us hearts filled with love and praises to thy holy Name; for thou hearest our prayers, thou breakest asunder
the bonds of our sins, thou deliverest our souls from trouble and heavinesse, and snatchest us from the snares of death, and savest us from the pains of hell. O mercifull God, let our souls rest in thee, and be satisfied in the plea∣sures of thy mercy, that we may receive the cup of blessing and salvation, and celebrate the Eucharist in honour of thy name, and in re∣membrance of thy infinite benefits which thou hast done unto us, and at last may pay our great Allelujah to the Lord in the courts of the Lords house, in the midst of the cele∣stiall Jerusalem, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 117. An invitation to all people to praise Gods mercy and truth. O Praise the Lord all yea heathen: praise him all ye Na∣tions. 2 For his mercifull kindnesse is ever more and more towards us: and the truth of the Lord endureth for ever. Praise the Lord. The Prayer. O Blessed Jesu who art not only the glory of thy people Israel, but the light of the Gentiles, let thy mercifull kindnesse be ever more and more towards the sons of men, that the nations which have not known thee may ear thy truth, and feel thy mercies, and call
pon thy Name, and thy grace may be confir∣med upon us, till we receive the fulnesse and perfection of thy graces in the full fruition of the glories of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. PSALME 118. A Psalme of thanksgiving for the mercies and salvation which are given us in Jesus Christ. O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious: be∣cause his mercy endureth forever. 2 Let Israel now confesse that he is gracious: and that his mercy endureth for ever. 3 Let the house of Aaron now confesse: that his mer∣cy endureth for ever. 4 Yea, let them now that fear the Lords confesse: that his mercy endureth for ever. 5 I called upon the Lord in trouble: and the Lord heard me at large. 6 The Lord is on my side: I will not fear what man doth unto me. 7 The Lord taketh my part with them that help me: therefore shall I see my desire upon mine enemies. 8 It is better to trust in the Lord: then to put any con∣fidence in man. 9 It is better to trust in the Lord: then to put any con∣fidence in Princes. 10 All nations compassed me round about: but in the name of the Lord will I destroy them. 11 They kept me in on every side, they kept me in (I say) on every side: but in the name of the Lord will I de∣stroy them. 12 They came about me like bees, and are extinct even as the fire among the thorns: for in the name of the Lord will I destroy them.
Thou hast thrust sore at me, that I might fall: but the Lord was my help. 14 The Lord is my strength and my song: and is be∣come my salvation. 15 The voyce of joy and health is in the dwellings of the righteous: the right hand of the Lord bringeth mighty things to passe. 16 The right hand of the Lord hath the preeminence: the right hand of the Lord bringeth mighty things to passe. 17 I will not die, but live: and declare the works of the Lord. 18 The Lord hath chastened and corrected me: but he hath not given me over unto death. 19 Open me the gates of righteousnesse: that I may goe into them, and give thnks unto the Lord. 20 This is the gae of the Lord: the righteous shall enter into it. 21 I will thank thee for thou hast heard me: and art become my salvation. 22 The same stone which the builders refused: is be∣come the head stone in the corner. 23 This is the Lords doing: and it is marvellous in our eyes. 24 This is the day which the Lord hath made: we will rejoyce and be glad in it. 25 Help me now, O Lord: O Lord send us now pro∣sperity. 26 Blessed be he that commeth in the name of the Lord: we have wished you good luck, ye that be of the house of the Lord. 27 God is the Lord which hath shewed us light: binde the sacrifice with cords, yea, even unto the horns of the altar. 28 Thou art my God, and I will thank thee: thou art my God, and I will praise thee. 29 O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious: and his mercy endureth for ever.
The Prayer. O Most gracious Lord, our strength and our song, thou art become our salvation, and thy mercy endureth for ever, be thou on our side, take part with them that help us, let the voyce of joy and health be within our dwel∣lings, and when thou chastenest and correctest us for our sins, give us not over unto death, but fix our faith and hopes upon the head stone in the corner, even our Lord Jesus Christ, that in all the assaults made against us by our ghostly enemies, the right hand of the Lord may have the preeminence, and bring mighty things to passe, even victory and deliverance unto thy servants, that we putting no confidence in the best of men, may trust in thee, O Lord, till at last, when thou openest the everlasting gates of righteousnesse, we may enter in and give thee thanks and praise, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Evening Prayer. PSALME 119. A Prayer for Religion, zeale, love of the law of God, and meditation in it. BLssed are those that are undefiled in the way: and walk in the Law of the Lord. 2 Blessed are they that keep his testimonies: and seek him with their whole heart. 3 For they which do no wickednesse: walk in his ways.
4 Thou hast charged: that we shall diligently keep thy commandements. 5 O that my ways were made so direct: that I might keep thy statutes! 6 So shall I not be confounded: while I have respect unto all thy commandements. 7 I will thank thee with an unfeigned heart: when I shall have learned the judgements of thy righteousnesse. 8 I will keep thy ceremonies: O forsake me not ut∣terly. The Prayer. O Blessed Lord God, whose words are light and life to the obedient and beleeving soul, let thy grace so purifie our hearts and actions, that we may be undefiled in thy way, keeping thy testimonies and seeking thee with our whole heart; that our ways being made direct without wandring into by-paths, we may go into our country, the land of eternall and glorious promises, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. II. WHerewithall shall a young man cleanse his way: even by ruling himself after thy word. 2 With my whole heart have I sought thee: O let me not go wrong out of thy commandements. 3 Thy words have I hid within my heart: that I should not sin against thee. 4 Blessed art thou, O Lord: O teach me thy statutes. 5 With my lips have I been telling: of all the judge∣ments of thy mouth. 6 I have had as great delight in the way of thy testimo∣nies: as in all manner of riches.
7 I will talk of thy commandements: and have respect to thy ways. 8 My delight shall be in thy statutes: and I will not forget thy word. The Prayer. GRant, O Lord, that our affections and en∣deavours be not divided between thee and the world, but that we may seek thee with our whole heart, cleansing our ways from all impurity, giving to thy service our youth, and more perfect age, even all our days, and all our powers, taking more delight in the way of thy testimonies then in all manner of riches and fading pleasures; that we delighting in thee, and the ways that lead to thee, may be beloved of thee with an eternall love, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. III. O Doe well unto thy servant that I may live: and keep thy word. 2 Open thou mine eyes: that I may see the wondrous things of thy law. 3 I am a stranger upon earth: O hide not thy comman∣dements from me. 4 My soul breaketh out for the very fervent desire: that it hath alway unto thy judgements. 5 Thou hast rebuked the proud: and cursed are they that do erre from thy commandements. 6 O turn from me shame and rebuke: for I have kept thy testimonies. 7 Pinces did also sit and speak against me: but thy ser∣ant is occupied in thy statutes.
8 For thy testimonies are my delight: and my coun∣sellers. The Prayer. O Lord God, our Father and our Guardian, we are strangers upon the earth, farre re∣moved from our country, and we are in dark∣nesse and walk in the shadow of death, let not this darknesse seize upon our souls, hide not thy commandements from us, but open our eyes with the light of thy holy Spirit, that we may see the wondrous things of thy law, and admire thy glories, and adore thy might, and obey all thy righteous precepts: and although our hearts be already enkindled with the love of thy law, yet make our desires to serve thee more fervent, that our lukewarmnesse may arise up to the flames and ardors of a Cheru∣bim, that while we are busied in thy statutes, making them our delight and our counsellors, shame and rebuke may always be turned from us, and we ever rejoyce with hope and confi∣dence in thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. IV. MY soul cleaveth to the dust: O quicken thou me ac∣cording to thy word. 2 I have knowledged my ways, and thou heardest me: O teach me thy statutes. 3 Make me to understand the way of thy command∣ments: and so shall I talk of thy wondrous works. 4 My soul melteth away for very heavinesse: comfort thou me according unto thy word.
5 Take from me the way of lying: and cause thou me to make much of thy law. 6 I have chosen the way of truth: and thy judgements have I laid before me. 7 I have sticken unto thy testimonies: O Lord con∣found me not. 8 I will run the way of thy commandements: when thou hast set my heart at liberty. The Prayer. WE have chosen the way of thy truth, O Lord, and laid thy judgements be∣fore us, and yet through our infirmities, and the disadvantages of the flesh, we are in heavi∣nesse, and drive on slowly like Pharaoh's cha∣riots with the wheels off; our souls and our de∣sires cleave unto the dust, and to things below, and we are not active in thy services: O quick∣en us according to thy word, refresh our wea∣rinesse, comfort our sadnesse, take from us the way of lying and vanity, set our hearts at li∣berty from the bondage of sin, from the fetters of temptation, form the incumbrances of the world, and then we shall run the way of thy ommandments, never ceasing to run till we arrive at the land of eternall rest and righte∣ousnesse, where thou livest and reignest, world without end. Amen.
Morning Prayer. V. TEach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes: and I shall keep it unto the end. 2 Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy Law: yea, I shall keep it with my whole heart. 3 Make me to go in the path of thy commandements: for therein is my desire. 4 Encline my heart unto thy testimonies: and not to covetousnesse. 5 O turn away mine eyes, lest they behold vanity: and quicken thou me in thy way. 6 O stablish thy word in thy servant: that I may feare thee. 7 Take away the rebuke that I am afraid of: for thy judgements are good. 8 Behold, my delight is in thy commandements: O quicken me in thy righteousnesse. The Prayer. O Lord God, who art of infinite Sanctity, and hast given us thy Law, that we walk∣ing in so divine a rule, may imitate the per∣fection of thy holinesse, make us to go all our days in the path of thy Commandements: take from us all greedy and inordinate appe∣tite of the creature, let not our hearts be in∣clid to covetousnesse, nor our eyes wander after vanity, but grant, that we being establi∣sed in thy Law, and walking in thy fear, may
persevere in the ways of righteousnesse, keep∣ing the way of thy Statutes even unto the end▪ that the rebuke which for our sins we may just∣ly fear, may by thy mercies and pardon be ta∣ken away from us, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. VI. LEt thy loving mercy also come unto me, O Lord▪ even thy salvation, according unto thy word. 2 So shall I make answer unto my blasphemers: for my trust is in thy word. 3 O take not the word of thy truth utterly out of m mouth: for my hope is in thy judgements. 4 So shall I alway keep thy law: yea, for ever and ever. 5 And I will walk at liberty: for I seek thy command∣ments. 6 I will speak of thy testimonies also, even before kings: and will not be ashamed. 7 And my delight shall be in thy commandments: which I have loved. 8 My hands also will I lift up unto thy commandments▪ which I have loved: and my study shall be in thy Statute. The Prayer. LEt thy loving mercy come unto us, O Lord, and thy salvation, for thou always keepest promise, and never disappointest the hopes of them that trust in thee. Give us confidence and boldnesse in thee, that we may never fear or blush to confesse thee before men, but may speak of thy testimonies even before Kings, and
may never be ashamed of thy Word, which is the ground of our hope, but that our hands may be lift up to perform thy Law, and our study, our love, and our delight may be in it, even for ever and ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. VII. O Think upon thy servant, as concerning thy word: wherein thou hast caused me to put my trust. 2 The same is my comfort in my trouble: for thy word hath quickned me. 3 The proud have had me exceedingly in derision: yet have I not shrinked from thy law. 4 For I remembred thine everlasting judgements, O Lord: and received comfort. 5 I am horribly afraid: for the ungodly that forsake thy law. 6 Thy Statutes have been my songs: in the house of my pilgrimage. 7 I have thought upon thy name, O Lord, in the night season: and have kept thy law. 8 This I had: because I kept thy commandments. The Prayer. THink upon us, O Lord, in all our desires, in all our fears, in all our troubles; let thy Law give us comfort, redresse, and satisfaction; that in our trouble we may thence derive com∣fort, in our fears we may there fix our anchor of hope, and from thence we may get defence against the derisions and insolencies of the proud; and grant that thy grace may reward thy grace in us, and a further degree of sanctity
may crown the first beginnings; and when by thy assistances we think upon thy Name, and keep thy Law, we begge this onely, that our reward may be still to keep thy Command∣ments. Grant this for Jesus Christ his sake, our Lord and onely Saviour. Amen. VIII. THou art my portion, O Lord: I have promised to keep thy law. 2 I made my humble petition in thy presence with my whole heart: O be mercifull unto me according to thy word. 3 I called mine own ways to remembrance: and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. 4 I made haste, and prolonged not the time: to keep thy commandements. 5 The congregation of the ungodly have robbed me: but I have not forgotten thy law. 6 At midnight I will rise to give thanks unto thee: because of thy righteous judgements. 7 I am a companion of all them that fear thee: and keep thy commandements. 8 The earth, O Lord, is full of thy mercy: O teach me thy Statutes. The Prayer. O Dear God, be thou our portion and the lot of our inheritance, and be mercifull unto us when ever we make our humble peti∣tion in thy presence, and above all the desires of our souls let us receive satisfaction in this re∣quest: give us repentance and thy holy Spirit, that we calling our own ways to remem∣brance,
may be truly sorrowfull for our past sins, and may make haste, prolonging not the time, but early and instantly turn our feet unto thy testimonies, that we being companions of all that fear thee, may be partakers of all the blessings in the communion of Saints, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. IX. O Lord, thou hast dealt graciously with thy servant: according unto thy word. 2 O learn me true understanding and knowledge: for I have beleeved thy commandements. 3 Before I was troubled, I went wrong: but now have I kept thy word. 4 Thou art good and gracious: O teach me thy statutes. 5 The proud have imagined a lie against me: but I will keep thy commandements with my whole heart. 6 Their heart is as fat as brawn: but my delight hath been in thy law. 7 It is good for me that I have been in trouble: that I may learn thy Statutes. 8 The law of thy mouth is dearer unto me: then thou∣sands of gold and silver. The Prayer. THou, O Lord, art gracious even in the exe∣cution of thy judgements and displeasure against sinners, & thou sendest chastisement and correction to us when we go wrong, that thou mayest chide us into obedience, and the bles∣sings of eternity: let not idlenesse and sensua∣lity make us remisse in our duty, nor our own vanity and the sense of thy favour make us
proud, nor the want of holy discipline make us impudent and refractory, but let thy mer∣cies and judgements learn us thy statutes, and make them dearer to us then thousands of gold and silver, that while we make thy sta∣tutes to be our treasure, our heart may be fix∣ed on them in a continuall meditation, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Evening Prayer. X. THy hands have made me and fashioned me: O give me understanding, that I may learn thy com∣mandments. 2 They that fear thee will be glad when they see me: because I have put my trust in thy word. 3 I know (O Lord) that thy judgements are right: and that thou of very faithfulnesse hast caused me to be trou∣bled. 4 O let thy mercifull kindnesse be my comfort: accor∣ding to thy word unto thy servant. 5 O let thy loving mercies come unto me, that I may live: for thy law is my delight. 6 Let the proud be confounded, for they go wickedly about to destroy me: but I will be occupied in thy com∣mandments. 7 Let such as fear thee, and have known thy testimo∣nies: be turned unto me. 8 O let my heart be sound in thy statutes: that I be not ashamed.
The Prayer. O Lord our Maker, thy hands have made us and fashioned us, let thy holy Spirit rege∣nerate us, and thy grace form us anew, that the old man being destroyed, the new man may be produced in righteousnes and sanctity; that our hearts may be sound in thy statutes without hypocrisy, and inordinate ends, full of candor & ingenuity; that thy loving mercies comming unto us in a full stream, we may live in them, and be turned unto thee, never to be removed from thy law and love. Grant this for the love of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. XI. MY soule hath longed for thy salvation: and I have a good hope because of thy word. 2 Mine eyes long sore for thy word: saying, O when wilt thou comfort me? 3 For I am become like a bottle in the smoke: yet do I not forget thy statutes. 4 How many are the dayes of thy servant: when wilt thou be avenged of them that persecute me? 5 The proud have digged pits for me: which are not after thy law. 6 All thy commandments are true: they persecute me falsly, O be thou may help. 7 They had almost made an end of me upon earth: but I forsook not thy commandments. 8 O quicken me after thy loving kindnesse: and so shall I keep the testimonies of thy mouth. The Prayer. O Lord our helper, teach us to remember our end, to consider our years that are past,
that we in consideration how few the days of thy servants are which are yet to come, may quicken our industry and affections to thy law, that by a double and more active endeavour in the ways of thy Commandments, we may re∣deem the time, and by thy mercy being delive∣red from all them that trouble and persecute us, we may be refreshed in thy eternall com∣forts, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. XII. O Lord, thy word endureth for ever in heaven. 2 Thy truth also remaineth from one generation to another: thou hast laid the foundation of the earth, and it abideth. 3 They continue this day according to thine ordinance: for all things serve thee. 4 If my delight had not been in thy law: I should have perished in my trouble. 5 I will never forget thy commandments: for with them thou hast quickned me. 6 I am thine, oh save me: for I have sought thy com∣mandments. 7 The ungodly laid wait for me, to destroy me: but I will consider thy testimonies. 8 I see that all things come to an end: but thy com∣mandment is exceeding broad. The Prayer. O Lord our Guide, thou hast laid the Foun∣dation of the earth sure, and it abideth, but thy Word endureth for ever in Heaven, & though Heaven and earth shall passe away, yet one title of thy Word shal never passe in vain & unaccomplished; teach us to obey thee with
a regular obedience, that since all the creatures continue according to thine ordinance & serve thee, we only may not disobey thee and disturb the order of Creation by a rebellion of crea∣tures against their Maker, lest thy wrath arise upon us, and we perish in our trouble. Have mercy upon us, and deliver us from thy wrath, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. XIII. LOrd, what love have I unto thy Law: all the day long is my study in it. 2 Thou through thy commandements hast made m wiser then mine enemies: for they are ever with me. 3 I have more understanding then my teachers: for thy estimonies are my study. 4 I am wiser then the aged: because I keep thy com∣mandments. 5 I have refrained my feet from every evil way: that I may keep thy word. 6 I have not shrunk from thy judgements: for thou teachest me. 7 O how sweet are thy words unto my throat: yea sweeter then hony unto my mouth. 8 Through thy commandments I get understanding: herefore I hate all wicked ways. The Prayer. O Lord our Governor, who art the Fountain of all wisdom and understanding, and hast commanded that all that lack wisdome should ask it of thee who givest liberally; make us wise & understanding in the observation of thy Cō∣mandments, that we may refrain our feet from every evil way, & never shrink from thy judge∣ments,
but may delight and study in all the ex∣presses of thy will which thou hast revealed to us by our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. Morning Prayer. XIV. THy word is a lantern unto my feet: and a light unto my paths. 2 I have sworn, and am stedfastly purposed: to keep thy righteous judgements. 3 I am troubled above measure: quicken me (O Lord) according to thy word. 5 Let the free-will offerings of my mouth please thee, O Lord: and teach me thy judgements. 5 My soul is alway in my hand: yet do I not forget thy law. 6 The ungodly have laid a snare for me: but yet I swer∣ved not from thy commandments. 7 Thy testimonies have I claimed as mine heritage for ever: and why? they are the very joy of my heart. 8 I have applied my heart to fulfill thy statutes alway: even unto the end. The Prayer. O Sunne of righteousnesse, that camest to bring light unto the world by thy word, & example, and illumination of thy holy Spirit; let thy Spirit lead us, thy example guide us, thy word teach us, that we may not love darkness more then light, but may keep thy righteous judgments according to our many purposes & our vow of baptisme: keep us from the snare of the ungodly, and from our own selves, the dangers of our own concupiscence, and th mi∣series of our infirmity; leave not our souls in
our own hands, but keep them under thy pro∣tection and government, lest we swerve from thy commandments, but that applying our hearts alway to fulfil thy statutes even unto the end, we may possesse thy law as our portion & inheritance for ever. Grant this, O blessed Jesu, for thy promise and for thy mercies sake, that we may glorifie thee in the unity of the most mysterious Trinity now and for evermore. A∣men. XV. I Hate them that imagine evil things: but thy law do I love. 2 Thou art my defence and shield: and my trust is in hy word. 3 Away from me ye wicked: I will keep the command∣ments of my God. 4 O stablish me according unto thy word, that I may live: and let me not be disappointed of my hope. 5 Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe: yea, my delight shall be ever in thy statutes. 6 Thou hast trodden down all them that depart from thy statutes: for they imagine but deceit. 7 Thou puttest away all the ungodly of the earth like drosse: therefore I love thy testimonies. 8 My flesh trembleth for fear of thee: and I am afraid of thy judgements. The Prayer. O God our defence & shield, thou that trea∣dest down all them that depart from thy law, and puttest away the ungodly of the earth like drosse, let thy mercies hold us up, that we may be safe from sin and death eternall: make us to hate all evill things, all evil imaginations,
that we being stablished with a trust in thee? and building our expectations▪ upon thy mer∣cies and promises, we may not be disappoin∣ted of our hope, but may live with thee eter∣nally, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. XVI. I Deal with the thing that is lawfull and right: O give me not over unto mine oppressors. 2 Make thou thy servant to delight in that which is good: that the proud do me no wrong. 3 Mine eyes are wasted away with looking for thy health: and for the word of thy righteousnesse. 4 O deal with thy servant according unto thy loving mercy: and teach me thy Statutes. 5 I am thy servant, O grant me understanding: that I may know thy testimonies. 6 It is time for thee, Lord, to lay to thine hand: for they have destroyed thy law. 7 For I love thy commandments: above gold and pre∣cious stone. 8 Therefore hold I straight all thy commandments: and all false wayes I utterly abhorre. The Prayer. O Lord God, thou seest with what miseries & dangers we are encompassd, our ghost∣ly enemies seek to doe us wrong, and to op∣presse our souls; give us not over unto their ma∣lice, but arm us against their pride and insolen∣cy by faith in thy word, by hope of thy mer∣cies, and looking for thy health, and by love unto thy commandments, that so in this world, & in the eternall retribution of the Saints, thou
maist deal with thy servants according to thy loving mercy. Grant this for Jesus Christ his sake our Lord and onely Saviour. Amen. XVII. THy testimonies are wonderfull: therefore doth my soul keep them. 2 When thy word goeth forth: it giveth light and un∣derstanding unto the simple. 3 I opened my mouth and drew in my breath: for my elight was in thy commandments. 4 O look thou upon me, and be mercifull unto me: as hou usest to do unto those that love thy name. 5 Order my steps in thy word: and so shall no wicked∣esse have dominion over. 6 O deliver me from the wrongfull dealings of men: nd so shall I keep thy commandments. 7 Shew the light of thy countenance upon thy servant: and teach me thy statutes. 8 Mine eles gush out with water: because men keep not thy law. The Prayer. O Just and dear God, shew the light of thy countenance upon thy servants, & let this light give unto us understanding in thy law, that our steps being ordered in thy word, thou maist deliver us from the wrongfull dealings of men, and from the malicious enmities of our Ghostly adversaries, that by their temptations, and our own weaknesse, we may never be brought under the dominion of sin and wick∣ednesse, that when thy word goeth forth to call to judgment all people, quick & dead, thou
maist be mercifull unto us, and save us, as thou usest to doe unto those that love thy name. Grant this for the merits and mercies of our dearest Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. XVIII. RIghteous art thou, O Lord: and true is thy judge∣ment. 2 The testimonies that thou hast commanded: are ex∣ceeding righteous and true. 3 My zeal hath even consumed me: because mine ene∣mies have forgotten thy words. 4 Thy word is tried to the uttermost: and thy servant loveth it. 5 I am small, and of no reputation: yet do I not for∣get thy commandements. 6 Thy righteousnesse is an evrlasting righteousnesse: and thy law is the truth. 7 Trouble and heavinesse have taken hold upon mee: yet is my delight in thy commandements. 8 The righteousnesse of thy testimonies is everlasting: O grant me understanding, and I shall live. The Prayer. O Righteous Lord God, whose judgements are true, and thy testimonies exceeding righteous, enkindle our souls with zeal to thy Laws and service, that the continuall remem∣brance of thy Commandements may so ena∣ble our souls, as to give a greatnesse and re∣putation to us in thy estimation, even the greatnesse of humility and obedience, which are more honourable in thy eyes then all the
pomps and vanities of this world. Grant this for his sake, who for our sakes humbled him∣self to the form of a servant, and became obe∣dient to the death of the Crosse, even Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with the Father and the holy Spirit be all honour and glory, now and for ever. Amen. Evening Prayer. XIX. I Call with my whole heart: hear me, O Lord, I will keep thy statutes. 2 Yea, even upon thee doe I call: help me, and I shall keep thy testimo∣nies. 3 Early in the morning doe I cry unto thee: for in thy word is my trust. 4 Mine eyes prevent the night-watches: that I might be occupied in thy words. 5 Hear my voyce (O Lord) according unto thy loving kindnesse: quicken me according as thou art wont. 6 They draw nigh that of malice persecute me: and are farre from thy law. 7 Be thou nigh at hand, O Lord: for all thy com∣mandements are true. 8 As concerning thy testimonies, I have known long since: that thou hast grounded them for ever.
The Prayer. O Lord God of eternall mercy and truth, give us hearts fixed upon thy divine beau∣ties, and an actuall intention in our prayers, that we may call upon thee with our whole hearts, and do thou hear in heaven when we call upon thee: deliver us from all them that of malice draw nigh to persecut and afflict us, be thou also nigh at hand, and nothing can disturb our safety. Make us to seek to thee ear∣ly in the morning; let our eyes and our pray∣ers prevent the night-watches, that we may be safe in our conversation with thee, and our daily approaches to thy Mercy-seat, where thou sittest attended with Cherubims and Se∣raphims, glorious in thy self, incomprehensi∣ble in thy Attributes, and infinitely rejoycing in thy mercies which thou shewest unto us in our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. XX. O Consider mine adversity, and deliver me: for I doe not forget thy law. 2 Avenge thou my cause, and deliver me: quicken me according unto thy word. 3 Health is far from the ungodly: for they regard not thy statutes. 4 Great is thy mercy, O Lord: quicken me as thou art wont. 5 Many there are that trouble me, and persecute me: yet doe I not swerve from thy testimonies.
6 It grieveth me when I see the transgressors: because they keep not thy law. 7 Consider, O Lord, how I love thy commandements: O quicken me according to thy loving kindnesse. 8 Thy word is true from everlasting: all the judge∣ments of thy righteousnesse endure for evermore. The Prayer. O Lord thy mercy is great, thy Word is true from everlasting, and in the truth of thy Word, and in the mercies of thy promises and loving kindnesse thou lovest to be known to the sons of men; O give us thy health and salvation, that our souls being delivered from the heavy pressure of sin, and quickned in thy Word, thou mayest avenge us of all our ghost∣ly enemies, and deliver us in thy righteousness in the day of thy eternall vengeance upon the ungodly, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. XXI. PRinces have persecuted me without a cause: but my heart standeth in aw of thy words. 2 I am as glad of thy word: as one that findeth great spoils. 3 As for lies, I hate and abhorre them: but thy law doe I love. 4 Seven times a day doe I praise thee: because of thy righteous judgements. 5 Great is the peace that they have which love thy law: and they are not offended at it. 6 Lord, I have looked for thy saving health: and done after thy commandements.
7 My soul hath kept thy testimonies: and loved them exceedingly. 8 I have kept thy commandements and testimonies: for all my ways are before thee. The Prayer. ALL our ways (O God) are before thee; let all our ways be directed by thee, & teach us to walk as in thy presence. Make us to hate and abhorre lies and vanity, and give us so much love, and so much zeal of thy Name and honour, that we may make it a businesse to give thee praises with a frequent and daily de∣votion, that we standing in awe of thy Word and holy Laws, and doing after thy Comman∣dements, our expectations may be satisfied with thy saving health, and we may at last en∣joy the peace which they have that love thy Law, even the peace of a good conscience here, and of a blessed eternity hereafter, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. XXII. LEt my complaint come before thee, O Lord: give me understanding according to thy word. 2 Let my supplication come before thee: deliver me according to thy word. 3 My lips shall speak of thy praise: when thou hast taught me thy statutes. 4 Yea, my tongue shall sing of thy word: for all thy commandements are righteous. 5 Let thine hand help me: for I have chosen thy com∣mandements.
6 I have longed for thy saving health, O Lord: and in thy law is my delight. 7 O let my soul live, and it shall praise thee: and thy judgements shall help me. 8 I have gone astray like a sheep that is lost: Oh seek thy servant, for I do not forget thy commandements. The Prayer. O Lord God, we have gone astray from thy Commandments, and been like lost sheep, thou art our Shepheard and our merci∣full Guide; O seek thy servants, let thy hand help us, let thy care and providence reduce us into the way of thy statutes; that we being de∣livered according to thy Word from thy wrath, and from our own corruptions and irre∣gularities, may at last be satisfied with thy sa∣ving health, and our lips may speak of thy praise in the quire of Saints and Angels, sing∣ing glorious Anthems to all eternity, to the honour of thee, O Lord God eternall, who li∣vest and reignest world without end. Amen.
Morning Prayer. PSALME 120. A Prayer to be delivered from false tongues, and cohabitation with wicked persons. WHen I was in trouble, I called upon the Lord: and he heard me. 2 Deliver my soul, O Lord, from ly∣ing lips: and from a deceitfull tongue. 3 What reward shall be given or done unto thee, thou false tongue: even mighty and sharp arrows, with hot burning coals. 4 Wo is me, that I am constrained to dwell with Me∣sech: and to have my habitation among the tents of Cedar. 5 My soul hath long dwelt among them: that be ene∣mies unto peace. 6 I labour for peace, but when I speak unto them thereof: they make them ready to battell. The Prayer. O Lord God, who hearest the prayers of them that call upon thee in their cala∣mities and distresses, have mercy upon us thy servants, who live in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, whereof we our selves make too great a part; we beseech thee so to order the circumstances and opportu∣nities of our life, that we may live in the so∣ciety of holy people, whose example and con∣versation may be a continuall incentive to the
ways of peace and righteousnesse; and deliver us from a necessity of conversing with turbu∣lent spirits, angry, and unpeacefull dispositi∣ons, who upon all occasions make themselves ready to battell. Sanctifie our hearts and lips with a burning coal from thy altar, that our words may be holy and profitable, and keep us from all slander and scandall, and the re∣wards of both, the sharp arrows of thy ven∣geance, the hot burning coals of thy wrath. Grant this for Iesus Christ his sake, our Lord and onely Saviour. Amen. PSALME 121. A Prayer for Gods protection over us. I Will lift up mine eyes unto the hils: from whence com∣meth my help. 2 My help commeth even from the Lord: which hath made heaven and earth. 3 He will not suffer thy foot to be moved: and he that keepeth thee, will not sleep. 4 Behold, he that keepeth Israel: shall neither slumber nor sleep. 5 The Lord himself is thy keeper: the Lord is thy de∣fence upon thy right hand. 6 So that the Sun shall not burn thee by day: neither the moon by night. 7 The Lord shall preserve thee from all evill: yea, it is even he that shall keep thy soul. 8 The Lord shall preserve thy going out, and thy com∣ming in: from this time forth for evermore.
The Prayer. O Lord God our keeper, who dwellest upon the eternall hils from whence commeth all our help, let thy mercies and thy providence watch over us by day and night, that neither the vanities of the one, nor the terrors of the other may disturb our peace or safety. Let not our feet be moved, but be fixed upon the Rock Christ Jesus, and so order our goings, making us to walk in the way of thy Com∣mandments, that thou mayest goe in and out before us, till at last we come into thy presence to dwell with thee for evermore, through Je∣sus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 122. A Prayer for the peace and prosperity of the Church. I Was glad when they said unto me: We will goe into the house of the Lord. 2 Our feet shall stand in thy gates: O Jerusalem. 3 Jerusalem is builded as a city: that is at unity in i selfe. 4 For thither the Tribes goe up, even the Tribes of the Lord: to testifie unto Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the Lord. 5 For there is the seat of judgement: even the seat of the house of David. 6 O pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee▪
7 Peace be within thy wals: and plenteousnesse within thy palaces. 8 For my brethren and companions sakes: I will wish thee prosperity. 9 Yea, because of the house of the Lord our God: I will seek to do thee good. The Prayer. O Blessed Jesu, who didst descend according to thy humane Nature from the house of thy servant David, and hast planted a Church, and defended it with a mighty hand and great assistances be pleased to preserve peace within her wals, and send plenteousnesse within her palaces, that all that love her peace may pro∣sper, and receive the blessings which thou gi∣vest to thy faithfull people in the communion of Saints. Take from her all schismes and divi∣sions, that she may be like a city that is at uni∣ty within it self, strong in faith, abounding in hope, and rich in the treasures of charity, that at last she may be removed to a fellowship of all those joys and felicities which are laid up for the inhabitants of the heavenly Jerusalem which is from above, and is the mother of us all. Grant this, O blessed Jesu, our only Me∣diatour and Redeemer. Amen.
PSALME 123. An ejaculation, or a lifting up our souls to God for help in trouble. VNto thee lift I up mine eyes: O thou that dwellest in the heavens. 2 Behold, even as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistresse: even so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, untill he have mercy upon us. 3 Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us: for we are utterly despised. 4 Our soul is filled with the scornfull reproofe of the wealthy: and with the despite fulnesse of the proud. The Prayer. O Lord God, that dwellest in the heavens, have mercy upon us in all our troubles, in contempt, in our poverty, and when ever we are oppressed by any injurious practices of the proud. Thou art our Lord and Master, we are thy servants, our eyes wait upon thee till thou have mercy upon us: let us not be ashamed of our hope, nor unfaithfull in our services, nor distrustfull of thy providence, but make us dili∣gent labourers in our calling, good husbands of our talents, and faithfull in all thy house, that we first seing thee may at last sit down at meat with thee at thy table in thy Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
PSALME 124. A thanksgiving for our deliverance from the power of all our enemies, and a confessing God to be the Author of it. IF the Lord himself had not been on our side (now may Israel say:) if the Lord himself had not been on our side when men rose up against us. 2 They had swallowed us up quick: when they were so wrathfully displeased at us. 3 Yea, the waters had drowned us: and the stream had gone over our soul. 4 The deep waters of the proud: had gone even over our soul. 5 But praised e the Lord: which hath not given us over for a prey unto their teeth. 6 Our soul is escaped, even as a bird out of the snare of the fowler: the snare is broken, and we are delivered. 7 Our help standeth in the Name of the Lord: which hath made heaven and earth. The Prayer. O Lord God, which hast made Heaven and Earth, in whose Name our help standeth, we praise and blesse thy Name, that in our troubles and temptations thou hast stood on our side, and pleaded for us against them that rose against us. It was thy hand (O Lord) and the help of thy mercy that relieved us: the waters of affliction had drowned us, and the stream had gone over our soul, if the Spirit of the Lord had not moved upon the waters: Thou (O Lord) didst blast the designs of our
enemies with the breath of thy displeasure, and to thee (O Lord) we ascribe the praise and honour of our redemption. Perpetuate thy mercies to us, let us never be given over as a prey to our ghostly enemies, but break their snares, discover and weaken all their tempta∣tions by which they would destroy our souls, that we being delivered from sin, may be pre∣served from thy wrath, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 125. A Prayer for confidence in God, and for delive∣rance from the portion of the wicked. THey that put their trust in the Lord, shall be even as the mount Sion: which may not be removed, but stan∣deth fast for ever. 2 The hils stand about Jerusalem: ven so standeth the Lord round about his people, from this time forth for evermore. 3 For the rod of the ungodly commeth not into the lot of the righteous: lest the righteous put their hand un∣to wickednesse. 4 Doe well, O Lord: unto those that be good and true of heart. 5 As for such as turn back unto their own wickednesse: the Lord shall lead them forth with the evill doers, but peace shall be upon Israel. The Prayer. O Lord God, our Trust and Confidence, in whom whosoever trusteth shall never be
removed, but standeth fast for ever: let thy mercies and the guard of holy Angels stand round about us, and about all thy holy people, like the hils for our defence and safety, that we may be inaccessible by all the intendments of our enemies. O let us not put our hands to wickednesse, neither let our portion be in the lot of the ungodly, whom thou leadest forth to destruction, but let us receive the blessing which our Lord Iesus left unto his Church, even the peace of God the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost; to whom be all honour and glory ascribed of men and Angels, now and for ever. Amen. Evening Prayer. PSALME 126. A contemplation of the joys and blessings of them that depart hence in the Lord. WHen the Lord turned again the captivi∣ty of Sion: then were we like to them that dream. 2 Then was our mouth filled with laughter: and our tongue with joy. 3 Then said they among the heathen: The Lord hath done great things for them. 4 Yea, the Lord had done great things for us already: whereof we rejoyce. 5 Turn thou our captivity, O Lord: as the rivers in the south.
6 They that sow in tears: shall reap in joy. 7 He that now goeth on his way weeping, and bea∣reth forth good seed: shall doubtlesse come again with joy, and bring his sheaves with him. The Prayer. O Lord God, who hast promised salvation to thy people, and hast done great things for us already, deliver us from the captivity and bondage of sinne and misery. Fill our hearts with holy sorrow and compunction when ever we trespasse against thee, and teach us so to deny our selves, to mortifie our affections, to crucifie our lusts and all the temptations of the flesh, that we going on our way with mourning and weeping, despising the plea∣sures of this life, may when thy great harvest shall come, and thy reapers the Angels shall separate the wheat from the tares, come be∣fore thee with joy, and bring our sheaves with us to be laid up in thy granary, that so we may escape the everlasting burning, through the mercies of Jesus Christ. Amen. PSALME 127. A Prayer for Gods blessing to goe along with the temporall good things he gives us. EXcept the Lord build the house: their labour is but lost that build it. 2 Except the Lord keep the city: the watchman wa∣keth but in vain.
3 It is but lost labour that ye haste to rise up early, and so late take rest, and eat the bread of carefulnesse: for so he giveth his beloved sleep. 4 Lo, children and the fruit of the womb: are an he∣ritage and gift that commeth of the Lord. 5 Like as the arrows in the hand of the giant: even so are the young children. 6 Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of them: they shall not be ashamed when they speak with their ene∣mies in the gate. The Prayer. O Lord God, without whose blessing all our labours are vain and unprofitable, and our possessions are but bitter and unpleasant: let thy blessing be upon our labours and our sub∣stance, our children, and our dwelling, that the good things of this life may be an heritage and gift from thee, issues of thy favour, and an ear∣nest of a greater blessing: make our souls di∣ligent in thy service, not importunate and greedy for the encrease of riches: let our dwel∣lings be safe and peaceable, and our families increase in thy blessings, that we feeling the comforts of thy favour here, may be stirred up to great desires after the blessings of eternity, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
PSALME 128. A Prayer for the fear of God, and the blessings of the godly. BLessed are all they that fear the Lord: and walk in his ways. 2 For thou shalt eat the labours of thine hands: O well is thee, and happy shalt thou be. 3 Thy wife shall be as the fruitfull vine: upon the wals of thine house. 4 Thy children like the olive-branches: round about thy table. 5 Lo, thus shall the man be blessed: that feareth the Lord. 6 The Lord from out of Sion shall so blesse thee: that thou shall  Jerusalem in prosperity all thy life long. 7 Yea, tht thou shalt see thy childrens children: and peace upon Israel. The Prayer. O Lord God, who hast promised to multiply thy blessings upon them that fear thee; teach us the fear of the Lord, and let thy Spirit so assist us, that we may walk in thy ways with great observation of all our actions, and much diligence to perform thy holy will, that we may receive the blessings of the righteous, blessings of the right hand, and of the left hand, and may rejoyce in the blessing and peace of thy Church, waiting for the con∣summation of all blessing and peace in thy eternall Kingdome, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
PSALME 129. A Prayer against the enemies of the Church. MAny a time have they fought against me from my youth up: (may Israel now say.) 2 Ye, many a time have they vexed mee from my youth up: but they have not prevailed against me. 3 The plowers plowed upon my back: and made long furrows. 4 But the righteous Lord: hath hewen the snares of the ungodly in pieces. 5 Let them be confounded and turned backward: as many as have evill will at Sion. 6 Let them be even as the grasse growing upon the house tops: which withereth afore it be plucked up. 7 Whereof the mower filleth not his hand: neither he that bindeth up the sheaves, his bosome. 8 So that they which goe by, say not so much as the Lord prosper you: we wish you good luck in the name of the Lord. The Prayer. O Most blessed Iesu, who for our sins didst suffer the plowers to plow upon thy back, and make long furrows, suffering shame and whipping for our sakes, and all the contra∣dictions of sinners, and didst leave sorrows and afflictions intailed upon thy Church, that by suffering with thee, she might at last reign with thee in glory: Deliver us and all thy holy Church, from all that fight against us; hew the snares of the ungodly in pieces, let the designes of them that have evill will at
thy Church, be like the grasse growing upon the house tops, withered and blasted before it comes to maturity; and make us to prosper under thy mercies, and in the good wishes and devout prayers of holy people, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 130. A penitentiall Psalme, or a prayer for pardon and redemption from sins. OUt of the deep have I called unto thee (O Lord:) Lord hear my voice. 2 Oh let thine eares consider well: the voice of my complaint. 3 If thou Lord wilt be extream to mark what is done amisse: O Lord, who may abide it? 4 For there is mercy with thee: therefore shalt thou be feared. 5 I look for the Lord, my soul doth wait for him: in his word is my trust. 6 My soul fleeth unto the Lord: before the morning watch, I say, before the morning watch. 7 O Israel trust in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy: and with him is plenteous redemption. 8 And he shall redeem Israel: from all his sins. The Prayer. O Lord God, blessed Iesu, with whom is mer∣cy and plenteous redemption, who didst redeem thy people from all their sins, paying the ransome of thine own bloud to purchase us freedome and salvation: let the height
of thy mercy take us up from the deep abysse of sin and misery. O be not extream to mark what we have done amisse, for it is impossible we should abide the extreamity of thy severest judgements: and as thy mercy pardons what is past, so let the sweetness of it beget thy fear in our hearts, that we may not dare to offend so gracious, so mercifull a God, but that trusting in thy Word, and flying unto thee for succour, we may wait for thee till our change commeth, looking for thee in holi∣ness and righteousness all our days. Grant this for thy mercies and compassion sake, O blessed Jesu, our onely Saviour and Redeemer. Amen. PSALME 131. A Prayer for the graces of humility and mortifi∣cation. LOrd, I am not high minded: I have no proud looks. 2 I doe not exercise my selfe in great matters: which are too high for me. 3 But I refrain my soul, and keep it low, like as a childe that is weaned from his mother: yea, my soul is even as a weaned childe. 4 O Israel trust in the Lord: from this time forth for evermore. The Prayer. O Lord God, before whom the humble Pub∣lican (who durst not lift up his eyes to
Heaven, but with confusion of face begged pardon) was justified and acquitted: give un∣to us thy servants humility of soul, and modesty in our behaviour, that our looks be not proud, nor our thoughts arrogant, nor our designes ambitious: but that our souls being refrained from all vanity and pride, our affections wea∣ned from great opinions and love of our selves, we may trust in thee, follow the exam∣ple of our blessed Master, and receive thy pro∣mises which thou hast made unto us, in our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. Morning Prayer. PSALME 132. A Prayer for the Church, for the promotion of Religion, for the King, and for the Clergy. LOrd remember David: and all his trouble. 2 How he sware unto the Lord: and vowed a vow unto the Almighty God of Jacob. 3 I will not come within the tabernacle of my house: nor climb up into my bed. 4 I will not suffer mine eyes to sleep, nor mine eye∣lids to slumber: neither the temples of my head to take any rst, 5 Untill I finde out a place for the temple of the Lord: an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob. 6 Lo, we heard of the same at Ephrata: and found it in the wood,
7 We will goe into his tabernacle: and fall low on our knees before his foot-stool. 8 Arise, O Lord, into thy resting place: thou and the ark of thy strength. 9 Let thy Priests be clothed with righteousnesse: and let thy saints sing with joyfulnesse. 10 For thy servant Davids sake: turn not away the presence of thine anointed. 11 The Lord hath made a faithfull oath unto David: and he shall not shrink from it. 12 Of the fruit of thy body: shall I set upon thy seat. 13 If thy children will keep my covenant and my testi∣monies that I shall learn them: their children also shall sit upon thy seat for evermore. 14 For the Lord hath chosen Sion to be an habitation for himself: he hath longed for her. 15 This shall be my rest for ever: here will I dwell, for I have a delight therein. 16 I will blesse her victuals with increase: and will sa∣tisfie her poor with bread. 17 I will deck her Priests with health: and her saints shall rejoyce and sing. 18 There shall I make the horn of David to flourish: I have ordained a lantern for mine anointed. 19 As for his enemies, I shall clothe them with shame: but upon himself shall his crown flourish. The Prayer. O Lord God, who dwellest not in Temples made with hands, and yet hast been pleased to manifest thy presence by speciall blessings and assistances, in places set apart for thy wor∣ship, be pleased to hear our prayers, and accept our services when ever we make our addresses to thee in the house of prayer, and fall down
low on our knees before thy footstool: let thy Priests be clothed with righteousness, and let thy Saints sing with joyfulness, and let all those that make their approaches unto thee purifie their hearts and hands, that they may offer to thee a pure sacrifice, even the sacrifice of obedience and holinesse, and the expresses of true Religion. Blesse (O Lord) thy servant the King, whom thou hast made the Patron and Defender of the Church, make his horn to flourish and be exalted above all his enemies, and let thy Word be as a lantern for thine A∣nointed, to shew him thy holy will and plea∣sure, that he seeking thy honour and glory, thy Church may flourish under the covert of his shield and patronage, her victuals may be blessed with increase, her poor satisfied with bread, her Priests decked with health, her Saints with joy, and himself with honour and great renown, and a flourishing diademe, while his enemies sit clothed in shame and misery. Grant this, O blessed God, for Jesus Christ his sake, our Lord and onely Saviour. Amen. PSALME 133. A Prayer for unity in the Church, in a Kingdom, or family. BEhold how good and joyfull a thing it is: brethen to dwell together in unity.
2 It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down unto the beard: even unto Aarons beard, and went down to the skirts of his clothing. 3 Like as the dew of Hermon: which fell upon the hill of Sion. 4 For there the Lord promised his blessing: and life for evermore. The Prayer. O Blessed Jesu, in whose garment was vari∣ety but no rent or seam, have mercy up∣on thy holy Catholike Church, and all Christi∣an Kingdomes and Families; and so unite all our hearts and affections by the union of Faith and Charity, that we be not torn into Factions and Schisms, but being anointed with the pre∣cious ointment, even the anointing of thy Spi∣rit from above, we may keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace; and grant that this holy ointment may so knit together the Guides of thy Church, the Rulers of Kingdomes, the Princes of the Nations, that the blessings of it may descend to the skirts of the people, and that thou mayest blesse us with thy graces here and hereafter, give us life for evermore in the participation of thy glorious Kingdom, where thou livest and reignest ever one God, world without end. Amen.
PSALME 134. An invitation to the Clergy to be diligent in singing Gods praises publikely. BEhold (now) praise the Lord: all ye servants of the Lord. 2 Ye that by night stand in the house of the Lord: even in the courts of the house of our God. 3 Lift up your hands in the sanctuary: and praise the Lord. 4 The Lord that made heaven and earth: give thee blessing out of Sion. The Prayer. O Lord, Creatour and Governour of all the world, thou that madest Heaven and Earth, that all should celebrate thy praise and the glory of thy Name, give great Religion and devout affections to thy Ministers, that by frequent elevation of their hands and hearts in thy Sanctuary, in behalf of them∣selves and all the people, thy honour may be exalted among all thy servants, Religion may be advanced, and the love of thy Name increased, and thy blessings may descend upon us in a plentifull proportion, to supply all our necessities, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
PSALME 135. A Prayer that God would avenge his People of their Enemies, and an invitation of them to praise his Name. O Praise the Lord, laud ye the Name of the Lord: praise it, O ye servants of the Lord. 2 Ye that stand in the house of the Lord: in the courts of the house of our God. 3 O praise the Lord, for the Lord is gracious: O sing praises unto his name, for it is lovely. 4 For why? the Lord hath chosen Jacob unto himself: and Israel for his own possession. 5 For I know that the Lord is great: and that our Lord is above all gods. 6 Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven and in earth: and in the sea, and in all deep places. 7 He bringeth forth the clouds from the ends of the world: and sendeth forth lightnings with the rain, bring∣ing the windes out of his treasures. 8 He smote the first-born of Egypt: both of man and beast. 9 He hath sent tokens and wonders into the midst of thee, O thou land of Egypt: upon Pharaoh and all his ser∣vants. 10 Hee smote divers Nations: and slew mighty Kings. 11 Sehon king of the Amorites, and Og the king of Basan: and all the kingdomes of Canaan. 12 And gave their land to be an heritage: even an he∣ritage unto Israel his people. 13 Thy Name, O Lord, endureth for ever: so doth thy memoriall, O Lord, from one generation to another. 14 For the Lord will avenge his people: and be graci∣ous unto his servants.
15 As for the images of the heathen, they are but silver and gold: the work of mens hands. 16 They have mouthes and speak not: eyes have they, but they see not. 17 They have eares, and yet they hear not: neither is there any breath in their mouthes. 18 They that make them are like unto them: and so are all they that put their trust in them. 19 Praise the Lord, ye house of Israel: praise the Lord, ye house of Aaron. 20 Praise the Lord, ye house of Levi: ye that fear the Lord, praise the Lord. 21 Praised be the Lord out of Sion: which dwelleth at Jerusalem. The Prayer. O Lord God, in whose sight the death of all the Saints is precious, and to whom the souls of the Martyrs from under the Al∣tar call to avenge their bloud that is shed like water upon the earth; be gracious unto us thy servants, avenge all thy people of their enemies, that all that hate and perse∣cute thy Church, being either brought to re∣pentance or confusion, thy Name and thy memoriall may be celebrated to all genera∣tions, thy Kingdome and thy comming may be hastened, that the Saints may receive the consummation of their glories, by resurre∣ction of their bodies, and receiving the crown of righteousnesse which thou hast prepared for all that put their trust in thee, and that
we all standing in the house of the Lord, even in the courts of the house of our God for ever, may praise thy Name which is gra∣cious and lovely, even for ever and ever. A∣men. Evening Prayer. PSALME 136. A Prayer of thanksgiving to God for his eternall mercies. O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gra∣cious: and his mercy endureth for ever. 2 O give thanks unto the God of all gods: for his mercy endureth for ever. 3 O thank the Lord of all lords: for his mercy endureth for ever. 4 Which onely doth great wonders: for his mercy en∣dureth for ever. 5 Which by his excellent wisdome made the heavens: for his mercy endureth for ever. 6 Which laid out the earth above the waters: for his mercy endureth for ever. 7 Which hath made great lights: for his mercy endu∣reth for ever. 8 The sun to rule the day: for his mercy endureth for ever. 9 The moon and the starres to govern the night: for his mercy endureth for ever. 10 Which smote Egypt with their first-born: for his mercy endureth for ever. 11 And brought out Israel from among them: for his mercy endureth for ever.
12 With a mighty hand and a stretched out arm: for his mercy endureth for ever. 13 Which divided the Red sea in two parts: for his mercy endureth for ever. 14 And made Israel to go through the midst of it: for his mercy endureth for ever. 15 But as for Pharaoh and his host, he overthrew them in the Red sea: for his mercy endureth for ever. 16 Which led his people through the wildernesse: for his mercy endureth for ever. 17 Which smote great kings: for his mercy endureth for ever. 18 Yea, and slew mighty kings: for his mercy endu∣reth for ever. 19 Sehon king of the Amorites: for his mercy endu∣reth for ever. 20 And Og the king of Basan: for his mercy endureth for ever. 21 And gave away their land for an heritage: for his mercy endureth for ever. 22 Even for an heritage unto Israel his servant: for his mercy endureth for ever. 23 Which remembred us when we were in trouble: for his mercy endureth for ever. 24 And hath delivered us from our enemies: for his mercy endureth for ever. 25 Which giveth food to all flesh: for his mercy endu∣reth for ever. 26 O give thanks unto the God of heaven: for his mercy endureth for ever. 27 O give thanks unto the Lord of lords: for his mercy endureth for ever.
The Prayer. O God of Heaven, and Lord of lords, who by thy excellent wisdome hast made the Heavens, and onely dost great wonders in Heaven and Earth, making all thy creatures to be expresses of thy power, and of thy lo∣ving mercy, let thy mighty hand and stretched out arme lead us through the midst of this world, and the throng of all our enemies, gi∣ving us food for the sustenance of our bodies, the light of the sun of righteousness to lead us in our goings, and great apprehensions of thy mercy to excite in us devotion and true Religion, that we praising thy mercies, and be∣ing relieved and sustained by thy loving kind∣nesse, may at last come to the land of promise which thou givest for an heritage to thy peo∣ple, and may receive the mercies of thy King∣dome, which endure for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 137. A Prayer for redemption of the Church from captivity and persecution. BY the waters of Babylon we sat down and wept: when we remembred (thee) O Sion. 2 As for our harps, we hanged them up: upon the trees that are therein. 3 For they that led us away captive, required of us then
a song and melody in our heavinesse: sing us one of the songs of Sion. 4 How shall wee sing the Lords song: in a strange land? 5 If I forget thee, O Jerusalem: let my right hand forget her cunning. 6 If I doe not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth: yea, if I preferre not Jerusalem in my mirth. 7 Remember the children of Edom, O Lord, in the day of Jerusalem: how they said, Down with it, down with it, even to the ground. 8 O daughter of Babylon, wasted with misery: yea, happy shall he be that rewardeth thee as thou hast served us. 9 Blessed shall he be that taketh thy children: and throweth them against the stones. The Prayer. O Lord our God, thou hast placed us in this world like pilgrims and strangers far from our Contrey, far from rest; give us souls and desires so abstract, so religious and con∣templative, that all our hopes, our joys, and longings may be to enjoy thee and thy glo∣ries in the celestiall Jerusalem: and let thy comforts refresh us in this our captivity and exile, that in our heavinesse thou maist be our joy, our songs and melody may be the songs of Sion, the praises of thy Name, that when thou hast delivered us from the wrath and malice of our enemies, and dashed all their wickednesse (which they have conceived and
would bring forth to our destruction) against the Rock Christ Jesus, we may be blessed amongst thy children, and be carried into our Countrey the Land of glorious promises, there to reign with thee, who livest and gover∣nest all things, world without end. Amen. PSALME 138. A Prayer and a thanksgiving for Gods mercies. I Will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, with my whole heart: even before the gods will I sing praise unto thee. 2 I will worship toward thy holy temple, and praise thy name, because of thy loving kindnsse and truth: for thou hast magnified thy name and thy word above all things. 3 When I called upon thee, thou heardest me: and en∣duedst my soul with much strength. 4 All the kings of the earth shall praise thee, O Lord: for they have heard the words of thy mouth. 5 Yea, they shall sing in the ways of the Lord: that great is the glory of the Lord. 6 For though the Lord be high, yet hath he respect un∣to the lowly: as for the proud, he beholdeth them afarre off. 7 Though I walk in the midst of trouble, yet shalt thou refresh me: thou shalt stretch forth thine hand upon the furiousnesse of mine enemies, and thy right hand shall save mee. 8 The Lord shall make good his loving kindnesse to∣ward me: yea, thy mercy, O Lord, endureth for ever, de∣spise not then the works of thine own hands.
The Prayer. O Lord God, who hast magnified thy Name and Word above all things, make good thy loving kindnesses towards us, and endue our souls with much strength, that thine hand being stretched forth upon the furiousness of all our ghostly enemies, and we being sa∣ved by thy right hand, may praise thee, and all thy glories, serving thee here with a low∣ly minde, and a great industry, that at last we may worship thee in thy holy Temple, in the midst of all the Myriads of Angels, where thy glory is great and farre exalted above all gods. Grant this for Jesus Christ his sake our Lord and onely Saviour. Amen. Morning Prayer. PSALME 139. A meditation of the omnipresence of God, and a prayer that we may alwayes walk as in his sight. O Lord, thou hast searched me out, and known mee: thou knowest my down-sitting, and mine up-rising, thou understandest my thoughts long before. 2 Thou art about my path, and about my bed: and spiest out all my ways.
3 For lo, there is not a word in my tongue: but thou, O Lord, knowest it altogether. 4 Thou hast fashioned me behinde and before: and laid thine hand upon me. 5 Such knowledge is too wonderfull and excellent for me: I cannot attain unto it. 6 Whither shall I go then from thy Spirit: or whither shall I go then from thy presence? 7 If I climb up into heaven, thou art there: if I go down to hell, thou art there also. 8 If I take the wings of the morning: and remain in the uttermost parts of the sea, 9 Even there also shall thy hand lead me: and thy right hand shall hold me. 80 If I say, Peradventure the darknesse shall cover me: then shall my night be turned to day. 11 Yea, the darknesse is no darknesse with thee, but the night is as clear as the day: the darknesse and light (to thee) are both alike. 12 For my reins are thine: thou hast covered mee in my mothers womb. 13 I will give thanks unto thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made: marvellous are thy works, and that my soul knoweth right well. 14 My bones are not hid from thee: though I be made secretly, and fashioned beneath in the earth. 15 Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being unper∣fect: and in thy book were all my members written. 16 Which day by day were fashioned: when as yet there was none of them. 17 How dear are thy counsels unto me, O God: O how great is the summe of them! 18 If I tell them, they are mo in number then the sand: when I wake up, I am present with thee. 19 Wilt thou not slay the wicked, O God: depart from me ye blood-thirsty men. 20 For they speak unrighteously against thee: and
thine enemies take thy Name in vain. 21 Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee: and am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee? 22 Yea, I hate them right fore: even as though they were mine enemies. 23 Try me, O God, and seek the ground of my heart: prove me and examine my thoughts. 24 Look well if there be any way of wickednesse in me: and lead me in the way everlasting. The Prayer. O Lord our God, who art infinite in wisdom, and present in all places, filling heaven and earth and hell with the effects of thy mighty power, and communications of thy glorious essence: let thy hand lead us, and thy right hand hold us in all our ways, always considering that thou art present, understan∣ding our thoughts and words, even long be∣fore they are, and seeing our most secret ways as clearly as in the sight of the sun: print thy fear mightily upon our souls, that we may be as fearfull of committing sins in secret, as in the eyes of all the world, that we hating all iniquity, and loving thy counsels as our dea∣rest treasures and guide, may, by the paths of a holy life, be conducted into the way everlasting, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
PSALME 140. A Prayer for deliverance from the mischiefe of all wicked persons. DEliver me, O Lord, from the evil man: and preserve me from the wicked man. 2 Which imagine mischief in their hearts: and stirre up strife all the day long. 3 They have sharpned their tongues like a serpent: ad∣ders poison is under their lips. 4 Keep me, O Lord, from the hands of the ungodly: preserve me from the wicked men, which are purposed to overthrow my goings. 5 The proud have laid a snare for me, and spread a net abroad with cords: yea, and set traps in my way. 6 I said unto the Lord, Thou art my God: hear the voice of my prayers, O Lord. 7 O Lord God, thou strength of my health: thou hast covered my head in the day of battle. 8 Let not the ungodly have his desire, O Lord: let not his mischievous imaginations prosper, lest they bee too proud. 9 Let the mischief of their own lips fall upon the head of them: that compasse me about. 10 Let hot burning coals fall upon them: let them be cast into the fire and into the pit, that they never rise up again. 11 A man full of words shall not prosper upon the earth: evil shall hunt the wicked person to overthrow him. 12 Sure I am that the Lord will avenge the poor: and maintain the cause of the helplesse. 13 The righteous also shall give thanks unto thy name: and the just shall continue in thy sight.
The Prayer. O Lord God, thou strength of our health, thou that avengest the poor, and main∣tainest the cause of the helplesse, deliver us, O Lord, and preserve us from the evil and wicked man, that neither his example may corrupt us, nor his counsels mislead us, nor his prosperity scandalize us, nor his strife disquiet us, nor his mischief disturb our safety; but do thou cover our heads in the day of battell and contestati∣on against all our bodily and ghostly enemies, that although they hunt us to overthrow us, yet we may prosper upon earth under thy fa∣vour and protection, and at last being removed from all fears, and sadnesse, and dangers, may continue in thy sight, amongst the congregati∣on of the just for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 141. A Prayer for the vertue of religion, for holinesse of life, and for deliverance from the snares of our enemies. LOrd, I call upon thee, haste thee unto me: and consi∣der my voyce, when I cry unto thee. 2 Let my prayer be set forth in thy sight, as the incense: and let the lifting up of my hands be an evening sacrifice. 3 Set a watch (O Lord) before my mouth: and keep the door of my lips.
4 O let not mine heart be enclined to any evil thing: let me not be occupied in ungodly works, with the men that work wickednesse, lest I eat of such things as please them. 5 Let the righteous rather smite me friendly: and re∣prove me. 6 But let not their precious balms break mine head: yea, I will pray yet against their wickednesse. 7 Let their Judges be overthrown in stony places: that they may hear my words, for they are sweet. 8 Our bones lie scattered before the pit: like as when one breaketh and heweth wood upon the earth. 9 But mine eyes look unto thee, O Lord God: in thee is my trust, O cast not out my soul. 10 Keep me from the snare which they have laid for me: and from the traps of the wicked doers. 11 Let the ungodly fall into their own nets together: and let me ever escape them. The Prayer. O Lord, our trust and confidence, haste thee unto us, and consider our voyce when we call upon thee in our trouble and necessity; let our prayers ascend up unto thee as incense, and be as the savour of the evening and the morning sacrifice. We begge of thee nothing but grace and power to fulfill thy will; let not our hearts be inclined to any evil: set a watch O Lord, before our mouth, and keep the door of our lips, let us not be busied in ungodly works, that we may never offend in our thoughts, or words, or actions; and when we do amisse, do thou smite us friendly, & reprove
us with the checks of a tender conscience, that thy fatherly correction may like precious balm cure all the wounds made by our own infirmi∣ties: that we escaping all the snares of wick∣ednesse, may for ever hear and obey thy sweet words, and our souls may never be cast out of thy presence, but for ever may rejoyce in our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. Evening Prayer. PSALME 142. A Prayer in all sadnesse, and in the hour of death. I Cried unto the Lord with my voyce: yea, even unto the Lord did I make my supplication. 2 I poured out my complaints before him: and shewed him of my trouble. 3 When my spirit was in heavinesse, thou knewest my path: in the way wherein I walked have they privily laid a snare for me. 4 I looked also upon my right hand: and saw there was no man that would know me. 5 I had no place to flee unto: and no man cared for my soul. 6 I cried unto thee, O Lord, and said: Thou art my hope and my portion in the land of the living. 7 Consider my complaint: for I am brought very low. 8 O deliver me from my persecutors: for they are too strong for me. 9 Bring my soul out of prison, that I may give thanks
unto thy Name: which thing if thou wilt grant me, then shall the righteous resort unto my company. The Prayer. O Lord God, thou art our hope, and our por∣tion in the land of the living, consider our complaint and misery, thou art our place to flee unto, thou onely art our sanctuary; O hide us under the covert of thy wings, keep us from all the dangers which multiply upon us when our spirits are in heavinesse, and our bodies pressed with infirmities: be thou al∣ways at our right hand, and assist us so with the strength of thy grace, that our temptati∣ons, and our enemies not being above our strength deriv'd from thee, our soul may with confidence go forth of prison, and give eter∣nall thanks unto thy Name, in the companies of the Righteous, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 143. A Prayer that God would pardon our sins, and di∣rect us in the way of righteousnesse. HEare my prayer, O Lord, and consider my desire: hearken unto me for thy truth and righteousnesse sake. 2 And enter not into judgement with thy servant: for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. 3 For the enemy hath persecuted my soul, he hath smit∣ten my life down to the ground: he hath laid me in the darknesse, as the men that have been long dead.
4 Therefore is my spirit vexed within me: and my heart within me is desolate. 5 Yet do I remember the time past, I muse upon all thy works: yea, I exercise my selfe in the works of thy hands. 6 I stretch forth my hands unto thee: my soul gaspeth nto thee as a thirsty land. 7 Hear me, O Lord, and that soon, for my spirit wax∣eth faint: hide not thy face from me, lest I be like unto them that go down into the pit. 8 O let me hear thy loving kindnesse betime in the morning, for in thee is my trust: shew thou me the way that I should walk in, for I lift up my soul unto thee. 9 Deliver me, O Lord, from mine enemies: for I flee unto thee to hide me. 10 Teach me to do the thing that pleaseth thee, for thou art my God: let thy loving spirit lead me forth into the land of righteousnesse. 11 Quicken me, O Lord, for thy Names sake: and for thy righteousnesse sake bring my soul out of trouble. 12 And of thy goodnesse slay mine enemies: and de∣stroy all them that vex my soul, for I am thy servant. The Prayer. O Lord our Judge, and our Redeemer, hear∣ken unto us for thy truth and righteous∣nesse sake; deliver us from the guilt of all our sinnes, and those great punishments which are due to us for the same. Enter not into judgement with us, for in thy sight no man can be justified by any worthinesse of his own. Endue our souls with the righteousnesse of a holy faith, living and working by charity. Shew us the way that we should walk in, teach
us to do whatsoever pleaseth thee, quicken our souls in the paths of life, and so continue the conduct of thy Spirit to us, that it may never leave us till we be brought forth of this world, into the land of righteousnesse to dwell with thee eternally, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Morning Prayer. PSALME 144. A thanksgiving for Victory, and a prayer for the blessings of Peace. BLessed be the Lord my strength: which teacheth my hands to war, and my fingers to fight. 2 My hope and my fortresse, my castle and deliverer, my defender, in whom I trust: which subdueth my people that is under me. 3 Lord, what is man that thou hast such respect unto him: or the son of man that thou so regardest him? 4 Man is like a thing of nought: his time passeth away like a shadow. 5 Bow the heavens, O Lord, and come down: touch the mountains, and they shall smoke. 6 Cast forth thy lightning, and tear them: shoot out thine arrows, and consume them. 7 Send down thy hand from above: deliver me and take me out of the great waters, from the hand of strange children. 8 Whose mouth talketh of vanity: and their right hand is a right hand of wickednesse.
9 I will sing a new song unto thee, O God: and sing praises unto thee upon a ten-stringed lute. 10 Thou hast given victory unto kings: and hast dli∣vered David thy servant from the perill of the sword. 11 Save me and deliver me from the hand of strange children: whose mouth talketh of vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of iniquity. 12 That our sons may grow up as the young plants: and that our daughters may be as the polished corners of the Temple. 13 That our garners may be full and plenteous with all manner of store: that our sheep may bring forth thou∣sands, and ten thousands in our streets. 14 That our oxen may be strong to labour, and there be no decay: no leading into captivity, and no complai∣ning in our streets. 15 Happy are the people that be in such a case: yea, blessed are the people which have the Lord for their God. The Prayer. O Lord our strength, our hope and fortresse, our castle and deliverer, our defender in whom we trust; bow the heavens, O Lord, come down and save us, send down thine hand from above, deliver us, and take us from the great waters, from those miseries and afflicti∣ons which come upon us by reason of our sins, from the condition of mortality, and from the hand of strange children, whose right hand is a right hand of wickednesse. Give us, O Lord, victory and peace, and all the blessings of thy peace, with which thou usest to adorn and beautifie the dwellings of the righteous, that
we may be happy in the continuall descent of thy favours, but above all, our happinesse may consist in being thy people, and thou being our God, that we may be blessed for ever in so blessed a relation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 145. A meditation of the glory and Majesty of God, and the mightinesse of his kingdome. I Will magnifie thee, O God, my King: and I will praise thy Name for ever and ever. 2 Every day will I give thanks unto thee: and praise thy name for ever and ever. 3 Great is the Lord, and marvellous worthy to bee praised: there is no end of his greatnesse. 4 One generation shall praise thy works unto another: and declare thy power. 5 As for me, I will be talking of thy worship: thy glo∣ry, thy praise, and wondrous works. 6 So that men shall speak of the might of thy marvellous acts: and I will also tell of thy greatnesse. 7 The memoriall of thine abundant kindnesse shall be shewed: and men shall sing of thy righteousnesse. 8 The Lord is gracious and mercifull: long-suffering, and of great goodnesse. 9 The Lord is loving unto every man: and his mercy is over all his works. 10 All thy works praise thee, O Lord: and thy saints give thanks unto thee. 11 They shew the glory of thy Kingdome: and talk of thy power. 12 That thy power, thy glory, and mightinesse of thy Kingdome: might be known unto men.
13 Thy kingdome is an everlasting kingdome: and thy dominion endureth throughout all ages. 14 The Lord upholdeth all such as fall: and lifteth up all those that be down. 15 The eyes of all wait upon thee, O Lord: and thou givest them their meat in due season. 16 Thou openest thine hand: and fillest all things li∣ving with plenteousnesse. 17 The Lord is righteous in all his ways: and holy in all his works. 18 The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him: yea, all such as call upon him faithfully. 19 He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him: he also will hear their cry, and will help them. 20 The Lord preserveth all them that love him: but scattereth abroad all the ungodly. 21 My mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord: and let all flesh give thanks unto his holy name for ever and ever. The Prayer. O God our King, thou art marvellous worthy to be praised, and there is no end of thy greatnesse; give us enlarged and sanctified hearts, and lips, that we may sing of thy righ∣teousnesse, and magnifie thy glory, thy wor∣ship, and wondrous works. All thy works praise thee, O Lord, and thy saints give thanks unto thee. Make us holy and righteous in thy sight, we are already the works of thine hands, and then, wee have a double title to praise thee. Uphold us, O Lord, that we fall not, and lift us up when we are down; give us met in due season for our souls, and for our bodies,
that we being filled with the plenteousnesse of thy mercies here, may have our best, and all our desires fulfilled and satisfied hereafter, amongst such as fear thee, and give thanks un∣to thy holy name for ever. Grant this for Je∣sus Christ his sake, to whom with thee, O Fa∣ther, and the holy Spirit, be all honour and glory now and for ever. Amen. PSALME 146. A Prayer that we may trust in God onely, and not in an arm of flesh. PRaise the Lord, O my soul, while I live will I praise the Lord: yea, as long as I have any beeing, I will sing praises unto my God. 2 O put not your trust in Princes, nor in any childe of man: for there is no help in them. 3 For when the breath of man goeth forth, hee shall turn again to his earth: and then all his thoughts pe∣rish. 4 Blessed is he that hath the God of Jacob for his help: and whose hope is in the Lord his God. 5 Which made heaven and earth, the sea and all that therein is: which keepeth his promise for ever. 6 Which helpeth them to right that suffer wrong: which feedeth the hungry. 7 The Lord looseth men out of Prison: the Lord gi∣eth sight to the blinde. 8 The Lord helpeth them that are fallen: the Lord ca∣reth for the righteous. 9 The Lord careth for the strangers, he defendeth the fatherlesse and widow: as for the way of the ungodly, he urneth it upside down.
10 The Lord thy God, O Sion, shall be King for ever∣more: and throughout all generations. The Prayer. O Lord God, who reignest a King for ever∣more, give us grace that we may make thee our help, and fix our hopes in thee, for thou onely art able to give deliverance. Feed our souls, O Lord, and satisfie us with thy sal∣vation when we hunger and thirst after righ∣teousnesse; help us to right when we suffer wrong, heal our back-slidings, raise us when we are fallen enlighten the eys of our souls that we walk not in darknesse and the shadow of death, and do thou take care for us in all our ways, and in all our necessities, that when our breath goeth forth, and we turn again to our earth, we may reign with thee in Sion, thy celestiall habitation, for evermore, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Evening Prayer. PSALME 147. A celebration of Gods wisdome and providence in the ministration of the things of this world, and of his goodnesse towards them that fear him. O Praise the Lord, for it is a good thing to sing praises unto our God: yea, a joyfull and plea∣sant thing it is to be thankfull. 2 The Lord doth build up Jerusalem: and gather together the outcasts of Israel. 3 He healeth those that are broken in heart: and giveth medicine to heal their sicknesse. 4 He telleth the number of the stars: and calleth them all by their names. 5 Great is our Lord, and great is his power: yea, and his wisdome is infinite. 6 The Lord setteth up the meek: and bringeth the un∣godly down to the ground. 7 O sing unto the Lord with thanksgiving: sing prai∣ses upon the harp unto our God. 8 Which covereth the heaven with clouds, and prepa∣reth rain for the earth: and maketh the grasse to grow up∣on the mountains, and herb for the use of men. 9 Which giveth fodder unto the cattell: and feedeth the young ravens that call upon him. 10 He hath no pleasure in the strength of an horse: nei∣ther delighteth he in any mans legs. 11 But the Lords delight is in them that fear him: and put their trust in his mercy. 12 Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem: praise thy God, O Sion.
13 For he hath made fast the bars of thy gates: and hath blessed thy children within thee. 14 He maketh peace in thy borders: and filleth thee with the floure of wheat. 15 He sendeth forth his commandement upon earth: and his word runneth very swiftly. 16 He giveth snow like wooll: and scattereth the hoar frost like ashes. 17 He casteth forth his ice like morsels: who is able to abide his frost? 18 He sendeth out his word, and melteth them: hee bloweth with his winde, and the waters flow. 19 He sheweth his word unto Jacob: his statutes and ordinances unto Israel. 20 He hath not dealt so with any nation: neither have the heathen knowledge of his laws. The Prayer. O Lord God, whose power is great, and thy wisdome infinite, give us broken and con∣trite hearts, meek spirits, a fear of thy Name, and a trust in thy mercy, that thou maist arise upon us with healing in thy wings, giving us medicine to heal all our ghostly sicknesses, and thy delight may be in us, delighting to doe us good, to feed us when we call upon thee, to set us above our enemies, to give us know∣ledge of thy Laws, to build up Jerusalem, and to repair the breaches of thy Church, that we may sing praises unto thee, O God, and be thankfull to all eternity, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
PSALME 148. An invitation of all the creatures of the world, to praise God. O Praise the Lord of heaven: praise him in the height. 2 Praise him all ye angels of his: praise him all his host. 3 Praise him sun and moon: praise him all ye stars and light. 4 Praise him all ye heavens: and ye waters that bee above the heavens. 5 Let them praise the Name of the Lord: for he spake the word, and they were made: he commanded, and they were created. 6 He hath made them fast for ever and ever: he hath given them a law which shall not be broken. 7 Praise the Lord upon earth: yee dragons and all deeps. 8 Fire and hail, snow and vapours: winde and storm, fulfilling his word. 9 Mountains and all hils: fruitfull trees, and all ce∣dars. 10 Beasts and all cattell: worms and feathered fowls. 11 Kings of the earth, and all people: princes and all judges of the world. 12 Young men and maidens, old men and children, praise the name of the Lord: for his name onely is excel∣lent, and his praise above heaven and earth. 13 He shall exalt the horn of his people, all his saints shall praise him: even the children of Israel, even the people that serveth him.
The Prayer. O Lord God, whose Name onely is excel∣lent, and thy praise above heaven and earth, we adore and blesse thy mercy and thy power for creating us after thine own Image: thou spakest the word, and we were made: thou commandedst, and we were created: and as thou hast established thy Creation with a Law for ever, that all should minister to thy praises in their severall proportions; so give us grace that the laws of sanctity, of faith, and obedience, which thou hast given to us, may never be broken, that we serving thee not onely in the order of thy creatures, but in the capacity of thy children, may sing thy praises amongst the Angels and the numerous host of Saints reigning in thy Kingdome for ever and ever. Amen. PSALME 149. A meditation of the joyes of Heaven prepared for the Saints. O Sing unto the Lord a new song: let the congregati∣on of saints praise him. 2 Let Israel rejoyce in him that made him: and let the children of Sion be joyfull in their King. 3 Let them praise his name in the dance: let them sing praises unto him with tabret and harp. 4 For the Lord hath pleasure in his people: and help∣eth the meek hearted.
5 Let the saints be joyfull with glory: let them re∣joyce in their beds. 6 Let the praises of God be in their mouth: and a two-edged sword in their hands. 7 To be avenged of the heathen: and to rebuke the people. 8 To binde their kings in chains: and their nobles with links of iron. 9 That they may be avenged of them, as it is written: Such honour have all his Saints. The Prayer. O Lord our King, in whose honour and salvation all thy Saints rejoyce, give un∣to thy holy Gospel a free passage in all the world, that Kings and Nobles may be bound with the chains of obedience, discipline, and subordination to all thy holy Laws; and grant to us thy servants that thy Laws may be so fixed in our hearts, and thy praises in our mouthes, and righteousnesse in all our actions, that we may be written among the righteous, and have our portion with the Saints, who rejoyce in their beds of eternall rest, and are joyfull in the glories of thy Kingdome, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
PSALME 150. An invitation to praise God with all our faculties and powers. O Praise God in his holinesse: praise him in the firma∣ment of his power. 2 Praise him in his noble acts: praise him according to his excellent greatnesse. 3 Praise him in the sound of the trumpet: praise him upon the lute and harp. 4 Praise him in the cymbals and dances: praise him upon the strings and pipe. 5 Praise him upon the well tuned cymbals: praise him upon the loud cymbals 6 Let every thing that hath breath: praise the Lord. The Prayer. O Eternall God, thy holinesse and power and excellent greatnesse are farre above all the praises of men and Angels, and yet thou art pleased in the harmony and concent of a thankfull heart, and a thanks-giving tongue; touch our hearts with admirable ap∣prehensions of thy Divine perfections, that our songs of thy honour may be devout and illuminate to the height of extasies, and the devotions of a Seraphim, for nothing is pro∣portionable to thy glories but what is infi∣nitely beyond our infirmities. Make us to sing Thee and thy Name while we have breath; and when we are breathlesse, let our hearts fill up the harmony, and think thy praises so
cordially, till our souls being separated from the harsh sound of our bodily organs, we may praise thee when we are all spirit in the state of separation, and in the re-union when our bodies shall be made spirituall, singing to thee exalted praises for ever and ever. To thee O blessed and glorious God be praises and ho∣nour and glory ascribed now, and to all eter∣nity. Amen. Amen.
DEVOTIONS FOR THE Help and Assistance OF ALL CHRISTIAN PEOPLE: In all occasions and necessities. The third EDITION. LONDON, Printed for R. Royston. 1647.
DEVOTIONS FOR SEVERALL OCCASIONS. A Prayer against wandring thoughts, to be said at the beginning of our devotions. ALmighty God, who hast commanded us to pray unto thee without ceasing, and hast added many glorious pro∣mises for our incouragement, let thy holy Spirit teach me how to pray; give me just apprehensions of my wants, zeal of thy glory, great resentment of thy mercies, love of all spirituall employments that are pleasing unto thee; and do thou help mine infirmities, that the Devill may not abuse my fancy with illusions, nor distract my minde with cares, nor alienate my thoughts with impertinencies, but give me a present minde, great devotion, a heart fixed upon thy divine beauties, and an actuall intention and perseverance in my pray∣ers, that I may glorifie thy Name, doe unto thee true and laudable service, and obtain re∣lief for all my necessities. Hear me, O King of Heaven, when I call upon thee, for thou hast promised mercy to them that pray in the Name of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen.
Penitentiall Prayers, and a Form of Confession of sinnes to God, to be said upon days of publike or private humiliation. O Lord God of mercy and pardon, give me a just remembrance and sad apprehensi∣ons of my sins; teach me to bewail them with as great an indignation and bitternesse, as I have committed them with complacency and delight. Let my prayers and my confession come into thy presence, and obtain a mercy for me and a pardon. Let not thy justice and severity so remember my sins, as to forget thine own mercy; and though I have commit∣ted that for which I deserve to be condemned, yet thou canst not lose that glorious attribute whence flows comfort to us and hopes of be∣ing saved. Spare me therefore, O mercifull God; for to give pardon to a sinner that con∣fesseth his sinnes, and begges remission, is not impossible to thy power, nor disproportio∣nate to thy justice, nor unusuall to thy mercy and sweetest clemency. Blessed Jesu, acknow∣ledge in me whatsoever is thine, and cleanse me from whatsoever is amisse. Have pity on me now in the time of mercy, and condemne me not when thou commest to judgement, for what profit is there in my bloud? Thou de∣lightest not in the death of a sinner, but in his
conversion there is joy in Heaven; and when thou hast delivered me from my sins, and sa∣ved my soul, I shall praise and magnifie thy Name to all eternity, Mercy, sweet Jesu, Mercy: Lord have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us. Our Father which art in Heaven, &c. I am not worthy, O Lord, to look up to Heaven, which is the Throne of thy purity; for my sins are moe in number then the hairs upon my head, and my heart hath failed me. Lord be mercifull to me a sinner. I have not lived according to thy will, but in the vanity of mine own thoughts, in idle, sinfull, and impertinent language, in foolish actions, in blindnesse of heart, in contempt of thy holy Word and Commandments; I have not loved thee my God with all my heart, nor feared thee with all my soul, nor served thee with all my might according to thy ho∣ly precept, nor loved my neighbour as my self. Lord be mercifull to me a sinner. I have been unthankfull to thy Divine Majesty, forgetting that thou madest me, and preservest me; to thy Son my blessed Saviour, forgetting the bitter pains he suffered for me; and to the holy Ghost, forgetting how many
gracious influences I have received from him for my help, comfort, and promotion in the wayes of holy Religion, but have rebelled against thee my Maker, have sold my self to work wickednesse, from whence by the passion of thy holy Son I was redeemed, and have re∣sisted the holy Ghost. Lord be mercifull to me a sinner. I have offended thee my God in an inordi∣nate estimation of my self, in vain complacen∣cies, and desires to be esteemed as much or more then others, in not suffering with meek∣nesse, indifference, and obedience, the humili∣ations sent to me by thy divine providence, in haughty deportment toward my superiours, equals, and inferiours, and in accepting such honours as have been done to me without returning them to thee the Fountain. Lord be mercifull to me a sinner. I have offended thee my God in impati∣ence, in anger intemperate in degree, inordi∣nate in the object, growing peevish and dis∣quieted by trifling inadvertencies of others, and sleight accidents about me. Lord be mercifull to me a sinner. I have offended thee my God, by being en∣vious at the prosperous successes and advan∣tages of my neighbours, and have had re∣sentments of joy at their displeasures and sad∣nesses.
Lord be mercifull to me a sinner. I have been negligent in performance of my charge, idle in doing my duties, soft and effeminate in my life, indevout in my pray∣ers, slothfull in the exercises of Religion, weary of their length, displeased at their re∣turn, without advertency in the execution of them, and glad at an occasion of their pre∣termission. Lord be mercifull to me a sinner. I have been diligent and curious in plea∣sing my appetite of meat, and drink, and plea∣sures, losing my time, pampering my flesh, quenching the Spirit, making matter both for sin and sicknesses, and have not been sedulous in mortifying my body for the subduing mine own intemperances and inordination. Lord be mercifull to me a sinner. I have been an unprovident steward of the good things thou hast given me, I have loved them inordinately, sought them greedily, and unjustly, dispensed them idlely, and parted with them unwillingly: I have not been so charitable to the poor, or so pitifull to the af∣flicted, or so compassionate to the sick, or so apt to succour and give supply to the miseries of my neighbours as I ought, but have too much minded things below, not setting mine affections upon Heaven and heavenly things, but have been unlike thee in all things, I have
been unmercifull and unjust. Lord be mercifull to me a sinner. Mine eyes, O Lord, have wandred after vani∣ty, beholding and looking after things unseem∣ly without displeasure, despising my neighbors, prying into their faults, but have been blinde not seeing mine own sins, and infinite irregu∣larities. Lord be mercifull to me a sinner. I have not with care kept the door of my lips, nor bridled my tongue, but have been ex∣cessive in talking, immoderate in dissolute and wanton laughter, apt to lie, to deny truth, to accuse others, to scoffe at them, to aggravate their faults, to lessen their worth, to give rash judgement, to flatter for advantage, to speak of thy Name irreverently, and without religi∣ous or grave occasions, our discourses have been allayed with slander and backbiting, not apt to edifie, or minister grace unto the hearers. Lord be mercifull to me a sinner. Mine eares have been greedy after vanity, listening after things unprofitable, or that might tend to the prejudice of my neighbors, and have not with holy appetite listened after thy holy words and conveyances of salvation. Lord be mercifull to me a sinner. I have offended thee by the entertainment of evill thoughts, thoughts of uncleannese and
impurity, and have not resisted their first be∣ginnings, but have given consent to them ex∣plicitly and implicitly, and have brought them up till they have grown into idle words and actions. Lord be mercifull to me a sinner. I have made my self guilty of the sinnes of others by consent, by approving, by not repro∣ving, by cooperating, by encouraging their ill actions, so making mine own heap grea∣ter by pulling their deformities upon mine own head. Lord be mercifull to me a sinner. I have employed all my members and facul∣ties both of soul and body in the ways of un∣righteousnesse, I have transgressed my duty in all my relations, and in all my actions and tra∣verses of my whole life, even where I might have had most confidence I finde nothing but weaknesse and imperfections. Lord be mercifull to me a sinner. I have broken my vows and purposes of obedience, and holy life, I have been inconstant to all good, refractory to counsels, disobedient to commands, stubborn against admonition, churlish and ungentle in my behaviour, mind∣full and revengefull of injuries, forgetfull of benefits, seeking my own ends, deceiving my own soul. Lord be mercifull to me a sinner.
My secret sins, O Lord, are innumerable, sins secret to my self through inadvertency, forget∣fulness, wilfull ignorance, or stupid negligence; secret to the world, committed before thee onely, and under the witness of mine own conscience. I am confounded with the multi∣tude of them, and the horror of their remem∣brance. Oh Jesu God, be mercifull unto me. I. SOn of David, Blessed Redeemer, Lamb of God, that takest away the sins of the world have mercy upon me. O Jesu, be a Jesus unto me, thou that sparedst thy servant Peter that denied thee thrice, thou that didst cast seven Devils out of Mary Magdalen, and forgavest the woman taken in adultery, and didst beare the convert thief from the Crosse, to the joys of Paradise, have mercy upon me also; for although I have amassed together more sinnes, then all these in conjunction, yet not their sins, nor mine, nor the sins of all the world can equall thy glorious mercy, which is as infinite, and eternall as thy self. I acknowledge, O Lord, that I am vile, but yet redeemed with thy pre∣cious bloud; I am blinde, but thou art the light of the world; I am weak, but thou art my strong Rock; I have been dead in trespasses and sins, but thou art my resurrection and my life. Thou, O Lord, lovest to shew mercy, and
the expressions of thy mercy, the nearer they come to infinite, the more proportionable they are to thy essence, and like thy self. Behold then, O Lord, a fit object for thy pity: my sins are so great and many that to forgive me, will be an act of glorious mercy, and all the praises which did accrue to thy name, by the forgivenes of David, and Manasses, and S. Paul, and the adulteresse, and the thief, and the Publican, will be multiplied to thy honour, in the forgive∣ness of me so vile, so unworthy a wretch, that I have nothing to say for my self, but that the greatness of my misery, is a fit object for thy miraculous and infinite mercy. Despise me not, O Lord, for I am thy creature, despise me not, for thou didst die for me, cast me not away in thine anger, for thou camest to seek me, and to save me. Say unto my soul, I am thy salva∣tion; let thy holy Spirit lead me from the er∣rours of my ways, into the paths of righteous∣ness, to great degrees of repentance, and through all the parts of a holy life, to a godly and a holy death. Grant this, O blessed Jesu, for thy mercies, and for thy pity sake. Amen. II. O Lord God, blessed Jesu, Eternall Judge of quick and dead, I tremble with horrour at the apprehension when I call to mind with
what terrors and Majesty thou shalt appear in judgement; a fire shall go out from thy pre∣sence, and a tempest shall be stirred up round about thee, such a tempest as shall rend the rocks, levell the mountains, shake the earth, disorder and dissolve the whole fabrick of the heavens, and where then shall I, vile sinner, ap∣pear, when the heavens are not pure in thy sight? Lord, I tremble when I remember that sad truth, If the righteous scarcely be saved, where then shall the wicked and the ungodly appear? I know, O Lord, that all my secret impurities shall be laid open before all the Na∣tions of the world, before all the orders and de∣grees of Angels, in the presence of innumerable millions of beatified spirits. There shall I see ma∣ny that have taught me innocence and sancti∣ty, many that have given me pious example, many that have dyed for thee, and suffered tor∣tures rather then they would offend thee. O just and dear God, where shall I appear? who shall plead for me that am so loaden with im∣purities, with vanity, with ingratitude, with malice, and the terrors of an affrighting con∣science? Lord what shall I do, who am strait∣ned by my own covetousnesse, accused by my own pride, consumed with envy, set on fire by lust, made dull with gluttony, and stupid by drunkennesse, supplanted by ambition, rent a∣sunder with faction and discord, made dissolute
with lightness and inconstancy, deceived with hypocrisie, abused with flattery, fool'd with presumption, disturb'd with anger, and disor∣dered by a whole body of sin and death? But thou shalt answer for me, O Lord my God, thou art my judge and my advocate, and thou art to pass sentence upon me for those sins, for which thou diedst. O reserve not my sins to be punished in the life to come, for then I die eternally, but bring me in this world to a holy, a sharp and salutary repentance. Behold I am in thine hands; grant I may so weep, and be contrite for my sins, that in the hour of my death I may finde mercy, and in the day of judgement I may be freed from all the terrors of thy wrath, and the sentence of the wicked, and may behold thy face with joy and security, being set at thy right hand, with all thy saints and Angels to sing an eternall Hallelujah to the honour of thy mercies. Amen, sweet Jesu. Amen. III. MOST mercifull and indulgent Jesu, hear the complaint of a sad and misera∣ble sinner, for I have searched into the secret recesses of my soul, and there I finde nothing but horror, and a barren wilderness, a neglected conscience overgrown with sins and cares and beset with fears and sore amazements. I finde that I have not observed due reverence to∣wards
my superiours, nor modesty in my dis∣course, nor discipline in my manners. I have been obstinate in my vain purposes, cosen'd in my own semblances of humility, pertinacious in hatred, bitter in my jesting, impatient of Subjection, ambitious of power, slow to good actions, apt to talk, ready to supplant my neighbours, full of jealousies & suspition, scorn∣full and censorious, burdensome to my friends, ingratefull to my benefactors, imperious to my inferiours, boasting to have said what I said not, to have seen what I saw not, to have done what I did not, and have both said, and seen, and done what I ought not, provoking thy di∣vine Majesty with a continuall course of sinne and vanity. And yet, O Lord, thou hast spared me all this while, and hast not taken away my life in the midst of my sins, which is a mercy so admirable and of so vast a kindness, as no heart or tongue can think, or speak. If thou hadst dealt with me according as I had deserved, and might justly have expected, I had been now, now at this instant seal'd up to an eternity of torments; hopelesly miserable, fearing the re∣velation of thy day with an unsupportable amazement: and now under the sweet influen∣ces of thy mercies, I am praying to thee, con∣fessing my sinnes, with shame, indeed at my basenesse and ingratitude, but with a full hope and confidence in thy mercy. O turn the eys
of thy divine clemency with a gracious aspect upon a wretched sinner, open the bowels of thy mercy, and receive me into favour. O my dear God, let thy grace speedily work that in me for which thou so long hast spared me, and to which thou didst design me in thy holy pur∣poses and mercies of eternity, even a true faith, and a holy life, conformable to thy will, and in order to eternall blessednesse. I remem∣ber, O Lord, the many fatherly expressions and examples of thy mercies to repenting sinners, thy delight in our conversion, thy unwillingnes to destroy us, thy earnest invitation of us to grace and life, thy displeasure at our dangers and miseries, the infinite variety of means thou usest to bring us from the gates of death, and to make us happy to eternity. These mercies, O Lord, are so essentiall to thee, that thou canst not but be infinitely pleased in demon∣strations of them. Remember not, O Lord, how we have despised thy mercies, sleighted thy judgements, neglected thy Commandments; but now at length establish in us great contri∣tion for our sins, lead us on to humble con∣fession and dereliction of them, and let thy grace make us bring forth fruits meet for re∣pentance, fruits of justice, of hope, of charity, of religion and devotion, that we may e what thou delightest in, holy, and just, ad mercifull, vessels prepared for honour, tem∣ples
of the holy Ghost, and instruments of thy praises to all eternity, O blessed Jesu, who livest and reignest, ever one God, world with∣out end. Amen. O Lord Jesu Christ, Sonne of the eternall God, interpose thy holy Death, thy Crosse and Passion between thy judgement and my soul, now and in the hour of my death, granting unto me grace and mercy, to all faith∣full people pardon and peace, to the Church unity and amity, and to all sinners repentance and amendment, to us all life and glory ever∣lasting, who livest and reignest ever one God, world without end. Amen. A Forme of thanksgiving, with a particular enumeration of Gods blessings. MOst glorious Lord God, infinite in mer∣cy, full of compassion, long-suffering, and of great goodness, I adore, and praise, and glorifie thy holy Name, worshipping thee with the lowliest devotions of my soul and body, and give thee thanks for all the benefits thou hast done unto me; for whatsoever I am, or have, or know, or desire as I ought, it is all from thee, thou art the Fountain of beeing and blessing, of sanctity and pardon, of life and glory.
Praise the Lord, O my soule, and all that is within me praise his holy Name. Thou, O God, of thine infinite goodness hast created me of nothing, and hast given me a degree of essence next to Angels, imprinting thine Image on me, enduing me with reasona∣ble faculties of will and understanding, to know and choose good, and to refuse evill, and hast put me into a capacity of a blessed immor∣tality. O praise the Lord with me, and let us magnifie his Name together. Thou, O God, of thy great mercy hast given me a comely body, a good understanding, straight limbs, a ready and unloosed tongue, whereas with justice thou mightest have made me crooked and deformed, sottish and slow of apprehension, imperfect and impedite in all my faculties. O give thanks unto the God of Heaven; for his mercy endureth for ever. Thou, O God, of thy glorious mercies, hast caused me to be born of Christian Parents, and didst not suffer me to be strangled in the womb, but gavest me opportunity of holy Bap∣tism, and hast ever since blessed me with educa∣tion in Christian Religion. Thy way, O God, is holy: who is so great a God as our God? Thou, O God, out of thine abundant kind∣nesse
hast made admirable variety of creatures to minister to my use, to serve my necessity, to preserve and restore my health, to be an ornament to my body, to be representations of thy power and of thy mercy. Vnto thee, O God, will I pay my vows: unto thee will I give thanks. Thou, O God, of thine admirable and glo∣rious mercy hast made thine Angels ministring spirits for my protection and defence against all the hostilities of the devill; thou hast set a hedge about me, and such a guard as all the power of hell and earth cannot overcome: thou hast preserved me by thy holy providence and the ministery of Angels from drowning, from burning, from precipice, from deformi∣ties, from fracture of bones, and all the snares of evil, and the great violations of health, which many of my betters suffer. I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, with my whole heart; even before the gods will I sing praise unto thee. Thou, O most mercifull God, hast fed me and clothed me, hast raised me up friends and blessed them, hast preserved me in dangers, hast rescued me from the fury of the sword, from the rage of pestilence, from perishing in pub∣like distemperatures and diseases epidemicall, from terrors and affrightments of the night, fom illusions of the devil and sad apparitions;
thou hast been my guide in my journeys, my refreshment in sadnesses, my hope and my con∣fidence in all my griefs and desolations. O give thanks unto the Lord of lords: for his mercy endureth for ever. But above all mercies it was not lesse then infinite, whereby thou lovedst me and all man∣kinde when we were lost and dead, and rebels against thy Divine Majesty; thou gavest thine own begotten Son to seek us when we went astray, to restore us to life when we were dead in trespasses and sins, and to reconcile us to thy self by the mercies and the atonement of an everlasting covenant. He is our God, even the God of whom commeth salvation: God is the Lord by whom we escape death. O most blessed Jesu, I praise and adore thine infinite mercies, humility, and condescension, that for my sake thou wouldst descend from the bosome of thy heavenly Father into the pure womb of an humble Maid, and take on thee my nature, and be born, and cry, and suf∣fer cold, and all the incommodities which the meannesse of a stable could minister to the ten∣dernesse of thy first infancy. Lord, what is man that thou art mindfull of him: and the son of man that thou so regardest him? I adore thee blessed Jesu, and praise thee for
thine immaculate sanctity, for all thy holy precepts and counsels, for thy Divine exam∣ple, for thy miracles and mysterious revelati∣ons of thy Fathers will, for the institution of the holy Sacraments, and all other blessings of thy Propheticall Office. O praise the Lord, for the Lord is gracious: sing praises unto his Name, for it is lovely. I adore and love thee, most blessed Jesu, for all the parts of thy most bitter Passion, for thy being betrayed and accused, buffeted and spit upon, blindfolded and mocked, crowned with thorns and scourged, for thine agony and bloudy sweat, for thy bearing the sad load of the Crosse, and sadder load of our sins, for thy Crucifixion three long hours, when the weight of thy Body was supported with wounds and nails, for thy Death and Buriall, for thy conti∣nuall intercession and advocation with thy heavenly Father in behalf of me and all thy holy Church, and all other acts of mediation and redemption, the blessings of thy Priestly Office. O praise the Lord for his goodnesse: and declare the wonders he hath done for the children of men. I adore and magnifie thy holy Name, O most blessed Jesu, for thy triumph over death, hell, sin, and the grave, for thy opening the King∣dome of Heaven to all beleevers, for thy glo∣rious resurrection and ascension, for thy go∣vernment
over all the creatures, for the ad∣vancement of thy holy Kingdome, for thy continuall resisting and defeating the intend∣ments of thine enemies against thy Church, by the strength of thine arm, by the mightinesse of thy power, by the glories of thy wisdome; for those blessed promises thou hast made and per∣formest to thy Church of sending the holy Ghost, of giving her perpetuity of being in defiance of all the gates and powers of Hell and darknesse, and blessing her with continu∣all assistances, and all other glories of thy Re∣gall Office and power. O sing praises, sing praises unto our God; O sing praises, sing praises unto our King; for God is the King of all the earth, sing ye praises with understanding. O most holy Spirit, Love of the Father, Fountain of grace, spring of all spirituall bles∣sings, I adore and praise thy divine excellen∣cies which are essentiall to thy glorious Self in the unity of the most mysterious Trinity, and which thou communicatest to all faithfull peo∣ple, and to me thy unworthy servant in the unity of the Catholique Church. O magnifie the Lord our God, and fall down before his footstoole: for he is holy. O blessed Spirit, I praise and magnifie thy Name for thy miraculous descent upon the Apostles in Pentecost in mysterious represent∣ments,
for those great graces and assistances comming upon their heads, and falling down upon us all in the descent of all ages of the Church, for confirmation of our Faith, for propagation of the Gospel, for edification and ornament of thy Family. Thou, O God, shalt endure for ever, and thy remembrance throughout all generations. O most glorious Spirit, I praise and magnifie thy Name for thy inspiration of the Apostles and Prophets, for thy providence and mercy in causing holy Scriptures to be written, and pre∣serving them from the corruptions of Here∣ticks, from the violences of Pagans and ene∣mies of the Crosse of Christ. I will alwayes give thanks unto the Lord: his praise shall ever be in my mouth. I blesse thy Name for those holy promises and threatnings, those judgements and mer∣cies, those holy precepts and admonitions which thou hast registred in Scriptures, and in the records and monuments of the Church, for all those graces, helps, and comforts whereby thou promotest me in piety, and the ways of true Religion, for baptismall and penitentiall grace, for the opportunities and sweet refre∣shings of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, for all the advantages thou hast given me of good society, tutors, and governours, for the fears thou hast produced in me as deleteries and im∣pediments
of sin, for all my hopes of pardon, and expectation of the promises made by our Lord Jesus Christ to encourage me in the paths of life and sanctity, for all the holy sermons, spirituall books, and lessons, for all the good prayers and meditations, for those blessed wai∣tings and knockings at the door of my heart, pitiently tarrying for, and lovingly inviting me to repentance, without ceasing, admoni∣shing and reproving me with the checks of a tender conscience, with exteriour and interi∣our motives, and for whatsoever other means or incentive of holiness thou hast assisted me withall. I magnifie, and praise, and adore thee and thy goodness. All Nations whom thou hast made and sanctified shall come and worship thee, O Lord, and shall glorify thy Name, for thou art great and dost wondrous things, thou art God alone, and great is thy mercy towards me, thou hast delivered my soul from the ne∣thermost Hell, therefore shall every good man sing of thy praise without ceasing: O my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever with Cherubims, and Seraphims, and all the companies of the heavenly Host, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabaoth, holy is our God, holy is the Immortall, holy is the Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, to whom be all honour and glory and
dominion and power ascribed of all spirits, and all men, and all creatures, now and for evermore. Amen. I. Prayers preparatory to the receiving of the bles∣sed Sacrament. O Most immaculate and glorious Jesu, be∣hold me miserable sinner, drawing near to thee with the approaches of humility, and ear∣nest desire to be cleansed fron my sins, to be united to thee by the nearest and most myste∣rious union of charity and Sacramentall parti∣cipation of thy most holy Body and Bloud: I presume nothing of mine own worthinesse, but I am most confident of thy mercies and in∣finite loving kindnesse. I know, O Lord, I am blinde, and sick, and dead, and naked, but therefore I come the rather: I am sick, and thou art my Physitian, thou arisest with hea∣ling in thy wings, by thy wounds I come to be cured, and to be healed by thy stripes: I am unclean, but thou art the Fountain of purity: I am blinde, and thou art the great Eye of the world, the Sun of righteousnesse, in thy light I shall see light: I am poor, and thou art rich unto all, the Lord of all the creatures. I there∣fore
humbly begge of thy mercy that thou wouldest be pleased to take from me all my sins, to cure my infirmities, to cleanse my fil∣thinesse, to lighten my darknesse, to clothe my nakednesse with the robe of thy righteous∣nesse, that I may with such reverence, and faith, and holy intention receive thy bles∣sed Body and Bloud in the mysterious Sacra∣ment, that it may be unto me life, and plea∣santnesse, and holy nourishment, and that I may be firmly and indissolubly united to thy mysticall Body, and may at last see clearly and without a vail thy face in glory everla∣sting, who livest and reignest, ever one God world without end. Amen. II. I Adore and blesse thy glorious Majesty, O blessed Jesu, for this great dignation and vouchsafing to me, that thou art pleased for all the infinite multiplication of my sins, and innumerable violations of thy holy Law, still to give thy self unto me, to convey health, and grace, and life, and hopes of glory in the most blessed Sacrament. I adore thee, O most righteous Redeemer, that thou art pleased under the visible signes of Bread and Wine, to convey unto our soules thy holy Body and Bloud, & all the benefits of thy bitter Passion. O my God, I am not worthy that thou shouldest
come under my roofe, but let thy holy Spirit with his purities prepare for thee a lodging in my soul. Thou hast knocked often, O blessed Jesu, at the door of my heart, and wouldest willingly have entred; behold, O Lord, my heart is ready to receive thee, cast out of it all worldly desires, all lusts and carnall appetites, and then enter in, and there love to inhabit, that the Devill may never return to a place that is so swept and garnished, to fill me full of all iniquity. O thou lover of souls, grant that this holy Sacrament may be a light unto mine eyes, a guide to my understanding, and a joy to my soul, that by its strength I may sub∣due and mortifie the whole body of sin in me, and that it may produce in me constancy in Faith, fulnesse of wisdom, perfection and ac∣complishment of all thy righteous command∣ments, and such a blessed union with thee, that I may never more live unto my self, or to the world, but to thee onely, and by the refresh∣ment of an holy hope, I may be led through the paths of a good life, and persevering pi∣ety to the communion and possession of thy Kingdome, O blessed Jesu, who livest and reignest ever one God, world without end. Amen.
III. O Lord God, who hast made all things of nought, producing great degrees of es∣sence out of nothing, make me a new creature, and of a sinfull man, make me holy, and just, and mercifull; that I may receive thy preci∣ous Body, devoutly, reverently, with meek∣nesse, contrition, and great affection, with spirituall comfort and gladnesse at thy mysti∣call presence. Feed my soul with Bread from Heaven, fill me with charity, conform me to thy will in all things, save me from all dan∣gers bodily and ghostly, assist and guide me in all doubts and fears, prepare and strengthen me against all surreptions and sudden incursion of temptations, cleanse me from all stains of sin, and suffer nothing to abide in me but thy self only, who art the Life of souls, the Food of the Elect, and the joy of Angels. Give me such a gust and an holy relish in this Divine nutriment, that nothing may ever hereafter please me but what savours of thee and thy miraculous sweetnesse. Teach me to loath all the pleasures and beauties of this life, and let my soul be so inebriated with the pleasures of thy Table, that I may be comprehended and swallowed up with thy love and sweetnesse: let me think nothing but thee, covet nothing but thee, enjoy nothing but thee, nothing
in comparison with thee, and neither doe not possesse any thing but what leads to thee, and is in order to the performance of thy will and the fruition of thy glories. Transfixe my soul, O blessed Jesu, with so great love to thee, so great devotion in receiving the holy Sacrament, that I may be transformed to the Fellowship of thy sufferings, and admitted to a participation of all the benefits of thy Passi∣on, and to a communion of thy graces and thy glories. I desire to be with thee, dissolve all the chains of my sin, and then come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Let my soul feed on thee greedily, for thou art the spring of light and life, the Fountain of wisdome and health, a torrent of divine pleasure and tranquillity, the Author of peace and comfort: enter into me, sweet Jesu, take thou possession of my soul, and be thou Lord over me and all my faculties, and preserve me with great mercy and tender∣nesse, that no doubting or infidelity, no impe∣nitence or remanent affection to a sin, no im∣purity or irreverence may make me unworthy and uncapable of thy glorious approach. Let not my sins crucifie the Lord of life again, let it not be said concerning me, The hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on the Table: that this holy Communion may not be unto me an occasion of death, but a blessed peace-offering for my sins, and a gate of life and
glory. Grant this, O blessed God, for his sake who is both Sacrifice and Priest, the Master of the Feast, and the Feast it self, even Jesus Christ, to whom with thee, O Father, and the holy Spirit, be all honour and glory, now and for ever. Amen. A Prayer after receiving the consecrated Bread. I Give thanks unto thee Almighty and eter∣nall God, that thou hast not rejected me from thy holy Table, but hast refreshed my soul with the salutary refection of the Body of thy Son Jesus Christ. Lord if I had lived inno∣cently, and had kept all thy Commandments, could have had no proportion of merit to so transcendent a mercy; but since I have lived in all manner of sin, and multiplied provocations against thy Divine Majesty, thy mercy is so glo∣rious and infinite, that I am amased at the con∣sideration of its immensity. Goe on, O my dear God, to finish so blessed a redemption, and now that thou hast begun to celebrate a marriage and holy union between thy self and my soul, let me never throw off the wedding garment, or stain it with the pollutions of deadly sin, nor seek after other lovers, but let me for ever and ever be united unto thee, be∣ing transformed into thy will in this life, and
to the likenesse of thy glories in the life to come, who livest and reignest, ever one God, world without end. Amen. After receiving the Cup. O Just and dear God, who out of the un∣measurable abysses of wisdome and mercy hast redeemed us, and offered life, and grace, and salvation to us by the reall exhibition of thy Son Jesus Christ in the Sacrifice of his Death upon the altar of the Crosse, and by commemoration of his bitter agonies in the holy Sacrament; Grant that that great and venerable sacrifice which we now commemo∣rate sacramentally, may procure of thee for thy whole Church mercy and great assistance in all trials, deliverance from all heresies, schismes, sacriledge, and persecutions, to all sick people health and salvation, redemption for captives, competency of living to the indi∣gent and necessitous, comfort to the afflicted, relief to the oppressed, repentance to all sin∣ners, softnesse of spirit and a tender consi∣ence to the obstinate, conversion to the Jews, Turks, and remedy to all that are in any trou∣ble or adversity: And grant to us, O Lord, that this blessed Sacrament and sacrifice of commemoration in vertue of that dreadfull and proper Sacrifice upon the Crosse may ob∣tain
for me, and for us all who have communi∣cated this day, pardon and peace; and that we may derive from thee by this ministery grace to expell all our sins, to mortifie all our lusts, to exterminate all concupiscence, to crucifie all inordination and irregularity, to produce in us humility, and chastity, and obedience, and meeknesse of spirit, and charity, and may be∣come our Defence and Armour against the vi∣olences and invasions of all our ghostly ene∣mies, and temporall disadvantages; and give us this grace and favour, that we may not die in the guilt and commission of a sin without repentance, nor without receiving the blessed Sacrament, but that we may so live and die, that we may at last rest in thy bosome, and be imbraced with the comprehensions of thy eter∣nall charity, who livest and reignest, ever one God, world without end. Amen. All blessing, and praise, and honour, be unto thee, O blessed Redeemer: to thee we the ba∣nished and miserable sons of Adam, do call for mercy and defence, to thee we sigh and cry in this valley of tears; O dearest Advocate, turn those thy mercifull eyes towards us, and shew us thy glorious face in thy Kingdom, where no tears, or sighing, or fears, or sadnesses can ap∣proach. Amen, sweetest Jesu, Amen.
Prayers preparatory to death. I. A Prayer for a blessed ending, to be said in time of health or sicknesse. O Blessed Jesu, Fountain of eternall mercy, the Life of the soul, and glorious Con∣querour over Death and sin, I humbly beseech thee to give me grace so to spend this transi∣tory life in vertuous and holy exercises, that when the day of my death shall come, in the midst of all my pains, I may feel the sweet re∣freshings of thy holy Spirit comforting my soul, sustaining my infirmities, and relieving all my spirituall necessities: and grant, that in the Unity of the holy Catholique Church, and in the integrity of Christian faith, with confi∣dence and hope of thy mercy, in great love to∣wards thee, in peace with my Neighbours, and in charity with all the world, I may through thy grace depart hence out of this vale of mi∣sery, and go unto that glorious country, where thou hast purchased an inheritance for us, with the price of thy most precious bloud, and raig∣nest in it gloriously, in the Unity of thy Father and ours, of thy holy Spirit, and our Ghostly Comforter, ever one God world without end. Amen.
II. A Prayer to be said at the beginning of a sick∣nesse. O Lord my God, who chastisest every one whom thou receivest, and with thy Fa∣therly correction smitest all those whom thou consignest to the inheritance of sons; write my soul in the book of life, and number me amongst thy children, whom thou hast smitten with the rod of sicknesse, and by thy cha∣stisements hast brought me into the Lot of the righteous. Thou, O Blessed Jesu, art a helper in the needfull time of trouble; lay no more upon me then thou shalt enable me to bear, and let thy gentle correction in this life pre∣vent the insupportable stripes of thy ven∣geance in the life to come. Smite me now that thou mayest spare me to all eternity: and yet, O blessed High Priest, who art touched with a sense of our infirmities, smite me friendly, and reprove me with such a tendernesse as thou bearest unto thy Children, to whom thou conveyest suppletory comforts, greater then the pains of chastisement, and in due time re∣store me to health, and to thy solemne assem∣blies again, and to the joy of thy Countenance. Give me patience and humility, and the grace
of repentance, and an absolute dereliction of my self, and a resignation to thy pleasures and providence, with a power to do thy will in all things, and then do what thou pleasest to me; onely in health or sicknesse, in life or death, let me feel thy comforts refreshing my soul, and let thy grace pardon all my sins. Grant this, O Blessed Jesu, for my trust is in thee only, thou art my God, and my mercifull Saviour and Redeemer. Amen. III. A Prayer to be said in the progresse of a sick∣nesse. O Lord my God, Blessed Jesu, who by thy bitter death and passion hast sweetned the cup of death to us, taking away its bitternesse and sting, and making it an entrance to life and glory, have pity upon me thy servant, who have so deep a share in sin, that I can∣not shake off the terrors of death, but that my nature with its hereditary corruption still would preserve it self in a dis-union from the joys of thy Kingdome. Lord, I acknowledge my own infirmities and begge thy pity. It is better for me to be with thee, but the remem∣brance of my sins doth so depresse my grow∣ing confidence, that I am in a great straight between my fears and hopes, between the in∣firmities
of my nature, and the better desires of conforming to thy holy will and pleasure. O my dear Redeemer, wean my soul and all my desires from the flatteries of this world; pardon all my sins, and consign so great a fa∣vour by the comforts, and attestation of thy divinest Spirit, that my own fears being ma∣stered, my sins pardoned, my desires rectified, as the Hart thirst after the springs of water, so my soul may long after thee, O God, and to enter into thy Courts. Heavenly Father, if it may be for thy glory, and my ghostly good, to have the days of my pilgrimage prolonged, I begge of thee health and life; but if it be not pleasing to thee, to have this cup passe from me, thy will be done: my Saviour hath drunk off all the bitternesse. Behold, O Lord, I am in thine hands, do with me as seemeth good in thine eyes; though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me, thy rod, and thy staffe com∣fort me. I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest, for it is thou Lord onely who shalt make me to dwell in everlasting safety, and to partake of the joys of thy Kingdom, who li∣vest and reignest eternall God, world with∣out end. Amen.
IV. A Prayer for a sick person, in danger of death. O Lord Jesus Christ, our health and life, our hope, and our resurrection from the dead: I resign my self up to thy holy will and pleasure, either to life, that I may live lon∣ger to thy service and my amendment; or to death to the perpetuall enjoyment of thy presence, and of thy glories. Into thy hands I commend my spirit, for I know, O Lord, that nothing can perish, which is committed to thy mercies. I believe, O Lord, that I shall receive my body again at the resurrection of the just: I relinquish all care of that, onely I begge of thee mercy for my soul; strengthen it with thy grace against all temptations, let thy lo∣ving kindness defend it as with a shield against all the violences and hostile assaults of Satan: let the same mercy be my guard and defence, which protected thy Martyrs, crowning them with victory in the midst of flames, horrid tor∣ments, and most cruell deaths. There is no help in me, O Lord, I cannot by my own power, give a minutes rest to my wearied body, but my trust is in thy sure mercies, and I call to minde, to my unspeakable comfort, that thou wert hungry, and thirsty, and wearied, and whipt, and crown'd with Thorns, and mock'd,
and crucified for me. O let that mercy which made thee suffer so much, make thee do that for which thou sufferedst so much, pardon me, and save me. Let thy merits answer for my impieties, let thy righteousnesse cover my sins, thy bloud wash away my stains, and thy comforts refresh my soul. As my body grows weak, let thy grace bestronger, let not my faith doubt, nor my hope tremble, nor my charity grow cold, nor my soul be affrighted with the terrors of death; but let the light of thy coun∣tenance enlighten mine eyes, that I sleep not in death eternall; and when my tongue fails, let thy spirit teach my heart to pray, with strong cryings and groans that are unuttera∣ble. O let not the enemy do me any violence, but let thy holy mercies, and thy Angels repell and defeat his malice and fraud, that my soul may by thy strength triumph in the joyes of eternity, in the fruition of thee, my life, my joy, my hope, my exceeding great reward, my Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. V. For a dying Person in, or near the agonies of death. MOst mercifull and Blessed Saviour, have mercy upon the soul of this thy srvant; remember not his ignorances, nor the sins of
his youth, but according to thy great mercy remember him in the mercies and glories of thy Kingdome. Thou, O Lord, hast opened the Kingdom of Heaven to all Believers, let the everlasting gates be open'd, and receive his Soul; let the Angels, who rejoyce at the con∣version of a sinner, triumph, and be exalted in his deliverance and salvation. Make him parta∣ker of the benefits of thy holy incarnation, life and sanctity, passion and death, resurrecti∣on and ascension, and of all the prayers of the Church, of the joy of the elect, and all the fruits of the blessed communion of Saints; and daily adde to the number of thy beatified ser∣vants such as shall be saved, that thy comming may be hastned, and the expectation of the Saints may be fulfilled, and the glory of thee, our Lord Jesu, bee advanced, all the whole Church singing praises to the Honour of thy Name, who livest and reignest ever one God world without end. Amen. VI. O Most mercifull Jesu, who didst die to re∣deem us from death and damnation, have mercy upon this thy servant, whom thy hand hath visited with sicknesse: of thy goodnesse be pleased to forgive him all his sinnes, and seal his hopes of glory, with the refreshments of thy holy Spirit. Lord give him strength and
confidence in thee, asswage his pain, repell the assaults of his Ghostly enemies by thy mercies, and a guard of holy Angels: preserve him in the unity of the Church, keep his senses intire, his understanding right, give him great mea∣sure of contrition, true faith, a well grounded hope, and abundant charity, give him a quiet and a joyfull departure, let thy ministring spi∣rits convey his soul to the mansions of peace and rest, there with certainty to expect a joy∣full resurrection to the fulnesse of joy at thy right hand, where there is pleasure for ever∣more. Amen. VII. A Prayer for the joyes of Heaven. O Most glorious Jesu, who art the portion and exceeding great reward of all faith∣full people, thou hast beautified humane Na∣ture with glorious immortality, and hast car∣ried the same above all Heavens, above the seat of Angels, beyond the Cherubims and Se∣raphims, placing it on the right hand of thy heavenly Father, grant to us all the issues of thy abundant charity, that we may live in thy fear, and die in thy favour. Prepare our souls with heavenly vertues for heavenly joys, mking us righteous here, that we may be beautified hereafter.
A Morning Prayer. In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Our Father which art in Heaven, &c. I. O Eternall Sun of righteousnesse, who ca∣mest from the bosome of thy Father, the Fountain of glorious light, to enlighten the darknesses of the world; I praise thy Name that thou hast preserved me from the dangers of this night, and hast continued to me still the opportunities of serving thee, and advancing my hopes of a blessed eternity. Let thy mercies shine brightly upon me, and dissipate the clouds and darknesses of my spirit and under∣standing, rectifie my affections, and purifie my will and all my actions, that whatsoever I shall do or suffer this day, or in my whole life, my words and purposes, my thoughts and my in∣tentions may be sanctified, and be acceptable to thy divine Majesty. Amen.
II. GRant that my understanding may know thee, my heart may love thee, and all my faculties and powers may give thee due obe∣dience and serve thee. Preserve me this day from all sin and danger, from all violences and snares of mine enemies, visible and invisible; let thy holy fear be as a bridle to my distem∣peratures, and thy love so enkindle and actuate all mine endeavours, that no pleasure or allure∣ments of the world may draw me from thy service, nor any difficulty or temptation may be my hinderance: let the profound humility and innocence of my blessed Saviour keep from me all pride and haughtinesse of mind, all self-love and vain-glory, all obstinacy and dis∣obedience, all fraudulency and hurtfull dissi∣mulation, and let the graces of the holy Ghost take so absolute possession and seizure of my soul, and all its faculties, that I may tread down and cast out the spirit of intemperance and uncleannesse, of malice and envy, of idle∣nesse and disdain, that I may never despise any of thy creatures, but my self; that so being little in mine own sight, I may be great in thine. Amen.
III. CLothe my soule with the Wedding gar∣ment, the habits of supernaturall Faith, and Charity, that I may believe all thy holy promises and revelations without all wave∣ring, and love thee my God with so great devotions and affections, that neither life nor death, prosperity nor adversity, temptations within, nor without, may ever dis-unite me from the love of thee; but that I may have the most intimate adhesion to thy glories and perfections, of which my condition in this world is capable. Make me to choose vertue with the same freenesse of election, entertain it with as little reluctancy, keep it with as much complacency, actuate it with as many faculties, serve it with as much industry, as I have in time past my vices and pleasures of the world; and grant that all inordinate affection to the transitory things of this life may daily decay in me, and that I may grow in spirit and ghostly strength, till I come to a perfect man in Christ Jesus. Amen. IV. GIve unto thy servant true humility, great contrition, a tender conscience, an obedi∣ent heart, an understanding always busied in honest and pious thoughts, a will tractable and
ever prone to do good, affections eaven and moderate, a watchfull custody over my senses, that by those windows sinne may never enter in, nor death by sin. Make me to watch over my tongue, and keep the door of my lips, that no corrupt or unseemly communication pro∣ceed out of my mouth, that I may never flan∣ner, calumniate or detract from the reputation of my neighbour; that I be not busie in the faults of others, but carefull to correct mine own, being gentle and mercifull to others, and severe towards my self, that I may speak much of thy praises, and what I can for the edificati∣on of my brethren. Amen. V. GIve me understanding in thy Law, that I may know thy will; and grace, and strength faithfully to fulfill the same. Give me a fear of thy Name, and of thy threatnings, and a love and hope of thy promises, let me daily feel thy mercies, and remove thy judgements far from me. Imprint in my heart a filiall reve∣rence and awfulness towards thy Divine Ma∣jesty, that I may study to please thee with dili∣gence, to worship thee with much devotion, to submit to the disposition of thy providence with thankfulnesse; and that in conscience of my duty towards thee I may honour the King, obey Magistrates under him, love the Saints,
and do all acts of charity according to my opportunity and ability, directing all my acti∣ons and intentions, not according to cu∣stome, or in pursuance of mine own ends, and temporall advantages, but in thy fear and in holy religion to the advancement of thy ho∣nour and glory. Amen. VI. GIve me a soul watchfull in the services of Religion, constant in holy purposes, inge∣nuous and free from sordid ends or servile flat∣tery, a modest gravity in my deportment, affa∣bility and fair courteous demeanour towards all men, austerity in condemning mine own sins, sweetnesse in fraternall correction and reprehending others, mature judgement, a chaste body and a clean soul, patience in suffe∣ring, deliberation in my words and actions, good counsels in all my purposes: make me just in performing promises, and in all my duties, sedulous in my calling, profitable to the Common-wealth, a true Son of the Church, and of a disposition meek and charitable to∣wards all men. Amen. VII. LEt this be my portion, and the comfort of my pilgrimage, so long as I am detained in the condition of mortality, and exiled from my heavenly Country, that being free from all fear of mine enemies, and from vexations, cares
and sollicitudes of this life, I may be wholly devoted to thy service, that I may attend thee onely, and what tends to thee, that I may re∣joyce onely in thee, and my soule may rest in thee; that without distractions I may enter∣tain thy heavenly Doctrine, and the blessed motions of thy holy Spirit, spending my time in the duties of necessity, in the works of cha∣rity, and the frequent office of Religion, with diligence, and patience, and perseverance, and hope, expecting the accomplishment of my days in peace; that when I go unto my dust, I may be reckoned amongst those blessed souls, whose work it is to give thee praise, and ho∣nour, and glory, to all eternity. Amen. Blessed be the holy and undivided Trinity, now and for evermore. Amen. An Evening Prayer. In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Our Father which art in Heaven, &c. I. O Lord God, who art the light and splen∣dour of souls, in the brightnesse of thy countenance is eternall Day that knows no night, in thy arms, and in thy protection is all quietnesse, tranquillity, and everlasting repose,
while the darkness covers the face of the earth, receive my body and soul into thy custody; let not the spirits of darkness come near my dwel∣ling, neither suffer my fancy to be abused with illusions of the night. Lord, I am thy servant, and the sheep of thy pasture, let not the de∣vil, who goeth up and down seeking whom he may devour, abuse my body, or make a prey of my soul, but defend me from all those cala∣mities which I have deserved, and protect my soul, that it consent not to any work of dark∣nesse, lest mine enemy say, he hath prevailed over me, or do mischief to a soul redeemed with thy most precious Bloud. Amen. II. PArdon and forgive me all the sins and of∣fences of my youth, the errours of mine un∣derstanding, the inordination of mine affecti∣ons, the irregularity of all mine actions, and particularly whatsoever I have transgressed this day in thought, word, or deed. Lord, let not thy wrath arise, for although I have de∣served the extreamest pressure of thine indig∣nation, yet remember my infirmity, and how thou hast sent thy Son to reveal thy infinite mercies to us, and convey pardon and salvati∣on to the penitent. I beseech thee also to ac∣cept the heartiest devotion and humblest ac∣knowledgement of a thankfull heart, for thy
blessing and preservation of me this day, for unlesse thy Providence and Grace had been my Defence and Guide, I had committed more and more grievous sins, and had been swallow∣ed up by thy just wrath, and severest judge∣ments. Mercy sweet Jesu. III. LOrd, let thy grace be so present with me, that though my body sleep, yet my soul may for ever be watchfull, that I sleep not in sin, or pretermit any opportunity of doing thee service; let the remembrances of thy goodnesse and glories be first and last with me, and so unite my heart unto thee with habituall charity, that all my actions and sufferings may be directed to thy glory, and every motion and inclination either of soul or body, may in some capacity or other, receive a blessing from thee, and do thee service; that whether I sleep or wake, travell or rest, eat or drink, live or die, I may always feel the light of thy countenance shining so upon me, that my labours may be easie, my rest blessed, my food sanctified, and my whole life spent with so much sanctity and peace, that escaping from the darknesses of this world, I may at last come to the land of everla∣sting rest in thy light, to behold light and glory through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Blessed be the holy and undivided Trinity, now and for evermore.
Another Prayer for Evening. I. VIsit we beseech thee, O Lord, this habita∣tion with thy mercy, and us thy servants with thy salvation, and repell far from us all the snares of the Enemy. Let thy holy Angels dwell here to keep us in peace and safety, and thy blessing be upon us for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. II: O Lord Jesu Christ, the lively Image of thy Fathers mercies and glories, the Saviour of all them that put their trust in thee; we of∣fer and present to thee all our strengths, and powers of our souls and bodies, and what∣soever we are, or have, to be preserved, governed, and possest by thee. Preserve us from all vitious, vain, and proud cogitations, unchaste affections, and from all those things which thou hatest. Grant us thy holy charity, that we may love thee above all the world, that we may, with sincerity of intention and zealous affections, seek thee alone, and in thee onely take our rest, inseparably joyning our selves unto thee, who art worthy to be belo∣ved and adored of all thy creatures with low∣est
prostrations, and highest affection, now and for evermore. Amen. III. O Father of mercies, and God of all com∣forts, let this blessing be upon us, and up∣on all the members of thy holy Church: all health and safety both of body and soul, against all our enemies, visible and invisible, now and for ever. Send us a quiet night, and a holy death in the actuall communion of the Catho∣lique Church, and in thy charity, through Je∣sus Christ our Lord. Amen. Our Father which art in heaven, &c. Now, and in all dangers and afflictions of soul and body, in the hour of death, and in the day of Judgement, save us and deliver us, O sweet Saviour and Redeemer Jesu. Collects to be added upon Various Occasions. I. For the Church: ALmighty and everlasting God, who hast revealed thy glory to Jews and Gentiles
in our Lord Jesus Christ, extend thy hand of mercy over all the world, that thy Church may spread like a flourishing vine, and enlarge her borders to the uttermost parts of the earth, that all Nations partaking of the sweet refresh∣ings of thy Gospel, thy Name may be glorified, the honour of our Lord Jesus advanced, his prophecies fulfilled, and his comming haste∣ned. Blesse, O Lord, thy holy Church with all blessings of comfort, assistance, and preserva∣tion; extirpate heresies, unite her divisions, give her patience & perseverance in the faith, and confession of thy name, in despite of all enmities, temptations, and disadvantages; de∣stroy all wicked counsels intended against her, or any of her children, by the Devill or any of his accursed instruments. Let the hands of thy grace and mercy lead her from this vale of misery, to the triumphant throne of her Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. II. For the King. O Lord our heavenly Father, High & Migh∣ty, King of Kings, who in thy hands hast the hearts of Kings, and canst turn them as the rivers of water, send the light of thy coun∣tenance, and abundance of blessings upon thy servant, our Soveraign Lord King Charles,
make him as holy, valiant, and prosperous as King David, wise and rich like Solomon, zealous for the honour of thy Law and temple as Josi∣ah; and give him all sorts of great assistances, to enable him to serve thee, to glorifie thy name, to protect thy Church, to promote true Reli∣gion, to overcome all his enemies, to make glad all his liege people, that he serving thee with all diligence and the utmost of his possibility, his people may serve him with honour and obedience, in thee, and for thee, according to thy blessed word and ordinance, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. III. For the Queen. O God of heaven, Father of mercies, have mercy upon our most gracious Queen, unite her unto thee with the bands of faith and love, preserve her to her lives end in thy fa∣vour, and make her an instrument of glory to thy Name, of refreshment to the Church, of joy to all faithfull people of this Kingdome, of a plenteous and blessed Issue to his Majesty, and Crown her with an eternall weight of glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
IV. For the Prince of Wales. O Most blessed Jesu, Son of God, who ca∣mest from thy Fathers bosome with my∣riads of blessings to the sons of men; blesse us all by thy especiall care and providence over the body and soul of the most illustrious Prince, CHARLES. Prepare him with plenty of thy grace, and with great abilities to succeed his Royall Father, in the service of thy Majesty, in defending the Catholique Faith, in comfor∣ting thy holy Church, in governing all the people prudently, justly, and religiously, that being partaker of all thy mercies here, in pro∣portion to his necessity and capacity, he may enjoy a fulnesse of thy glory hereafter, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
V. For the Bishops. O Thou great Shepheard and Bishop of our souls, most glorious Jesu, blesse all holy and religious Prelates, especially the Bishops of our Church. O God let abundance of thy grace and benediction descend upon their heads, that by a holy life, by a true and Catho∣lique beliefe, by a confident confession of thy Name, and by a Fatherly care, great sedulity and watchfulnesse over their flock, they may glorifie thee our God, the great lover of Souls, and set forward the salvation of their people, and of others by their example, and at last af∣ter a plentifull conversion of souls, they may shine like the Starres in glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
VI. For our Parents. O Almighty God, and mercifull Father, who from the loins of our first Parents, Adam & Eve, hast produced mankind, and hast com∣manded us to honor our Parents; in pursuance of thy holy Commandment, and of our duty to thee our God, and in thee to them, we do with all humility beg a blessing of thee for our Pa∣rents, who from thy mercy and plenty have conveyed many to us; pardon and forgive all their sins and infirmities, increase in them all goodnesse, give them blessings of the right hand, and blessings of the left; blesse them in their persons, in their posterity, in the comforts of thy holy Spirit, in a persevering goodnesse, and at last in an eternall weight of glory, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. VII. For our Children. O Father of Heaven, God of all the Crea∣tures, by whose Providence mankinde is increased, I blesse thy Name for bestowing on me that blessing of the righteous man, the bles∣sing of children. Lord blesse them with health, with life, with good understanding, with fair
opportunities and advantages of education, society, tutors, and governours; and above all with the graces of thy holy Spirit, that they may live and be blessed under thy protection, grow in grace, and be in favour with God and Man, and at last may make up the number of thine elect children, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. VIII. For our Patron, our Friends, and Benefactors. O Almighty God, thou Fountain of all good, of all excellency both to Men and Angels, extend thine abundant favour and loving kind∣nesses to my Patron, to all my Friends and Be∣nefactors; reward them and make them plenti∣full compensation for all the good which from thy mercifull Providence they have conveyed unto me. Let the light of thy countenance shine upon them, and let them never come in∣to any desertion, affliction, or sadnesse, but such as may be an instrument of thy glory and their eternall comfort, in our Lord and Saviour Je∣sus Christ. Amen.
IX. A Prayer of a Wife for her Husband. O My God, who hast graciously pleased to call me to the holy state of Matrimony, blesse me in it with the grace of chastity, with oyalty, obedience, and complacency to my Husband; and blesse him with long life, with a healthfull body, with an understanding soule, with abundance of all thy graces, which may make him to be and continue thy servant, a true son of the Church, a supporter and a guide to me his wife, a blessing and a comfort to his children, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. X. Of a Husband for his Wife. O Mercifull God, who art a Father to us thy children, a Spouse to thy holy Church, a Saviour and Redeemer to all mankind, have mercy upon thy handmaid my wife, endue her with all the ornaments of thy heavenly grace, make her to be holy and devout as Hester, lo∣ving and amiable as Rachel, fruitfull as Leah, wise as Rebeccah, faithfull and obedient as Sa∣rah, that being filled with thy grace and bene∣diction here, she may be partaker of thy glory hereafter, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
XI. For a Curate to say in behalfe of his Parish. O Blessed Iesu, thou that art an eternall Priest, an universall Bishop, and the Foun∣tain of all ghostly good, have mercy upon this Parish which thou hast cencredited to my charge. Lord, I am unfit for so great a burden, but by thy aid and gracious acceptation I hope for mercy, pardon, and assistance. O Lord, send thy holy Spirit to dwell amongst us: let here be peace and charity, and true Catholike Reli∣gion, and holy Discipline. Comfort the com∣fortlesse, heal the sick, relieve the oppressed, in∣strut the ignorant, correct the refractory, keep us all from all deadly sin, and make them obe∣dient to their superiours, friendly to one ano∣ther, and servants of thy Divine Majesty, that so from thy favour they may obtain blessings in their bodies, in their souls, in their estates, and a supply to all their necessities, till at last they be freed from all dangers and necessities in the full fruition of thy everlasting glories, O blessed Saviour, and Redeemer Iesu. Amen.
XII. For a Parishioner to say in behalf of his Curate. O God Almighty, who art pleased to send thy blessings upon us by the Ministration of the Bishops and Priests of thy holy Church, have mercy upon thy servant, to whom is com∣mitted the care of my soul, that he, by whose means thou art graciously pleased to advance my spirituall good, may by thy grace and favor be protected, by thy providence assisted, by thy great mercies comforted and relieved in all his necessities bodily and ghostly, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. XIII. For safe Childe-birth. O Blessed Iesu, Son of the eternall God, who according to thy humanity wert born of a holy Maid, who conceived thee without sin, and brought thee forth without pain, have mercy upon me thy humble servant, and as by thy blessing I have conceived, so grant that by thy favourable assistance I may be safely deli∣vered. Lord, grant me patience, and strength, and confidence in thee, and send thy holy An∣gel to be my guardian in the hour of my travel. O shut not up my soul with sinners, nor my life with them that go down into the pit. I humbly also beg mercy for my childe, grant it may be
born with its right shape, give it a comely bo∣dy, and an understanding soul, life, and oppor∣tunity of Baptism, and thy grace from the cra∣dle to the grave, that it may encrease the num∣ber of Saints in that holy Fellowship of Saints and Angels, where thou livest and reignest eternall God, world without end. Amen. XIV. Before a Journey. O God, who didst preserve thy servants A∣braham and Jacob, thy People Israel, thy servant Tobias, and the wise men of the East in their severall journeys, by thy providence, by a ministery of Angels, by a pillar of fire, and by the guidance of a Star, vouchsafe to preserve us thy servants in the way we are now to goe. Be (O Lord a guide unto us) in our preparati∣on, a shadow in the Day, and a covering by Night, a rest to our wearinesse, and a staffe to our weaknesse, a patron in adversity, a prote∣ction from danger, that by thy assistance we may perform our journey safely to thy honor, to our own comfort, and with safety may re∣turn; and at last bring us to the everlasting rest of our heavenly Country, through him who is the way, the truth, and the life, our blessed Lord and Saviour Jesus. Amen.
XV. For afflicted persons. O Lord God, mercifull and gracious, whose compassion extends to all that are in mi∣sery and need, and takest delight in the re∣lieving the distresses of the afflicted, give re∣freshment to all the comfortlesse, provide for the poor, give ease to all them that are tor∣mented with sharp pains, health to the disea∣sed, liberty and redemption to the captives, chearfulnesse of spirit to all them that are in great desolations. Lord, let thy Spirit con∣firm all that are strong, strengthen all that are weak, and speak peace to afflicted con∣sciences, that the light of thy countenance being restored to them, they may rejoyce in thy salvation, and sing praises unto thy Name, who hast delivered their souls from death, their eyes from tears, and their feet from fal∣ling. Grant this for the honour of thy mer∣cies, and the glory of thy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
XVI. For our Enemies. O Blessed Jesu, who wert of so infinite mer∣cies, so transcendent a charity, that thou didst descend from Heaven to the bowels of the earth, that thou mightest reconcile us who were enemies, to the mercies of thy hea∣venly Father; and in imitation of so glorious example hast commanded us to love them that hate us; and to pray for them that are our ene∣mies; I beseech thee of thine infinite good∣nesse, that thou wouldest be pleased to keep me with thy grace in so much meeknesse, ju∣stice, and affable disposition, that I may, so far as concerns me, live peaceably with all men, gi∣ving no man occasion of offence, and to them who hate me without a cause, I beseech thee give thy pardon, and fill them with charity to∣wards thee and all the world, blesse them with all blessings in order to eternity, that when they are reconciled to thee, we also may be united with the bands of Faith, and Love, and a common Hope, and at last we may be removed to the glories of thy Kingdom, which is full of love and eternall charity, and where thou livest and reignest, ever one God, world without end. Amen.
XVII. A Prayer to be said upon Ember-dayes. O Mercifull Jesu, who hast promised perpe∣tuity to the Church, and a permanency in defiance of all the powers of darknesse, and the gates of hell, and to this purpose hast constituted severall orders, leaving a power to the Apostles, and their Successors, the Bishops, to beget Fathers of our souls, and to appoint Priests and Deacons for the edification of the Church, the benefit of all Christian people, and the advancement of thy service: have mercy upon thy Ministers the Bishops, give them for ever great mea∣sure of thy holy Spirit, and at this time par∣ticular assistances, and a power of discerning and trying the spirits of them who come to be ordained to the Ministery of thy Word and Sacraments; that they may lay hands sudden∣ly on no man, but maturely, prudently, and piously, they may appoint such to thy ser∣vice and the Ministery of thy Kingdome, who by learning, discretion, and a holy life are apt instruments for the conversion of souls, to be examples to the people, guides of their man∣ners, comforters of their sorrows, to sustain their weaknesses, and able to promote all the interests of true Religion. Grant this,
O great Shepheard and Bishop of our souls, Blessed Jesus, who livest and reignest in the Kingdome of thine eternall Father, one God, world without end. Amen. Sanctus Deus. Sanctus Fortis. Sanctus Immortalis. FINIS.
