B83A 9692171 44016
An Humble ADDRESS TO The Livery-Men of London, Relating to the Election of Sheriffs, by a Lover of his King and Country. Gentlemen. THere are now amongst us who bears true Allegiance to the King, or hath a real kindness for the Government ei∣ther in Church and State, but must be filled with Consternation, at the daly feuds and Animosites that are prevalent in the mid'st of us, and if the methods, one that of our Loy∣al and prudent Parliaments formerly took, were put in Eexecution to wit to Retrospect the past Actions of some Citizens amongst us. We might then plainly see, whence these Animosities took their rise, and by what artifices they are still car∣ried on: my design and Intention of exposing these ensuing Lines to publick view, is not to incite men ta Rancor and Malice, but to reduce them to a more quiet and sedate Temper. I therefore ear∣nestly desire that in the perusal of them, all preju∣dice and self-Interest may be laid aside. For the continued Design of the Author is to promote Love and Union, and to beget a right understand∣ing in the minds of Men. Gentlemen, It is obvious to you all, that the Election of Sheriffs is become the discourse of Ci∣ty and Country; and it were happy, if an expedi∣ent were found out, in Order to the preservation of my Lord Mayors Prerogative, and to prevent an Invasion upon the Priviledges of the Com∣mons: as to my Lord Mayors drinking to a per∣son, and the Commons usual confirming of that person, hath been so constantly practised, that it would be impertinent to enlarge on that Subject. I shall only crave leave to premise one thing be∣fore I come to enter upon the main drift of my Discourse. There is no Citizen I suppose, but hath heard a large Character of the worth and ability both in Purse and Person, of the Gentleman drank to by my Lord Mayor; and the main Objection that I hear of, that bears weight is his being unacquainted with the Customes of the City: by reason of the short time he hath resi∣ded amongst us. Much might be urged, Pro and Con. But I will not undertake, at present to de∣fend, or gainsay; but this I must take the Free∣dome to assert, that some persons amongst us, through the inadvertency of their Actions and the arogancy of their minds, and seeking to become Popular: have made themselves Lyable to Justice and are fearful of coming to the Test, and upon that score, they influence the Commons to im∣bark in their Cause, and by that means infufe fears and Jealousies, and a dislike of such persons, who will not be influenced by their Principles, and I appeal to the Consciences of all unbiassed men, whether what I have asserted be not a real Truth, or else why was not this Gentleman Confirmed by you, as well as several others have been several years together. I think it is obvious to you all, that whoever he or they were, that advised my Lord to send forth so unusual a Precept for the summoning a Common-Hall on Midsum∣mer day, did at the same time do the great∣est prejudice to that worthy and Loyal Gen∣tleman Mr. North, that lay in their pow∣er, for before the Issuing forth of that Precept, he was high in esteem in the good Opinions of the Majority of the Citizens, and he had certainly been confirmed, but it was that which was the real cause of those Fears and Jealo∣fies, and the incitement of those Feuds amongst us; and that Precept hath done the great dis∣kindness to my Lord Mayor, by creating in mens minds a misbelief, and a great mistrust of his Actions, as if he intended an Invasion upon the Rights and Priveledges of the Commons. It is matter of wonder and astonishment that any inferiour Officer belonging to the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, should assume to him∣self, so great a Confidence, as to impose a Pa∣per, Intituled Brief Collections upon that honou∣rable Court, and crave their Licensing it, so full of falfifications. I verily believe my Lord Mayor will have great cause when a Scrutiny comes to be made of the Transactions of Midsomer-day, to Return his hearty thanks backward to some Persons who would pretend themselves to be, Loyal to the King and Government, were very earnest with my Lord to come and dissolve the Poll. And there are some sober and Loyal Citizens that observed all Transactions, and took special Notice, who it was that came before my Lords Coach, crying-out Huzza Boyes: here comes my Lord, is this a deport∣ment becoming anysober Citizen. I appeal to all Loyal persons, and this person was one of the Chief that went to White-Hall, to inform against his fellow Citizens, it would better have hecomed him, to have been in his Shop and
minded his business I wonder with what considence, such a person dare presume to appear in the pre∣sence of a Prince, who hath so flender a Repute amongst tht Eminent wealthy Loyal Citizens, that they account him not worth associating with. And they wondered to see him come home sitting on the right hand of a truely Loyal Citizen in his Coach, the Appellation, of (Martain Marral) is truely applicable to him, and certainly Mr. Chase his Majesties Apoth. Who is the Loyal, and so well beloved among the Generality of the chief Citzens, will be so Just to them, and Loyal to his Majesty, as to give him a true account of the Gen∣tlemans aiblitys being a brother of the same fra∣ternity; there is a Barbado's Marchant of the same stamp who Hectors and talks, But if there were Occasion of serving the King in purse or per∣son, they would both quickly grow coole. I could heartily wish that the appellation of To∣ry and Whigg might be obliterated among us, and that we might all Joyn hand in hand, resolving to fear God, and Honour the King, and to Pro∣mote those things that might be acceptable to the King, and advantagious to the City, and in order to that Establishment, of that happy Union, I would propose but not impose some things to the serious considerations of all sober Citizens, my Lord having Ordered an account to be sent in∣to the Town-clarks Office of all the Liveries which is accordingly done, it were well if an Inspection were made to see whither any other then Livery∣men Polled, if it appear they did then the Electi∣on
becomes void of it self, but if that expedient be fruitless. I crave leave to propose another. Several persons, having been with my Lord Mayor and acquainted him that upon his Ordering the Poll to cease they have not Polled, they therefore crave a new Election. If my Lord pleases to Sum∣mon a new Hall, and to wave Mr. North for the present, and to drink to another person; who may be acceptable to the King, and pleasing to the Ci∣ty: and it is hoped, we all may confirm him and other persons, being put up by the Common-Hall, and the present persons Totally laid aside for this year, it never was, nor now is any conceit I had or have of my own abilitys, that put me upon, de∣livering my Sentiments. But the Duty and Ser∣vice which I owe unto the Citizens, made me ad∣venture to put in this plea, for the preservation of our libertyes, and as somtimes it falls out in a case of danger, when the loss of all lies at Stake, that the forwardness of a young and experienced Souldier who perhaps is more hardy then Warrier yet loving his Countries Liberty adventures to begin the on set and thereby stirs up courage in the more grave and able Commanders to follow on in hops of victory so if by my example; I may encourage some of you, who I know are sar abler then my self to improve your parts and abilities; for the Common good I shall then hope that by the Evidence of Truth and Reason, all our Privi∣ledges & Immunities will be continued to us, which is and ever shall be the desire of your servant. I. B. LONDON Printed for J. Bayly, 1682.
