B810 R25862 9234361 42563
THE WINCHCOMB PAPERS REVIVED. Wherein are contained some particulars concerning The Government of the Church. Liturgy and Forms of Prayer. Ordination and power of Ministers. Administration of the Sacrament, &c. For the use of dissenting Brethren. Veritati & paci. LONDON, For John Barksdale, Newstreet, Five Bells. 1675.
S. Augustinus de fide & oper. c. 5. tom. 4. p. 13. Cum sive per negligentiam praeposi∣torum, sive per aliquam excusabi∣lem necessitatem, sive per occultas obre∣ptiones, invenimus in ecclesia malos, quos ecclesiasticâ disciplinâ corrigere aut coërcere non possumus; tunc non ascen∣dat in cor nostrum impia ac perniciosa praesumptio, quâ existimemus nos ab his esse separandos, ut peccatis eorum non in∣quinemur; at{que} ita post nos trahere co∣nemur, veluti mundos sanctos{que}▪ discipu∣los, ab unitatis compage, quasi à malorum consortio segregatos. Veniant in mentem illae descripturis similitudines & divina oracula, vel certissima exempla, quibus demonstratum & pronuntiatum est, ma∣los in ecclesia permixtos bonis usque in finem seculi tempus{que} judicii futuros; & nihil bonis in unitate ac participatione Sacramentorum, qui eorum factis non consenserint, obfuturos.
The Review. THat which at first gave life to the following Papers, is the cause also why they are now revived: namely, the consi∣deration of many evils done to the Church of England, by the over∣busie actings of some men that stile them selves, Pastors of Gathered Churches; who, while they gather a few, scatter many. There is a short, but sad complaint, which I have late∣ly seen, written in the name of many thou∣sands of this Country, to this effect. 1 That in severall great Parishes, Market Towns and other, Ministers are placed, who own but a very few as Members of their Church, and preach judgement to the rest, and deprive them and their children of the Sacraments, and other Ministerial Offices (yet receive the profits) and account them but as Heathens, except they will enter in∣to
their private Covenant. 2 That the said Preachers wander abroad with their Disciples after them, invade other mens pa∣rishes, distract the people, and alienate their mindes from their lawful Pastors. 3 That they spread (under pretence of preaching Christ) very dangerous opini∣ons against parish-Churches, and parish-Ministers, and against that order and Go∣verment that ought to be restored to the Church of God. 4 That the said prea∣chers pretend to be the men, by whose fa∣vour or disfavour other Ministers must stand or fall: Whose Ordination they call Antichristian, and have a designe to plant their illiterate followers (whom they ex∣ercise to that end) in their places. These and the like grievances we hope Authority will in time redresse: In the mean time, it is the duty of Ministers that are left of the old stock, to teach the truth and warn the people of these errors: To which purpose the following Papers are not of no use. In the Review whereof we see the substance of them may be referred (chiefly) to these Heads.
Of Church Government. Publick Prayers. The Ministry. Communion. And of these we shall note something in re∣lation to the printed Papers. 1. For Church-Government I cannot blame the Respondent, who had lived under the form of Episcopacy, to own that ancient way. He denies it not to have been subject unto faults and errors by the miscarriage of persons employed; whose faults, if they shoud be charged likewise upon other Go∣vernments, no form, neither Civil nor Ec∣clesiastical, would be of any long continu∣ance. I suppose it were a good Reformation, to make some amendment in the Ecclesiastical Lawes (as about the abilities required in persons to be Ordained, &c.) and to bring up the practice of the Church to the Laws. That Episcopacy is not to be cast off, we the Ancients, Ignatius and little reading in are verily perswaded by our o∣ther, and by what we find in our own best Reformed Divines. No more need here be named but Zanchy from beyond sea, and Bishop Davenant at home (whose words you have in the Testimonies) Bishop Davenant
(a man worthily much esteemed by all par∣ties) saith, that among many Presbyters, that ad∣minister the Word and Sacraments in some one City, there was one by the Apostles themselves, set over the rest, and (indowed) with a certain singular dignity and power. And it is manifest, these Bishops thus establisht by the Apostles autho∣rity had their successions in the same Cities by a continual order. And Zanchy saith, That in the Protestant Churches are not wanting Bishops and Archbishops indeed and in effect: But the good Greek names being changed into bad Latin, they call them Superintendents and general Su∣perintendents. And where these names are not, yet there are wont to be some prime men, who have almost all the Authority. And why should we contend about names, when we agree about the thing? I will onely adde upon this first Head, what I hear is not displeasing to the Presbyterians, I wish it may not be to the In∣dependents (whose chief Argument from Mat. 18. for the power of the Congregation, is answe∣red by considering, that matters seem to be refer∣red to the people, because they passed at their as∣semblies, though under censure of Bishops and Presbyters. See page 112.) Namely the judg∣ment of that most Reverend and lear∣ned Primate, Dr. Ʋsher, now with God: who in four Articles lately printed, hath re∣duced
Episcopacy to the form of Synodical Government. The summe is this, 1 That in every parish the Rector with the Church∣wardens note the scandalous and admonish them. 2. That they present the obstinate to the monthly rural Synod, consisting of the Rectors of that part assembled under the Suffragan there to be censured. 3. That the Acts of the monthly Synods be revised once or twice a year by the Diocesan Sy∣nod, consisting of all the suffragans and some choice Rectors assembled under the Bishop. 4. That further Appeal may be made, in case of grievances, to the Provin∣cial Synods, &c. This is a way of conjoyning Episcopal go∣vernment and Presbyterial into one: which might happily content all sober Christians, so as Church-affairs should be managed (to borrow words from the royal pen) neither with tyranny, impurity, nor popularity: nei∣ther Bishops ejected, nor Presbyters despi∣sed, nor people oppressed: Whom God hath joyned together, let no man put asunder. So much of the first Head. 2. For Publick prayers. I see no cause to di∣slike that which is (among the following testimonies) cited out of Mr. Calvin's Epi∣stle to the Lord Protector, wherein he saith,
I very much approve a certain form of prayers, from which it may not be lawful for the Pastors in their function to depart; for these reasons, that help may be given to the unskilfulnesse of some: that the consent of all the Churches may appear; that the levity and uncertainty of some men al∣waies ffecting novelties, may be regulated and restrained. Yet neither doth Calvin here, nor do any of us deny a grave, modest, discreet and humble use of Ministers gifts, even in publick, the better to fit & excite their own and the peoples affections to the present occasions. But that any mens private & sin∣gle Abilities should quite justle out the pub∣lick forms of prayer, composed by the joynt Abilities and gifts of Godly learned Gover∣nours of the Church, this is that we cannot allow of. Neither do we conceive the spirit of prayer to consist so much in utterance of words, which is but a gift of edification, as in stirring up the Graces of faith and hu∣mility, and other gifts of sanctification, wherein the very life and soul of prayer consisteth. And certianly he that saith, that short comprehensive prayer (justly called The Lords prayer, because he framed it for his Disciples) with an understanding, devout and faithfull heart, prayes very spiritually, very acceptably, and powerfully. Con∣cerning
this prayer, I censure it as too yiel∣dingly spoken, which is said in the first Let∣ter, as if the words might be laid aside and omitted, the sense being kept: When as, in my opinion, it is an honour to our Saviour, and a good mark of his humble and faithful followers, to keep not the sense onely, but the very form of words which he hath com∣mended: Nor can I see any reason why so many in these times do omit the form, as if that omission were now become a distin∣ctive character, whereby the most godly preachers and most Reformed Christians might be known. But enough of this. 3. As to the Ordination and power of Ministers, that Text (Tit. 1. 5.) insisted on in the Dispute (adde Acts 14. 23.) plainly shews the Apostolical practice of Ordaining El∣ders in every Church; and in succeeding A∣ges a succession of Christs Ministers was preserved by the like Ordination, as Eccle∣siastical Records do abundantly witness. That Churches parochial should be filled with those that set up a new or no form of worship, and minister holy things before they have received holy Orders, this I think was never heard of in our land, before these our times; and what the consequence will be, we have great cause to fear, even the overthrow of
all Religion, and the introducing of Atheism and prophaness among our people. Those words in the late Mournfull Complaint, pre∣sented to some Parliament men, are to the purpose: You have placed in many of our Churches, and given the Tithes, and other profits belonging to the cure of souls, to men that refuse to take any such charge upon them, and who are so far from having the affections, or performing the duties of faithful Pastors to us, that they do pro∣fessedly disown any such relation, and consequently all the duties thereunto belonging: Thence they neither Baptise nor Catechise our children, nor do they administer the Lords Supper in our Con∣gregations, our sick and feeble persons they visite not, nor own it as a duty incumbent on them to take care for our souls. These Ministers I con∣ceive, being not Ordained, believe their mi∣nisterial power to reach onely to those select persons that are in Covenant with them, and submit to their Church-way, as if the said power were received from the persons that consent thereunto. Thus have we Ministers that are Preachers to▪ thousands, and Ministers (as themselves say) to some few gathered out of the multitude; the rest of the multi∣tude in the mean time remaining (accord∣ing to their opinion) almost in the quality of meer Heathens and Infidels: and if they
be not such, this seemeth a way o make them so. For, being not owned as Brethren by the gathered Church, and having good rea∣sons not to come into their communion, they are in many places destitute of divine or∣dinances, without publick Prayers, Sermons, Sacraments, and in a ready way to loose Re∣ligion altogether. But why do they not come into the Preachers placed among them by Authority? Because they believe those Prea∣chers, however settled by the civil power, have not received the sacred Office by lawful Ordination: For we may easily distinguish between the Office and the place wherein the Office is exercised. Preachers and Ministers are placed, and confirmed in their places by the Magistrate or Civil power, but they re∣ceive their ministerial Office, or spiritual function by lawful Ordination, and laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. This is called the Power of Order, derived, not from the Magistrate or Prince; not from the peo∣ple (they cannt give what they have not) but from Bishops and Presbyters, who also have received it from their Predecessors. The Ministers, Servants, Officers and Embassa∣dors of Christ, must have their Authority and Commission from Christ, either immediately, as the Apostles had, or mediately by the hands
of Elder Ministers, as the lawful Ministers of our time have; nor may any take this ho∣nour unto himself, but he that is thus called of God. The people indeed may be said to Call, that is, to invite and intreate Ministers to come unto them, but their Calling or Fun∣ction is from God. The Lord of the harvest sends in the laborers; the great Shepheard setteth Pastors over his flock; the Master of the Family appointeth Stewards for his hous∣hould to dispence unto them the Mysteries of God. 4. For the administration of the holy Sacrament, that such as have not received the power before mentioned by lawful Ordi∣nation, do not administer the Sacrament to all, we will not blame them, because we con∣ceive they have not power of ministring to any one▪ but that they condemn the lawful Mi∣nisters for ministring unto the people of their Parishes, the sacred things which cannot rightly be denied them, this we may com∣plain of. In the above▪ cited Mournful Com∣plaint, among many other sad passages, we finde these words: You permit us not to cele∣brate the memory of our dying Saviour in the Sacrament of his lost Supper, and so deprive our souls of that heavenly food, that our dear Lord hath with so much cost provided for us: We▪
would after many sad violations, renew our Co∣venant with Christ, and engage our souls more firmly to him, but you will not permit us. You complain of the loosenesse of our spirits, whilest you withhold the bonds that should knit us faster unto Christ; you complain of our weaknesse in resisting corruptions, whilest you withhold the food whereby we should be strengthened; you com∣plain of seism, strife and division, whilest by you the sacred pledge of Ʋnion is detained from us. Surely, I had rther the Church-gatherers should blame the Minister for his indulgence to the people, than that the people should have cause in this manner to complain of his severity; but the golden mean is to be inquired for. And this is discovered in the ensuing Papers; where the Author endea∣vours on the one side to avoid the preciseness of some, that admit to the holy Table onely some few persons chosen out of many hun∣dreds; and the loosnesse of some on the o∣ther side, who admit hundreds and exclude not some few; namely, such as are ignorant and scandalous, such he would have noted, kept back and avoided, if after due admo∣nitions they will not be amended. Who∣soever shall peruse two of the following Pa∣pers, the first entituled, A reformed Congre∣gation. The second, The Congregation of S.
will acknowledge the Author to be no fa∣vourer of ignorance and scandalous living, but one that is studious to advance and in∣crease knowledge and piety, and to procure and maintain good Order. The more cause have I to note either the want of charity, or want of care in that Writer, who in a cer∣tain Preface hath snatched the Argument out of the Letter May 26 and contrary to the Authors minde and the many expressions in the Book, put upon him this Thesis, That the ignorant and scandalous must be admitted to the Communion: For it is one thing to admi∣nister the Sacrament in a Congregation, though mixt, i. e. though after your diligence in doing your part, there be a mixture of good and bad, as there will be while men are men; and it is another thing to administer carelesly to all sorts, without preparation, without observation, without suspension of such as the Minister is assured, are uncapa∣ble of receiving any benefit thereby. That the fear of a mixture is not reason enough to forbear the Sacrament, is (we still believe) evinced by some (at least) of those Argu∣ments. How they are perverted by the Re∣penter, the impartiall Reader will easily ob∣serve, if he please to compare the places. I will here mention onely the last. As we offer
the Covenant to All, so must we offer the Seal to All, that do outwardly submit to the Covenant. Out of these words the Repeater frames this Argument: The Covenant must be offered to all; Therefore the Sacrament must be offered to all, even to the ignorant and scandalous: Lea∣ving out the qualification added to All in the Letter; namely, that outwardly submit to the Covenant, by which he might if he had plea∣sed, have understood, those that professe faith and repentance, and outwardly or in the eye of their neighbours, are not rebellious against good counsell and admonition: If profession of faith and repentance, that is, a voluntary subjection to the Gospel be not the proper Quality of a Receiver, what is? And when shall Ministers perform their duty of admi∣nistration, if they must behold first the work of Grace wrought in the heart of every Re∣ceiver? Let the Minister instruct, exhort, admonish his people; let the people also ex∣hort, and admonish one another, yea let them separate and gather as long as they will; yet still there will be a mixture: Perfect pu∣rity is reserved for heaven. Labour for pu∣rity, labour for perfection we must but in the way of charity and humility, in the way of peace and order. The deence, not of neg∣ligent, but of faithful Ministers in Parish-Churches
Churches was the thing undertaken by this Respondent, who whilest he labored to com∣pose the difference by private conference, was unhappily engaged to a kinde of publick Di∣spute, wherein the Reader will quickly finde a great fault, wandring from the Question, and he will find as easily where to lay the blame. However, it may pass among the scuffles of our time, not the worst. In the Relation we know not of any wrong done to the Oppo∣nents, with whom the Respondent wisheth no more contention, but what shall pursue Truth and Peace with the swistest foot. For he is not glad to see the divisions of Protestants and Papists, muchless of Protestants among themselves; least of all, of English Protestants striving to the ruin of our Mother-Church. All good men will joyn in Reverend Do∣ctor Bernard's most charitable wish, That such as do consent in substantials for matter of Doctrine, would joyn in Discipline, and not let private interests and Circumstantials keep them thus far asunder. I conclude with the words of an honorable and religious person: This therefore is the best and surest way, because we are all apt to be decei∣ved, to be sincere in our disquisitions, modest in our determinations, charitable in our Censures,
and apt to communicate in things of evident Truth and confessed Holinesse. Mar. 25. 1657.
Post-script. THe Respondent hath been heavily censur'd for what he said, at the end of the Dispute, concerning Universal Redemption [vide E∣pist. Davenantii ad Duraeum.] But he saith, he will change his Opinion, when he shall see the fol∣lowing Paper of that Title solidly answered. Mean while, he hopeth he shall (by Gods Grace) patiently endure the loss and displeasure, that in these times attend upon that and other wholesome Doctrines.
The Preface. THat the patient Reader may see the first Rise of this Dispute be∣tween Mr. Barksdale of Sudeley, and Mr. Helme of Winchcombe, we must return into the memory of that time, when, not long after Mr. Helme his coming to that Church, he desired the aid of his neighbouring Ministers to preach in their turns a Lecture there. Mr. Barksdale was of all men most ready (being the nearest neighbour) to co-operate in a work tending to the benefit of that old Town; and I have heard him say, he should be very unmindfull of the good example of his Father and eldest Brother, that aregon before, if he should not in his way also study the good of that place of his Birth: and it is Poverty only, which like an armed man keeps him off from being an eminent Bene∣factor there. He had the more hope of this de∣sign, because Mr. Helme was then lookt upon, not only by those of the Parish that brought him thither, but by others too, even those of a con∣trary
Interest, as a man diligent in his calling charitable to the poor, fair-condition'd in his behaviour, and moderate in point of religion. So that, as yet, the people of all sorts heard him gladly. Mr. Barksdale was the more confir∣med in his good opinion of his Moderation, ha∣ving in familiar conference heard him much commend Mr. Baxter and his writings, a man indeed worthy of much commendation, especial∣ly for his great love and study of the Churches Peace. God direct him and all others in the right way unto it. Well, the Lecture began, Mr. Collier of Blockley (one whom Mr. Barksdale professeth to honour for his Christian temper, and the lovely Graces he hath observed in him,) being the first preacher; and, I remember, before he came, Mr. Helme entertained the Hearers with expounding of the beginning of the 122. Psalm, I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the Lord. Which sudden exercise of his was so well approved by Mr. Barksdale, that some dayes after (being a little given to the Muses, because of his daily conversation with some young Gentlemen-Scholars that live with him) he sent Mr. Helme this following Anagram:
HELMIUS. MELIUS. Maii. 27. 51. Helmius ad populum vicinos dicere Fratres Vultne? Docere potest Ipse suum melius, Qui bona, qui bene jam docuit, meliora docebit (Ni fuer it populus non melior) melius. The next turn was assigned to Mr. Barks∣dale, who brought with him his friend Mr. Towers, and obtained leave for him to preach in his stead. One of his reasons was, that he might shew Mr. T. to his friends in that place, and bring him into acquaintance with them. For if you know Mr. B. you know him to be a lover of all learned men, and very glad of any opportunity to serve them, either by himself, or by commending them to his more able friends. Mr. T. having learnedly supplyed the place, the chiefest of the Auditors after met at an Or∣dinary: where Mr. Helme signified his dislike of so much Greek in a Sermon, and of the Preach∣ers concluding his prayer with the Lord's, using this phrase before it, meekly kneeling upon our knees. This last censure was nothing pleasing to the company, who were all well affected to the Orders of the Church, and particularly a Mini∣ster of note in these parts, Mr. M. a little man, but full met all, fell sharply upon Mr. H. What,
saith he, reject the Lords prayer! I come no more into your company. And I think, he was as good as his word. Mr. T. soberly said as much as was fit for the time and place in defense of himself, to the content of the worthy Gentle∣men and the rest present. Mr. H. desired, that any man of a different mind from him, would send him his thoughts in writing. And this was the occasion of The first Letter of Mr. B. to Mr. H. Junii 13. 51. SIR, My respects remembred, I take leave to trouble you with this Paper, fearing lest the Discourse that past on Tuesday create some further unnecessary dispute. For preventing whereof, it will be good, I think, to mark what is the meaning of both parties. I con∣ceive, 'tis this: You lay by the Lord's prayer, not as if you did not hold it to be a prayer lawfull, yea and commendable to be used in the prayers of the Church (so the Divines of the Assembly call it p. 18. 19. of the Directo∣ry;) And you would have people know, that we may pray very acceptably, though not in those very words. And so, whereas it is conceived some have set up that to the disadvantage of other prayers, or perhaps been a little super∣stitious
in honouring the former, you would bend the stick the other way, and by omitting for a time the use of the words, (though you keep the matter still) teach people to regard the sense as the onely thing. Wherein you are not, I think, opposed by the other side, who hold the prayer to have been used, by Christ's appointment, by the Disciples, and fit to be used by us: (How can this be denied?) yet do not de∣ny but the words may lawfully be omitted, and the sense kept. And surely, it were a very great restraint of Devotion to confine it to any Forms whatsoever; my particular neces∣sities being not particularly provided for by the forms of any other. Which necessities yet my heart may much desire to open to God. And the like may be said sometime of a Con∣gregation; So that, as every Christian must labour to express himself in private (beyond forms;) so every Minister must endeavour af∣ter the Ability to deliver to God the needs of his people, as the exigent shall require. And the exigent doth not always admit of prepa∣ration. To conclude, we gladly use the help our Lord, and his servants that have gon be∣ore us, have afforded us; We value their pray∣ers, and use them; We do also after their pat∣tern▪ and agreeable to them frame other pray∣ers for our use; And yet after all prepared
prayer, the Christian Soul must be allowed her sudden ejaculations and extemporall as∣censions to the Throne of Grace. What would you have more, &c. The Answer given to this letter was civill, and so was the Reply; but neither is found. Only Mr. Barksdale remembreth, he sent Mr. Medes Diatribae with his next letter, and com∣mended some of the discourses to Mr. Helme, who answerd, that Mr. Mede lived in the time of the Prelates, and no wonder if he did serve that time; wherein surely he mistook the Ge∣nius of that excellent scholar, whose learning was accompanyed with equall integrity, as the Reader may finde by his Epistles and life, since published. Mr. Helme his conclusion then was, that he would avoid controversies, and preach Christ unto the people; And thus far all was fair between him and Mr. Barksdale, and so it con∣tinued till Mr. Helme began more and more to alienate himself from all neighbouring Mini∣sters, except some few more suitable to his own mind, with whom alone he gave out he would supply the Lecture; And accordingly, when ano∣ther came to preach, he denyed him, and took the pulpit himself, and there deliver'd such things, which occasioned
Another Letter of Mr. Barksdale to Mr. Helme. Maii 26. 52. Vincat Veritas! Vivat Charitas! SIR, I much commend what you said well of brotherly union and love, but cannot a∣way with this new business of separation. Fra∣ternall Admonition also I much desire should be more practised, but suspension before▪ Ad∣monition I cannot allow of. Clearly, my opi∣nion is, notwithstanding all that I have heard from you and your Brethren, that Ministers are not to be condemn'd by you for admini∣string the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper in their Congregations, though mixed. And for the proof here of I do humbly tender unto you and yours these following Reasons, which I shall be ready to enlarge and press more Lo∣gically, if it be desired. 1. Because of Christ's precept, Do this in remembrance of me. This remembrance should be frequent, and not delayed from year to year, on pretence of unpreparedness. 2. I argue from Christ's example. As he washed the feet of Judas among the rest, so (if you will hear the Expositors antient and recent of best account) he admitted Judas to the Sacrament: though he well knew his
unworthiness, and Ministers do not know the unworthiness of those they admit, but hope the best, upon their profession. 3. From the Apostles words, Ye shew forth the Lords death: The Lords death is shewed forth to the Ear of the unworthy Hea∣rer, why may it not to the Eye also of the Re∣ceiver, though in the Event he prove un∣worthy. 4. From those words of the Apostle, where he saith, The word is the savour of death to some. Yet the danger of that must not hin∣der Ministers from preaching in mixt Con∣gregations: and therefore the danger of the unworthiness of some Receivers must not hin∣der the administration of the Sacrament. 5. I allege the example of the Apostles, who upon profession of Faith Baptized whole multitudes, and no doubt communicated with them; although it appeared after that they were not all right. 6. St. Paul, directing his Epistles to mixt Congregations, calls them all Saints, because of their holy calling and profession: and those that are Saints in reputation may be ad∣mitted. 7. In the Church of Corinth were ma∣ny disorderly persons (besides the incestuous person) that were admitted. And 1 Cor. 11.
Where he blames their comming together for the worse, he forbids them not to come toge∣ther, nor doth he check the Minister, and forbid him to offer the Sacrament, but, saith he, Let a man examine himself, and so—Neither doth the unworthy eat damnation to the Minister, or any other, but only to him∣self. Nor is the Cup of blessing turned by the Minister into a Cup of poyson: (God forbid such language of yours,) but the unworthy Recei∣ver of the cup of blessing loses the blessing through his unworthiness. 8. As the word becomes the savour of death to the unworthy, so are their prayers abomina∣tion; yet you both receive them to the Word, and joyn with them in Prayer; and you sing Psalms with them, namely the 100. Psalms, We are his flock, he doth us seed, &c. 9. As the Word is a quickning Ordinance, so the Sacrament is a quickning Ordinance; For it is always accompanied with the Word. Nay without the Word 'tis no Sacrament. If the Word, without the Sacrament, may quicken those that were dead, much more may the Word with the Sacrament. Christ is the Bread of life, both to give life, and to maintain life. 10. You do, I suppose, admit Children of all Christian parents (upon their desire and pro∣fession) to the one Sacrament; why do you not
admit the parents themselves likewise to thè other? 11. You have no power to receive accusa∣tions and proofs of Witnesses, without which you cannot give sentence; and will you condemn and suspend, or excommunicate, before you have try∣ed, or upon hear-say? Quis erit innocens? 12. You say you make a separation in the Church, not from the Church; as if it were lawfull to make a separation in the Church. A separation in the Church is a rent of the Church, is offensive, and saddens the heart of many pious, discreet, and charitable persons, that however they like you otherwise, cannot joyn with you in your by-way. 13. We must not deny the worthy, and keep from them the means and pledges of grace, be∣cause of the unworthiness of some. 14. As we offer the Covenant to all, so must we offer the seal to all, that do outwardly sub∣mit to the Covenant. Sir, I will add no more at present: these Arguments thus briefly set down, you may consider of impartially. I have left a margin for your Annotations, and desire you to note what you allow, and what you dislike, and so return my paper; that I may endeavour to sa∣tisfy you, so far as it becomes one that is a friend to you, and to the people among whom
you are Minister. I must not end, till I have (as I think it my duty) admonisht you to re∣view the Meditations you delivered yesterday, and in your second thoughts judge, whether it he right and charitable to preach, 1. That the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church were heretofore imposed as necessary or equall to Gods Law. See to the contrary in the preface to the Liturgy, of Ceremonies, why some are retained. 2. That a Church of Saints might fifteen years ago best be gathered out of excommuni∣cate persons. 3. That God will add to your separating Church such as shall be saved; [as if salvation were not to be had elswhere.] 4. That Liturgy hath done much hurt a∣mong the people. [Remember the fallacy of non causa pro causa.] 5. That the Ministers that joyn not with you, harden people in their sins, and favour their wickedness. 6. That the Apostle speaking of withdraw∣ing from disorderly walkers, forbids to eat the Sacrament with them, though they were not excommunicate. [They might eat familiarly with Infidels not with the brother offending, 1 Cor. 5.] Herein I cannot subscribe to your doctrin, though in any office of love I am your servant.
Postscript. YOU were a little troubled, me thought, with that Text, 1 Cor. 5. concerning not eating with the offending Brother; and you held it lawfull to eat familiarly, (or at the common Table) with him, but not at the Holy Table. Your reason: because it was law∣full so to eat with Infidels. Sir, you are twice mistaken; for it was clearly permitted to keep company and eat with Infidels, though not with the brother. Read the place. And the Apostle doth not speak of eating the Sa∣crament, but common bread. A Christian must be so far from familiar converse with such a brother, that he must not so much as eat with him;—No, not to eat. He must avoid his familiar company, lest he partake in his sin, whom he knows to be covetous, a railer, a drunkard, &c. But, if they both chance to meet at the Lords Table (the offender being not under publick censure of Authority) there he may accompany him in that good Action, and not be polluted by him; for the Action is good, and the inward unworthiness is his own guilt, and hurts not another. The end of this Aversation from the offending brother is for his good, for his conversion; , 2 Th. 3. 14. That he may be ashamed. The
end of my Admonition to you, is that you may not be ashamed, but in the most han∣some way you can, amend your error, and no longer rail Humfryes of Free Admiss. p. 78. My Brethren, there are some touches of the Law and Superstition on you. You know what a sacred thing was made of the Communion-Table, when the Rayl was a∣bout it. Now I pray, think how you refine and spiritualize your old superstition, by putting a spiritual rail about the Sacrament, when you debar poor sinners from coming thi∣ther. Let us take heed, there will be something of the Pha∣risee in these spiritual-proud hearts of men; there will be setting a rayl stil about the Communion-Table. about the Holy Table, and fright the people from it. Mr. Barksdale expected Mr. Helme should now shew himself an example of meekness in accepting brotherly Admonition, which he had commended so much in his Sermon, but found it otherwise; for, neither was the pa∣per returned according to his request, nor a∣ny Answer at all, but the letter was shewed to his party, and from one of them Mr. Barks∣dale received this loving Advice following: A Letter of Mr. Tr. to Mr. B. Junii 1. 52. GOod Sir, The good respect I ever bore to your industry, learning, peaceableness
and integrity, makes me, having seen a letter of yours, savouring of some sharpness, to be bold to give you advice worth gold. 1. That you would write no more such letters: you know not what use may be made of it. If you had the letter again, I think you would never send it. 2. That you will not think your self ingaged in conscience to contend against any particular form or disciplin tolerated by the Magistrate, especially seeing I and the rest do by no means judge any man to be scandalous, because he is not of our form, but desire all brotherly love and fellowship with you and them. Good Sir, consider of this mine advice, and if you cannot take it well, yet do not take it ill, because tis the advice of your assured loving friend. The Answer returned Junii 5. WOrthy Sir, Although my Letter, writ∣ten (as I conceive) on a very just occa∣sion, and in a friendly manner to Mr. Helm, be not yet vouchsafed any answer, yet have I this fruit of it, that you, upon sight thereof, have been pleased thus far to shew your love to the Writer, as to give me your Advice: Advice led in by so favourable an elogy of your undeserving friend, that were the Ad∣monition sharper than any point of my let∣ter,
yet should I think my self bound to take it well. Monere & Moneri: you know the rest. I do not only not take it ill, but heartily thank you for it, and will obey it, preferring your judgment herein before mine own. For truly when I consult with my self (give me an ingenuous liberty to speak a little boldly with you) I can see no cause but I may write more such letters. That letter hath two parts: one defensive of many Ministers, for their life and learning, well approved; the other admonitory, desiring a revisall of some points deliverd by that Preacher my friend. In the Defense I have certainly said somewhat that cannot be refuted by silence; nor, as I think, by words: And in my Admonition, I have touched that which ought to be retracted, or at least excused. Why am I not answered by letter; if I am wrong, to be reduced or in∣formed; if I am right, to be confirmed. To give no Answer, in such a case, I confess I can∣not reconcile with the Rules of humanity which I have learned, and which I did be∣lieve my friend would not transgress. The true use of a letter is thereby to understand the writers mind, and so to give him answer: what other use may be made of it (as you say) truly I know not; but I esteem it not worthy to be seen by Superiours, against whose
command, I am so far from contending, that I will not publickly condemn what they publickly commend. But (to speak to your second) it hath been esteemed heretofore very conscientious to contend against some things tolerated by the Magistrate; So did many zealous Preachers contend against sports on the Lords day tolerated once, and so do some still contend against Usury tolera∣ted yet. And for Forms and Discipline, the Old way, you know, was preached down, when the Laws and Magistrates did endea∣vour to uphold it. These preachers I cannot defend, but would say something for them, if it had been a Form tolerated only, and not establisht. For we look upon a Form tolera∣ted as a thing not approved by the State, but winked at for a time, and dispenst with to content a party or side. A Form tolerated is at most but for triall: and so long as it is put to the triall, it may be contended against, not by force, but by argument and disswasion. Nor is this to oppose the State, or cross their Intention; for til they declare their Mind, it is presumption in a private man to intrude into their Counsells. And therefore while things are under Consultation (as now) it cannot be justly called opposition of the Ma∣gistrate, if one dispute (in a familiar letter)
against that which they tolerate. Nay, the liberty of familiar letters, you know, is of greater extent. For my part, there is none gives more to the Magistrate in matters of Religion, that I do; none is more ready to submit to laws in all things not cleerly con∣trary to the Highest Law. And for the pre∣sent Toleration, although I think I may safely take the liberty (is not this also a part of the Toleration?) to discourse of such matters either by letter or otherwise; yet I will obey your Advice, as I said: and I cannot chuse but commend your Moderation in not judging any man scandalous for not being of your Form. Though out of Form, I am really, Sir, your Servant in Christ. Another to the same, not long aster. GOod Sir, Having not the leasure at present to attend you at Stow, I send my letter to to salute you and your good company. I have considered upon your Argument yesterday (taking advantage from the rubric in our Service-Book) That Catechizing and Con∣firmation must go before the Sacrament of of the Lords Supper: Therefore your New Covenant. The Antecedent is in the rubric after the Form of Confirmation. And I can∣not
defend the former neglect of Confirma∣tion in the Bishop, nor any present neglect of Catechizing by any Minister. But seeing there is now none of that Confirmation to be had (a great want in the Church I think) what if the Minister do his part in instruct∣ing people in the Catechism, and the people not only make Confession of Faith, but pro∣fess Repentance, Charity, Obedience; nor hath the Minister any assurance, no nor just ground of suspicion that they are not sincere, shall he not admit them to the Lords Table? I would not presume to condemn all the pious and learned Ministers of the Church of Eng∣land, that have administred the Sacrament upon such tearms. When we cannot have all done we would, we must be content with what can be done, as the case standeth, Well, Con∣firmation I grant is commanded as conveni∣ent and profitable, not so necessary, but that, in case it be wanting, the Sacrament may be administred. Now, to the sequel: How your Covenant can serve in place of Confir∣mation, I do not yet understand. It consisteth only of the Confession, resolution and pro∣mise of the Covenanters: whereas Confirma∣tion, or laying on of hands, is an act of the Bi∣shop to certify the person confirmed, of Gods favour and gracious goodness towards him:
and it is joyned with prayer and benediction, wherwith the party is thought to be strength∣ned and encreas'd in grace. Your Covenant, I grant, is somewhat like the Answer in our Catechism, where the Catechized underta∣keth the Baptismall vow made in his name, and promiseth by Gods help to perform it. And surely that is done by all that come with us to the Lords Table. And approaching to it in the quality of such as repent them truly of all their sins, are in charity with their neighbours, and intend to lead a new life, they do renew their Covenant, and in taking the Sacrament have the seal thereof: as tis very requisite, nor do I yet see how Ministers can refuse to give it. Sir, shall I be bold in secret to ask you, what great deliverance is the ground of your Covenant. I doubt of it, because upon the late deliverance from the Scotish Invasion, all hopes were cut off of reforming this Church according to the pattern of Scotland, which, unless I am deceived, was one end of the Scotish Covenant receiv'd in England. I deny not great Deliverances, but I take ad∣vantage from the Scots Covenant, and say, that the Friends thereof, instead of Delive∣rance, have had a totall overthrow. Give me a little light in this, and reconcile the Cove∣nants
in the religious part of them: for I meddle not with temporals. That which you said (as I take it) of peo∣ples having excommunicated themselves, by a defection from the Gospel in life and man∣ners, which is you say in effect all one as to fall from the Faith, must be explaned by you. For Apostacy from the Faith and pro∣fession of Christ cuts a member off from the Church, and Corruption in manners doth but make a diseased member, and such a one must be cured gently. I remember a Covenant somewhere in Mr. Rogers his 7. Treatises, a Book Dedi∣cated to King James: I would gladly know, whether such a one as that might not serve your turn, Your Servant, C. B. Reader, I am tempted by the mention of the Covenant in the former Letter, here to insert what seems to have been written about this time.
Queries of a Christian Brother, which he desires may be answered before he enter into the Covenant held forth at Winchoomb. 1. WHether it be lawful for any num∣ber of people thus to combine, with∣out direction of Authority, which is wont to be jealous of Meetings, lest under pretence of piety somewhat else be intended. 2. Whether all that is moral in this Co∣venant be not conteined in the Prayer of all Communicants the old way, to live a godly, righteous and sober life, and in the profession to repent of former sins, and lead a new life. 3. Whether all that are Catechized the old way, do not take on them as good a Covenant, when they answer, Yes verily, and by Gods help so I will, &c. 4. What is meant by the corrupt and for∣mal way of worship, whereof they are asha∣med. If the worship established in the Church of England, is it not a false and scandalous expression? 5. What is meant by all other Godly dis∣ciplin: if the use of the Keys; where have these Covenanters any Commission? 6. Whether they can be said to keep the
Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, that innovate in the Church, and divide with∣out cause? Queries upon the Covenant at Winch∣comb▪ 1652. 1. VVHether it were not much better and more needful for the People to repent their departing from the Vow of Baptism, and from the Orders, and Ministry of that Church wherein they were Baptized, than to charge the Worship thereof as cor∣rupt, when the corruption is only in them∣selves? 2. Whether any People can have enjoy∣ment of all Gods holy Ordinances, that have not any Minister among them Ordained after the Apostolical manner? 3. Whether Ecclesiastical Power be groun∣ded in the People, and not derived from Christ and his Apostles by a succession of Church∣men? 4. Whether it be not Schism to cast off obedience to the antient Apostolical Govern∣ment of the Church? And to be of these new Congregations, to communicate in Schism? 5. Whether Schism be not a great crime? when as every Christian is bound upon his
Salvation to maintain the Unity of the Church. 6. Whether any example or pattern of a Congregation, without dependence upon some higher Ecclesiastical power, can be found in any Age till this last? 7. Whether mutual Admonition and all that is good in this Covenant may not be pra∣ctised keeping our dependence still on the law∣ful Guides of the Church? 8. Whether they can be said to walk hum∣bly and inoffensively toward All, that take upon them▪ to condemn the whole Church as corrupt, and renounce Communion with all that joyn not in this Covenant? Another Letter to Master H. about the same time. SIR, ALthough I have promised to write no more Letters, such as the former, wherein, it seems, you have found some dislike that you will not tell me of; nor will I oppose your new Church-State any fur∣ther than in modesty and charity I may: yet having missed of your Company to day, and having understood by Mr. Tr. that you have had a report brought you concerning
your Orders and Me, I desire you not to be∣lieve it, before you hear me; and the like I desire concerning any Report you hear of my Preaching. One thing more: Whereas I am informed that the last Lords Day you were much in confuting my Interpretation of 1 Cor. 5. 11. and brought consent of In∣terpreters, that, [no, not to eat] is not, as I understand it, spoken of common eating, I have here transcribed Diotat's note. No, not to eat [Namely in common course of life: shun all manner of voluntary sweet and friend∣ly conversation with him. The same shun∣ning of Infidels was not required: and there∣fore you must acknowledge your proof weak, They might eat with Infidels, Therefore much more with Christians. I will trouble you with his note upon v. 4. When ye are] He speaks to the Pastors and Conductors of the Church. The meaning is, Being gathered together in Ecclesiastical judgement, having this my Declaration, &c. Whereby you plainly see, your foundation for an Inde∣pendent Congregation taken away. Pray Sir, weigh this, and if you please, the for∣mer Letter, with the same quietness of mind, wherewith I wrote it, and return me two lines of Answer, that I may know my friend∣ly Office is not lost: and take you the same
liberty of correcting me, who am your Chri∣stian Friend. No Answer was returned to the former Letters, and so there was a Cessation till the next year. But in the mean time this fol∣lowing Paper came to my hands, supposed to be written by Mr. B. out of a desire to have somewhat done in the way of Refor∣mation by the neighbouring Ministers to take away somewhat from the grievous Cri∣minations Mr. H. and such others usually cast upon them, as hinderers of piety, and hardeners of the people in their Sins. This Paper, I believe the pious Reader will take kindly from me, intitled A Reformed Congregation. 1. WE do in thankfulness acknowledge the great Mercy of God, in not giving us up utterly to confusion and desolation, but preserving us under any Government, where∣in Law and Justice is so administred, that we may (if we be not wanting to our selves) lead a quiet and a godly life; And we content our selves with the present State, not seditiously seeking after changes. 2. We do much honour the Church of England, wherein we have been Baptized and bred; and, notwithstanding any small
faults in the Constitution and Disciplin, or great faults in the late Officers and Gover∣nours thereof, we insist upon the same Grounds, and adhere to the same Church, as it was in Queen Elizabeths time defended against the Roman by Jewels Apology, and against the Innovators by Hookers Ecclesiastical Politie. 3. Yet do we not think all the forms and rites thereof so necessary, but that we may (as discretion shall require) omit them upon oc∣casion, and in their stead (without coutempt of the former) use some that are different and serve well for order and decency in the service of God. 4. To rest in any forms and rites what∣soever, and to serve God only externally, we hold a very imperfect and unacceptable serving of God, who requireth chiefly the heart. But, as God hath made both our Bodies and Souls, and Christ hath redeemed Both; so do we desire to glorifie Him with Both. And, as we would express the power of Godliness in our lives, so would we also preserve a decent form of it (such as is for edification) in our Assemblies. 5. The Litury of the Church of England (for the substance and main of it) we heartily embrace; but in the use thereof shall not re∣tain any thing offensive and opposite to the
present Government: but in all our Religious exercises shall be as careful to shew our due submission to the Magistrate (which all good Christians have ever done) as our reverence to the Antient Church. 6. That Sum of Religion contained in the old Catechism, we do especially commend for the education of Children: And we shall then think our selves good proficients in Christia∣nity, when, with the profession of the necessary Articles of Faith, and due participation of the Sacraments, and frequency of the Word and Prayer, we joyn the careful daily practice of Gods moral Law, and of those excellent E∣vangelical precepts of our only Lord and Sa∣viour Jesus Christ. 7. Difference of opinions in lesser points and matters shall not make a breach in our Charity and Communion with one another: Nor shall we for any such difference be aliena∣ted so much or estranged from any Christians in the whole world, but that we shall be glad to communicate and close with them in all that is good and lawful. 8. That we may (for the present) supply the want of publick Church-Government, as well as we can, we resolve to put into more diligent practice that command of Christ concerning fraternal Admonition; First, by
one in private, then by two or three, and lastly by the Church or Congregation, or those that represent it: And whosoever shall obstinately stand out against the last Admonition, with such a one we will have nothing to do, but avoid him so far as the Law of Nature and this Nation will permit. 9. This our Congregation shall be guided by one or more lawful Ministers, assisted with such Officers as our Necessities shall require, and the Church by common consent shall elect. And▪ as we cannot like of those that factiously draw away people after them, that belong to other Assemblies; so shall we be careful not to offend in the like manner by trespassing upon any lawful Minister, or distracting, and di∣sturbing any other Congregation whatso∣ever. 10. Our great Business shall be (by Gods grace) to live soberly, righteously and godly, That being the end of the Gospel: and in all external and indifferent matters we shall con∣form our selves to the Law of the Land, and to such Rules of Civility and good order, as we can learn by our selves, or by the exam∣ples and directions of the most prudent. 11. And lastly, we shall be in preparation of mind to conform unto any Church-Govern∣ment, which the Supreme Power shall settle
over us according to the word of God: And (in case none be setled) we shall endeavour to join with other neighbouring Congregations, and receive what influence we can from some Overseer of the Primitive and Apostolical temper. THe last Spring Master B. encreased his diligence, and doubled his pains at Sude∣ley, considering how many of his friends and acquaintance at Winchcomb, and of his most Honourable Patron's Tenants, were become almost like Sheep without a Shepheard; some frequenting that Parish-Church indeed, but bringing home their ears tingling with the strange doctrins, and uncharitable censures and reproaches of the Preacher; others absen∣ting themselves from the Church, and con∣tented with their private reading and devo∣tions at home; others looking about where they might find a more comfortable Ministry. Upon this consideration Mr. B. not consulting with flesh and bloud, not fearing the threats of those violent men, not seeking any profit to himself, but meerly the glory of God and the good of Souls, opposes his endeavours a∣gainst the separation, shews the danger of fal∣ing off from a true Reformed Church, ex∣horteth to Communion with Pastors of a
regular Ordination, reproveth the license of the times, wherein so many without lawfull call, without commission, venture upon holy Ministeries. The people hereby erected, and (as I have credibly been informed) being publick∣ly told by Mr. Helme, that if they could not comply with his way, they should not dissem∣blingly come to hear him, but provide other∣wise for themselves, they in great numbers fre∣quent Prayers., Sermons and Sacraments at Sudeley. This pierced Mr. Helme, and al∣though he would not answer what Mr. Barks∣dale had written to him, he inveighs against him in his Pulpit, condemnes his Preaching, and his Sacramenting, and this in no milder language than of murdering Christ and the souls of men: This was the occasion of Another Letter to Mr. Helme, Maii 23. 53. MR. Helme, I have this long time much desired some friendly conference with you, but not yet finding the opportunity, I take the liber∣ty to send you this Letter after my former let∣ters which I suppose you received, though you returned no answer. I would not divert you from your better thoughts by troubling
you to give any long answer, a few lines shall be sufficient to me. Only be pleased to let me know the reasons of that vehemence you have often used in condemning your neighbours, Minister, and people, particularly for the Holy Sacrament administred among them. Must we forbear that part of our Ministry, because some are unworthy receivers? Then it seems we may not preach for fear our Ser∣mons may prove the savour of death to some. The accidentall evill following by reason of some (not known) defect in the recipient is no discharge to the Minister, nor need it de∣ter him from doing his part. But we must not admit the unworthy. Nor do we admit any but upon an apparent worthiness, that is, upon profession of Faith, and repentance, and newness of life. But they make not good their promises: The more are they to blame, that do not. Let not their falsness be laid upon the Minister; for he's not guilty of it, no more than a Magistrate that gives an oath to Jurors which they through their own ne∣gligence do not performe; or than a Mini∣ster; that offers an Engagement or Cove∣nant to people, when yet some of them are found afterwards to have entred into it not sincerely. Sir, I cannot see, how you can se∣cure your self at any time, so that your Mi∣nistrie
may not be employed on those who may (possibly) turne it to their hurt. Those bloody words that are reported to have fallen from you in publick concerning people in Hel crying out upon Ministers for damning them by giving them the Holy Mysteries, cannot be excused; Nor are you to censure any for unworthy receiving unless you know them to be such; and if you do know them to be such, I think you are rather to admonish them in privat, and pray for them, than pub∣likly to rage against them. I will not trouble you with more of this. Yet one word more I must take leave to add, and ask of you, Why you complained to the Justices at Winch∣comb Sessions last that you had malignant Neighbours. Sir, you are not to endanger any man's name or estate by such a character that is a professor of that Religion which Christ hath taught, that submits to the High∣er powers, that desires to live peaceably with all men. Such a one particularly doth he pro∣fess himself to be in truth, who also is, Your friend to serve you C. B. May, 23. 53.
A Reply presently upon receipt of Answer to the letter of May 23. Jun. 8. 53. SIR, To shew my respect unto you, and the desire I have you should have any fair satis∣faction concerning my doings, I shall give some touches upon the severall parts of your letter, passing by the ill language in it (pro∣ceeding not from your reason, but passion) and being very well assured, that many pious and learned men (equall to the best of your Approvers) doe concurre against you in the charge of uncharitableness, and do not think fit to conform themselves to your example. Ad. 1. The wicked men cannot be said to be hardened in their wicked wayes by us that promise them life onely upon Gods terms, if they repent and believe the Gospell; Nor have they that are convinced of sin by you at Winchcomb any other salve from me at Sudely to cure them but the promises of the Gospell upon their Conversion. Yet do not I confess that every thing you call sin, is so; How many good things have you called evill? That of Ursin is not pertinent unto me, for none are acquitted Verbo visibili, that are not also Verbo audibili. Both wayes are they ac∣quitted that are truly that which they pro∣fess.
2. This Ordinance is no otherwise pro∣phaned than others are, by unworthy parta∣kers. Prayers of wicked men are abomina∣tion, why do you let them prophane your prayers at Winchcomb? As to Ezec. 44. And other places elsewhere, I must confess you have an unhappy skill in making the Scriptures look kindly upon your selves, and with an ill aspect on such as are not of you. Before that Text will serve your turn, you must prove our people are the uncircumcised in heart, and gone astray after Idols? 3. Tis no guilt at all to see men making a solemn memorial of Christs death, and prai∣sing him, & promising to obey him better than they have done. Hag. 2. 3. Is sure mistaken by you, 1 Cor 5. 6. justly condemns the countenancers of the Incestuous person, and is not pertinent to them that make an open de∣testation of all sin. 1 Cor. 5. 11. requires that Christians which are fornicators, drunkards, &c. be avoided and not eaten with, which is clearly spoken and interpreted by all the lear∣ned interpreters (I believe) of abstaining from familiar converse. Yet no man denyes but such are to be excluded also from the Ho∣ly Table. But this must be done judicially. There is not wanting diligentia debita in the Minister when he gives instruction and ad∣monition,
and admitts none whom he knows or is informed of to be in that black rowl. The Discipline Authoritative in the places cited, Matth. 18. and 1 Cor. 5. is conceived to belong to other Overseers † than you or I. Your comparisons prove nothing. Nor is the case alike. We give that which is good to those whom we in charity suppose to be well affected. † See the Author of binding and loosing. 4. If there had been only Prayers and not wars for Reformation, many think it had been the more Christian way. But Sir, was not the Reformation fought for a long time, Presby∣terian? That's not yours; Nor is yours esta∣blished. I perswade all to light and purity. 5. I assist the true Reformation, in preach∣ing piety and charity, and admitting such to Communion who vow holy vowes. And I think they are of the best sort. My cure at Hawl. and Sudely is not comparable to your large Diocese. And for gathering a Church, truly I am ready to serve all my Christian friends that (upon the liberty granted under this Government) will make use of my Mi∣nistry. 6. For Matter and Form, our congrega∣tion (I trust in Gods mercy) shall not be a∣shamed to look upon yours: and we endea∣vour
to be above you in our humility (at least) and charity. And if you will inform against any member, and prove the accusation, he shall feel our Discipline. But I perceive by what you add, you are misinformed, and so may I be. God send us more of the Gospell-Spirit. C. B. June 8. An Addition. TO your Rule, where no excommunion, no communion, I answer, that the power of Excommunion is in the Governours of the Church, (and I conceive) belongs not unto particular Congregations. For before judge∣ment given, there must be a tryall by exami∣nation of witnesses, &c. Do you keep such a court in your Church? pray shew me the Commission for it. Now, if the Government of the Church be hindred or excluded, the blame must light upon the Enemyes thereof; and particular Congregations must enjoy the ordinances as well as they can. Besides, by your Rule, all the Congregations of England in former times had no right to Communion, because they owned no power of Excommu∣nion: only they could present faults, and so must leave them to the cognizance of their
superiors. As for 1 Cor. 5. You must not look upon Corinth as a single Congregation, but as an Episcopall See, according to some: ac∣cording to others, as governed by a Consi∣story of Presbyters. See the Expositors. Calvin. in 1 Cor. 5. 4. COngregatis vobis] Erat in veteri Ec∣clesia ordinatum presbyterium: hoc est, Collegium Seniorum, cujus, omnium consensu, prima erat cognitio: inde res ad populum, sed jam praejudicata, deferebatur. 11. Cum tali nec cibum quidem sumat is] Per cibi communicationem intelligitur vel con∣tubernium, vel interior convictus: nihil enim prohibet, quo minus, si in diversorium in∣gressus, videam excommunicatum quempiam assidere, simul cum eo prandeam: ne{que} enim ejus excludendi mihi est potestas. C. 11. 28. Probet autem seipsum homo] Ne{que} vero perfecta aut fides aut poenitentia re∣quiritur; sicuti quidam perfectionem quae nus∣quam inveniri potest, nimium urgendo univer∣sos mortales in perpetuum à coena arcent.——Fide setiam inchoata ex indignis facit dignos. 29. Qui ederit indignè]—offerri illis cor∣pus, licet ejus participatione sua eos indignitas privet.
34. Caetera qum venero disponam] De ex∣terno decore loquitur, quod ut in libertate Ecclesiae positum est, ita pro temporum, loco∣rum, hominum conditione constitui debet. C. 13. 7. Charitas omnia fert, omnia cre∣dit] Simplicitatem & humanitatem in ju∣dicando hic requirit, & asserit esse perpetuas Charitatis comites. Ita fiet, ut homo Chri∣stianus falli sua benignitate ac facilitate satius esse ducat, quam sinistra suspicione fratrem gravare. Idem in Ep. ad Philip C. 2. v. 3. Nihil per contentionem] Excitatur contentio dum su∣am quisque sententiam pertinaciter vult tueri.—Inanis autem gloria animos titillat, ut unicuique blandiantur sua inventa. Sed per humilitatem.] Ex stultâ nostri admiratione nascitur fratrum contemptus. Si quid novisti rectius— Reader, I shall here take leave to impart unto thee another paper written, as I think, about this time, when Mr. B. grieved at the virulence of the Adversary, and studying to deprive him of all occasion of evil-speaking, set down and presented to some worthy friends, this Model for
The Congregation at Sudeley▪ 1. THe Rector is a Presbyter of the Church of England, and hath some discreet men of the Congregation for his As∣sistants to advise with, and to use as occasion shall require. 2. On the Lords day he Preacheth once or twice, and also the Church-Catechism is repeated at certain times by the younger sort. 3. On Saturday in the Afternoon (or at another convenient time) he explaneth some part of the Catechism, and taketh the names of such as desire to be admitted to the Com∣munion, and giveth particular aid, as neces∣sity shall appear. 4. Every month is administred the Com∣munion to as many of those that have given their Names to the Minister as have recei∣ved Tokens from him. Which Tokens they receive on the Eve of the Communion Day. 5. A prime duty of the Assistants is to have an Eye to the Conversation of the rest, and to admonish them that are faulty, and to acquaint the Minister therewith, if need be, that scandals may be avoided. 6. The persons that are put off till the
Communion day take it not ill, but use the time allowed them, for their better pre∣paration, knowing that this business is of the greatest moment. 7. This Congregation beareth charitable affections, toward all other Congregations whatsoever, and prayeth for the union of all Christians, and the recovery of all holy Dis∣ciplin. I omit some other letters of Mr. B. to Mr. H. because they contein little but a repetition of what is said in the former: and for Mr. H. his Answers, those I have seen have so little of Charity or Civility in them (to speak most gently) that I conceive it will be no wrong to the Reader, or to him, to let them dye; nor will Himself, I believe, think fit to bring them into the light. Next then shall fllow A Letter of Mr. B. to Col. A. Jun. 53. NOble Sir, You are a Gentleman and a Scliolar, and in both names I have reason to expect courtesy from you in a fair perusall of the en∣closed, that my cause may not be made worse than it is by misapprehension. The sum of the letter to which here is a Reply, is but
this; To administer the Sacrament to the wic∣ked, as such, is many wayes unlawfull; You administer the Sacrament to the wicked, as such; Therefore, &c. A bare denyall of the Minor is sufficient on my part, and I look upon the charge as very uncharitable, with∣out further proof. Methinks it becomes not any modest Christian, to accuse strongly, and prove weakly. But let me retort thus; To admit to your Prayers and Sabbaths the wic∣ked, as such is unlawfull; You admit to your Prayers and Sabbaths the wicked, as such; Therefore, &c. Sir, I am much mistaken in all the practice of the Church, if excommuni∣cation doth not as well exclude the wicked from the society of prayers, as the Sacrament. By your means I hope for further light, and some Logicall Account of this business in con∣troversy. And I am willing to attend you at your Call, to be taught by any man of a Chri∣stian temper. I shall take leave to adde here some what relating to our discourse yesterday, concerning Judas and the Passover. I say the presence of an hypocrite disclos'd pollutes not the Ordinance: because Judas was such a one, [was he not known and discover'd by Christ, to be a Devill?] and yet he was pre∣sent at Christ's institution. Consider, I pray, of the passage John 13. there is mention of
the last Supper. After the first part of it, Christ rose and washed his Disciples feet, then he lay down again, and proceeded to the institution of the Holy Sacrament, at which Judas being present, received the peece of bread, , which Christ , having put his hand in the dish, gave him. Judicent eru∣diti. Again, I say, Christ at this Passover did not eat the Lamb; for the time of slaying the Lamb was not yet come. The Lamb was flain and eaten by the Jews, 'tis plain, after Christ's passion. For they would not enter into the Judgment-Hall, lest they should be defiled, but that they might eat the Passo∣ver. John 18. 28. What Passover then did Christ eat the night before? Not the Lamb, but unleavened Bread and bitter herbs. Af∣ter that, followed the Postcoenium, wherein the Holy Sacrament was instituted. This I shall make out further at our Meeting, and you shall see we may be very confident in some opinions without any true ground. I am Sir, Your very humble servant, C. B. Thus did the poor man labour to make his peace with the Adversary, but in vain, and
being now weary of this endless controversy, he sought after some refreshment in the compa∣ny of some Ministers his friends, not very re∣mote, and endevoured to hold a meeting with them at some convenient times for mutual con∣ference and comfort. And that the Meeting might not be obnoxious to the Censure of such as watch for advantages, He sent to Mr. To. the following paper, which although it came not to the effect therein particularly men∣tioned, yet hath attained its general end, and made way for the Lecture now begun among us; and unless the people be over-cold in their Affection to the lawfull Preachers; or them∣selves, some of them, afraid to do their duty, it is like to continue. The paper mentioned, with Mr. T's answer, is not ashamed here to offer it self to the Candid Readers view: Amica Collatio. 1. † De Deo. De Homine.1. THe end of this Collation is not for any Indulgence to the Body,2. De Christo. De Ecclesia. but for re∣freshment of the mind, and cherishing one ano∣ther3. De Scriptura. De Traditionib. in the Studies of good Learning and Re∣ligion:
4. De Peccato. De Gratia.and therefore here shall be more Dis∣course than Drink. 5. De Angelis. De Sanctis.2. Every one of the Company, consisting on∣ly of Scholars, shall stand to his six-pence Commons, and if he come not, shall send his money7. De Lege. De Evangelio. with a letter of excuse; otherwise, he shall pay it double. 8. De Baptismo. De Eucharistia.Those present shall not exceed above the other six-pēce6. De Imaginibus. De precibus. apeece in bread and beer and other per∣tinents.9. De Fide. De Operibus. 3. This Meeting shall be the first Tuesday10. De Votis. De Juramentis. in every Month, unless the day be (upon some exigent)11. De Pietate. De Charitate. changed; and every one in his turn shall provide a Latin Lecture12. De Patientia. De Spe. to be read at the appointed place, im∣mediatly before dinner, not exceeding half an hour,Huc spectant fere omnia. upon two Heads
of Theology, according to the order of the Catalogue. † 4. That Lecture shall yield matter of Dis∣course, pro and con; and for the more varie∣ty of Conference every Fellow of this Socie∣ty shall bring some pocket-volume, or some new Tract to be communicated to the rest, and considered in the By. And moreover, They shall impart what Intelligence they have De Rep. literaria. 5. That the Society may be the better fur∣nished for their private Studies, they shall give each other a Note of such Books as they can lend in exchange for other, and the mutuall returns shall be made within the month; That none may be a loser, some re∣cord is to be made hereof. 6. In this Meeting nothing shall pass that may either be offensive to the Common∣wealth, or injurious to the good Name of a∣ny private person, living or dead; And every one shall use all Gentleness and Condescen∣tion of the other, remembring who hath said, He that is greatest among you, let him be servant of All. Qu. 1. Whether it be not the Duty of the lawfull Ministers to shew some extraordina∣ry zeall and care in preserving people in the
Unity of the Church, when so many unor∣dained men, are so zealous and diligent to draw them into separation. 2. Whether Communions ought not to be celebrated, at least, thrice a year, according to the Rule of the Church: and to that end the People to be duly prepared by Cate∣chizing, and, where need is, by particular Conference. 3. Whether the lawful Ministers, for their mutual encouragement and furtherance in the work of their Calling, ought not to associate themselves, and at certain ap∣pointed times of meeting perform some Ex∣ercise by turns. Mr. T. to Mr. B. Aug. 30. 53. My Dear Friend, YOur's I received on Friday; that and the afterday was ingag'd in the service for the third day. On Monday I communi∣cated the enclosed (which now I return) to D. We do so exceedingly approve it, and the compiler of it, that we heartily desire you, who are so prudent a  to the young so∣ciety, either to bring the same Paper with you on the first Tuesday of the next Month, or another Paper, with Additions, as you shall
think fit (though in point of Laws, as in Cases of Conscience, the excess of determina∣tions may be offensive) to be communicated to New College, so contrived, that to prevent any possible exception, we may impart the view of it to him that sits at the Helm, and if not desire, yet give way for his concurrent socie∣ty in the innocency and industry of the design. We think when we do hunc lapidem movere, we do amoliri omnem. God direct and pros∣per you and us. It was not long after this time, when Mr. B. having celebrated the Holy Eucharist at Sudeley, Mr. H. as his manner had been before, crys out, Murder, in his Pulpit, and withall makes shew of a readiness to confer with any body, and make good his charge. Which news was brought Mr. B. by one of the Baylifs, and by the same hand a few lines were presently sent by Mr. B. signi∣fying to Mr. H. that he was glad to hear now of an offer of Conference, and that he would be ready to wait upon Mr. H. at his time and place before some discreet Auditors of his choice, to answer his charge, and give him account of his doings at Sudeley. To this note, after three weeks interval,
had Mr. B. answer brought him to his house in these words of Master H. to Master B. Octob. 19. 1653. MAster B. I received your Chalenge, which you sent by Baylif T. and am willing to answer it (in the strength of God:) and because you give me liberty to choose time and place, and Auditors; Sir, I do choose Nov. 9. next following for the day, and the publick meeting house of Winchcomb for the place, where I shall not fail (God assi∣sting) to be ready to prove, That such a mixed Administration of the Sacraments, that is usually practized in the Parishes of England, is unlawful in the Administrators in giving, and the People in receiving. As for the persons before whom this Conference shall be held, I shall choose my despised Brethren who are Pa∣stors of the Churches, and those simple Dis∣ciples (as you call them) over whom the Ho∣ly Ghost hath made me Overseer. You have the liberty to choose what sober persons you please. Sir, if you resolve to maintain this unchristian practice in your self and others,
you shall meet at the time and place afora∣said an opponent of Your loving friend, C. H. Your chalenge is so triumphantly reported about the Country by your friend, that I be∣lieve here will be many Godly persons of the places adjacent. Master B. to Master H. Octob. 20. 1653. SIR, THat which you are pleas'd, in your mi∣litary language, to call a challenge (which yet you have been so wary as to an∣swer after three weeks space) was indeed a friendly Civil request, that I might wait up∣on you at your appointed time and place in the presence of some discreet witnesses (that is, in some neighbours house, as the bearer could, and did assure you) to answer your charge against me for my Ministring at Sudeley. Your publick meetings I do not approve: they tend to faction in the Church, and per∣haps will end in sedition against the State, if you be not the wiser. See Sleidan's Commen∣taries, of the disorders of Germany. But Sir,
if you please to meet me on the Lords da next at night, at Mr. F's He was waited for, in one quarter of an hour's but he came not. discourse (possibly) we may contrive some way for your satisfaction, Your servant, C. B. Mr. B. to Mr. P. & Mr. Tr. Oct. 20. 53. WOrthy Friends, I have some reason to think that you are misinform'd by Mr. Helme concern∣ing me: wherefore I trouble you with these few lines, to assure you, that I am so far from despising you, that I do not use to mention you sine honoris praefatione, and in my heart do much value your learning and piety; yea, I do reckon you in the number of my honor'd friends: Non eadem sentire bonos de rebus isdem, Incolumi licuit semper Amicitiâ. That first. Next, whereas I am required to answer at the publick meeting▪ place at Winchcomb Novemb. 9. before a confluence of those that are called by my opponent the Godly, and am named the Challenger, I tru∣ly profess unto you, that in my note to Mr. Helme, about three weeks agoe, I only de∣sired
him in humble manner (grounding my request upon what the bearer told me of his readiness to conferr with any man of a dif∣ferent way, and to make good his cause) to appoint a time, place, and some discreet per∣sons, to be witnesses, and I would wait on him. Let him shew you my Note. I never heard of any good order at any late-publick popular disputes; and it is against my peace∣able disposition and Studies to engage my self to the noise & factions of such meetings. 'Twill be better sure, first to corfer in pri∣vate: I will meet Mr. Helme at Mr. Free∣mans house, if he will; The sooner the better; Let him chuse some seect friends of judg∣ment▪ and I shall be glad to have both of you present, to keep us within the Laws of Aca∣demicall Disputation. Upon which meeting, if we can a∣gree upon any publick orderly way of Tryall, that may tend to a good effect, with leave of Superiours, I shall, God willing, be ready, and either answer or oppose, so far as it con∣cerns me. I most desire to confer by letters with any sober Divine, Nec quenquam fugio. Your very humble Servant, C. B.
That same week was sent to Mr. H. a pa∣per conteining three false Doctrins to be con∣futed at Gods house in Winchcomb by some neighbouring Ministers Novemb. 9. with an Epigram to the erring Brethren: Papists look one away, &c. See it immediately before the Dispute. Mr. H. to Mr. B. October 31. 53. SIR, There was a nameless paper sent to me with three questions and a Libell at the end of it, directed to the erring brethren; the Mes∣senger said it came from you. I desire to know who those erring Brethren are. The question I propos'd takes in the substance of what is in difference between you and me; And I shall be ready the day and hour appointed, viz. 10. of the clock on the 9. day of November next, at the Meeting-house at Winchcomb, which you Idolatrically call God's House, to justify (through Grace) that assertion I sent to you, and I do desire your positive Answer, whether you will be there or not to answer, as you first proposed, my opposition. Your friend so far as you are for truth, C. H.
Mr. B. to Mr. H. November 1. 53. SIR, I am very prone of my self to wait on you either privately or publickly, but you know, I think, or may know, that my Intention was for a private meeting. I am assured by some judicious friends, that no scholastic Order is to be hoped for at your publick Meeting: Wherefore I may without any injury to my Cause decline it; being ready to answer, ei∣ther by word before some discreet witnesses, or by writing, as you shall please to propose your Arguments. But pray, let them be Ar∣guments, not ill words, as Libell, Idolatry, Murdering, and other the like elegancies of yours. In all wayes that become an ingenu∣ous man and a Christian, I am your servant. All-Saints-Day. Mr. B's. Reply to Mr. A. P. Octob. 31. 53. DEar Sir, Si judicas cognosce. My self am best able to inform you, both what my Thoughts are, and what my Actions are. Ever since I
was initiated into Holy Orders (which was above twenty years since) it hath been my Design in preaching (with sincerity and sim∣plicity of heart, I thank God, though with much weakness) to commend unto my Hea∣rers both the Form and the Power of Godli∣ness; not one without the other, but Both; Quae Deus conjunxit—I could never ap∣prove of those that pretending to set up the Power, cry down the Form, that is, all de∣cent and comely Rites and Ceremonies or∣dained by the Church; nor of those, that, while they were zealous for Rites and Forms, ne∣glected the Power. The Church of England I have always reverenced, I mean in respect of the excellent constitutions and Laws of it: as for corrupt practices of Officers or Mini∣sters therein, I can be sorry for them, I can∣not defend them. And now, since the late obstinate Disorders of our people, I am more in love with the Beauty of the Church, appea∣ring still in the said constitutions. Till I find a better Church, I must have leave to conti∣nue in the communion of this. A causeless se∣paration from it, I cannot excuse from the crime of Schism. In the Ministration of the Sacrament I indeavor to follow the Rule so far as I can: and after the best preparation I can use, admit only those that joyn with me in holy
professions, and serious and solemn engage∣ments to lead a Christian life. If I be enformed of any particular, that scandalously breaks his Vow, I will take heed how I admit him a∣gain without satisfaction. But, where things are doubtful, I encline to the more favou∣rable part. Private Conference, either by word or Letter, I much desire with any of your Temper; Publick I refuse not, if it may be quiet and orderly. Your Letter I much thank you for; I will study it, and give you Account. This general Answer I scribled, and sent you this next morn after the receit of yours, that you may know I have kindly taken it, and that I heartily am, SIR, Yours C. B. His fuller Answer to Mr. A. P. Dear Sir, THe Zeal that sparkles all over your Let∣ter of the 26. of Octo. (which I have now had leasure to read so often, that I can read it perfectly) calls for a more particular Answer, than I gave you on Monday last. Expect only a few brief notes upon it, till I have the opportunity of a friendly meeting.
You say you do not find but Mr. H. procee∣ded according to what I proposed to him. My note shews that I offered a meeting at the place he would appoint, in the presence of some discreet Auditors: What place can be understood, but a private place or house? as I also explaned my self to the Baylif, that received of me the Paper, mentioning his house, or Mr. F's, so that, it is no receding from my offer, but a refusal of an unreaso∣nable demand, if I come not among the confused multitude. Peruse a passage in Hoo∣kers Preface concerning publick Conferen∣ces or Disputes, and consider whether Mr. H. his publike meeting will admit of any such Rules. You say, You are grieved to hear of me as an Opposer of Reformation, &c. If you would make it appear to me, that the work at Winchcomb, is a work of true Re∣formation, Oh how glad should I be to con∣tribute my best aid to it. But I administer the holy things (you say) to Prophane Wret∣ches, the haters of Godliness, who the next hour, &c. We confess our selves to God, miserable and wretched sinners, but we trust in his mercy, that he will accept us (in Christ) not weiging our merits; but pardo∣ning our offences. I shall use the best means I can, to find out those you characterize,
and deal with them accordingly; but after all care there may be false Professors and Revolters in the truest Church. I counte∣nance none in their corrupt and loose waies, but on the contrary, shew the danger of such looseness, and exhort unto all Gospel-Order: nor do I know any of my Company that do scornfully refuse it. I am not guilty of the bloud of Christ, which I highly honour, and Minister to those only that seem to me to thirst after it, and receive it with fear and reverence, after profession of Faith and O∣bedience. If by Praelatical, formal, supersti∣tious usages, you mean those decent Orders and Rites which have been established and used in the Church of England, I have much to say for the Lawfulness of them, yet am ready to submit to the commands of my Superiors, when they shall establish ano∣ther way agreeable to Gods word. I will neither shut my eyes against the light, nor resist the Spirit of Christ, for which I daily pray. The way of holiness, I conceive, doth not exclude laudable Forms and Customs, which serve for edification in holiness. Me thinks it is very fit the body should act a part in the service of God with the Soul, for both are Gods. I had almost forgot that you say, I have no Call to do what I do. If
Mr. H. hath as lawful a Call as I, I will seek Communion with him the next day I know it. The out-comers that will make use of my Ministry, I cannot deny, so long as they have no Pastor that will own them upon lawful conditions: for the conditions of that same new Covenant are not right in the eyes of very knowing, orderly, and well-disposed People. It had been, methinks, a good way to have proposed that Covenant to debate among Neighbouring Ministers, before it had been obtruded on the People, under penalty of loss of Communion. The excellent Scriptures you commend unto me, I have considered, and will give you my sense of them, when I see what dedu∣ctions you can make thence against me. I do think there are as good Preachers and as holy men of that way which you call Pre∣latical, as are under Heaven: quos longè se∣quar, & vestigia semper adoro: I speak of Jewels, Hookers, Ushers, Halls, Lakes, An∣drews; I could weary you with names worthy of eternal memory. It is easy to call yours the Lord's, (they that are truly so I honour, not despise,) and others a loose, dead-hearted, carnal party. For my part I judge no man, but pray that we may all la∣bour to make our calling sure, and work
out our own salvation with fear and Trem∣bling. By the Grace of God we are what we are, if there be any good in any of us. That Spirit of Grace whose name (you say) hath been among some a derided thing (who have given the occasion to that derision I will not say) is by all sober persons ever to be magnified and adored. Without which you say well, I cannot approve my self a member of his body, much less a Minister of Christ. And therefore I pray for that Spirit, and (not expecting new Revelations) study what is the mind of the Spirit in the Holy Scripture. For the explication whereof, because a late Doctor of ours, hath done more than any in this Age, I commend his paraphrase to you on the New Testament, specially on the Texts you cite to me: and desire you to peruse [Sine Studio partium] his Trea∣tise prefixed concerning the New Lights: and if you look upon his Exposition of the Apocalyps, you will have no cause to repent of your pains. Having mentioned this Au∣thor, of no less piety and modesty, than Learning and judgement, I would gladly know your opinion of his Latin Book a∣gainst Blondell. If either Blondell be right for Presbytery, or He for Episcopacy, [vide si vacat, Thorndik of Prim. Gver. cap. ult. of
the Right of the Church.] both waies your New-Church-way will prove plainly Schis∣matical. I do verily believe the power of Godliness may be upheld without the over∣throw of antient forms. Nor can I be so ir∣reverent to our Fore-fathers, ever since the Reformation, much less to all Antiquity, as to slight and condemn what they either ap∣pointed or retained. My rule is this: Rites of Religion not opposite to Scripture may law∣fully be used. What say you against it? Have they not also (if they make for order and Edification) a reall tendency (in your phrase) to advance Jesus Christ? What tendency to this end is in the countenancing of Un-or∣dained Ministers, and in usurping a Power of Government in the Church, which Christ hath deposited in other hands, and in set∣ting up ignorant Persons to be publike O∣rators, I confess, Dear Sir, I do not under∣stand. And my opposition against such waies, proceeds meerly of duty. In which opposi∣tion I shall carry my self with all Modera∣tion, approving and imitating what is com∣mendable in the Adversary, while I oppose what I can prove to be blameable. Him will I willingly confer with, either by my tongue or pen, in such manner as I may safely do it: but much rather with your self, because I
conceive you are of a sweeter temper, that I mention not parts, Learning, and the like things, which (although without Grace they are not much to be valued, yet) are very useful and subservient to the work of God. Wherein I heartily desire to joyn with you so far as I can, and I hope in whatsoever we be differently minded, God will in time reveal even that to us. To his gracious dire∣ction and blessing I commend you and your labours, praying, that as you are endowed with precious gifts of Zeal, Elocution, Lear∣ning, Judgement, Meekness, so you may employ them happily to the Glory of the Donor, in procuring the Unity and Tran∣quillity of his Church. Your servant in Christ, C. B. Nov. 2. 1653. Mr. B. to Mr. H. Novem. 7. 1653. SIR, I Am assured, you are resolved to hold your publick meeting on Wednesday next, and I am desired by some of your Neighbours, as well as your self, to be present. I intend, God willing, to wait on you at your hour,
on this condition that you permit me being Respondent to stand in your Pue, that I may be seen and heard the better, and be free from the croud. You, and if they be pre∣sent, Master Palmer, and Master Tray I will embrace (and only you, in order) as my Op∣ponents, placing your selves a part as you shall see most convenient. That the people abstain from all rudeness and disturbance of our work, your Officers must take care. Qu. Whether it be lawful to administer and receive the Holy Sacrament in Congre∣gations called mixt? Aff. My meaning is clearly to affirm what you deny, though my Terms are not just the same. Yours in the Truth, C. B. All was granted, but the Pue.
An Answer to a Question proposed by the separating Minister to one of the Parish of W. 1653. Qu. Of what Church are You? 1. I Am a member of the Parish Church wherein I live; which, although it be much distracted by a Minister of separation, yet it is not destroyed. Although we can∣not come to the usual place for the present, safely and without danger of being engaged in Prayers against our Conscience, and of being seduced by erroneous doctrin, and much offended and grieved by uncharitable
sentences and judgements upon our Chri∣stian Brethren; yet we preserve the practice of our Religion at home▪ and sometimes partake of the publick Ordinances abroad, and are in readiness to submit our selves ei∣ther to the present Minister, when he shall approve himself our lawful and Orthodox Pastor, or to some other duly to be placed over us. 2. I am a Member of the National Church of England; which we acknow∣ledge a true visible Church of Christ, though somewhat clouded now and defaced by the modern innovations: to which yet there are many thousand professors that have not bowed. And the Communion of this Church we will not forsake, but pray that Government agreeable to the word of God may be restored to it. 3. I am a Member of the Church Ca∣tholick, into which I was received at my Baptism; and I desire to joyn with any peaceable Christian in the whole world, in the profession of that Faith which was once deliver'd, and in such forms of Worship
which agree therewith. And we pray, that by the means of Christian Princes a Free Ge∣neral Council may at length be assembled, to reconcile the Differences, and guide the Affairs of Christendom, to the good of Souls, and the Glory of our Common Saviour.
TO THE MINISTERS HIS OPPONENTS . THE report of our Dispute being spread abroad, and (as it happens in other fights) Victory being cry'd on both sides, I thought it reaso∣nable to publish this Account of it, that the impartial Reader may judge. Another rea∣son is, that our selves, my brethren (this com∣pellation you will not disdain for Jesus sake) may in cold blood review what hath passed, and either I may come to you, or you to me, as Truth shall require. The first honour is to Defend the Truth, the second to Yield unto it. If any of you will write, remember those words of the Grave Hooker. There will come a time when three words uttered with Charity and Meekness, shall receive a far more blessed reward, than three thousand volumes written with disdainful sharpness of wit. If you please to hold an other personal meeting, it is fit you answer our Arguments
against you concerning what you delivered at Winchcomb Nov. 8. in disgrace of our Mi∣nistry and Parish-Churches: but if you go on to decline answering, and are only good at opposing, I do not refuse to appear again in defence, not only of our ministring the Sa∣crament, but of the other two Theses, That your new Churches, are not the only true Churches, And, That Christ was truly Preached before these late years. Upon which (in conformity to the old Vniversity fashion) I take leave to adde here, not any Libel, as one of you called it, but my sad Epigram. Papists took one away, but you combine To rob the People both of Bread and Wine. They blame us, 'cause we have not Rites so many; But you condemn us more, 'cause we have any. They will not call us Catholicks; you can Scarce yield us the first name of Christian. Poor English Church! thy enemies from Rome Were cruel; more unkind are these at home. Your servant in the Truth Clement Barksdale. Oxon. Nov. 16. 1653.
Disputandi Sobrietas, Eccle∣siarum Medicina. A true Account of a Dis∣pute at Winchcomb-Parish-Church November 9. 1653. Written by a careful Observer November 11. and Prin∣ted with Licence November 16. for the satisfaction of the People at and neer Winchcomb. Great is the Truth, and it will prevail. UPON the ninth of this Novem∣ber, between nine and ten in the Morning, Mr. Barksdale Minister at Sudeley the Respondent having waited a while for the comming of the Op∣ponents, first enters Mr. Helm Minister at
Winchcomb, immediately after him enters Col∣lonel Aileworth Justice of peace, Mr. Tray Mi∣nister at Oddington, Mr. Wells Minister at Tewksbury, Mr. Chaffy Minister at Naunton, and some other. 1. After they had taken possessi∣on of the Ministers Pue, all together, the Res∣pondent ascends a Pue ex opposito, which he had caused to be erected for the purpose (his friend Mr. Towers Minister at Toddington, and some other Orthodox Ministers taking up a lower seat next unto him on the right hand:) where, first falling on his knees, after a short ejacula∣tion he shews himself, and saluted his Oppo∣nents, and after some little Pause the Question was proposed, Whether it be lawful to Mini∣ster and Receive the Holy Sacrament in Con∣gregations called mixt? (Or, in our Parish-Churches?) Aff. The prior Opponent Mr. H. desired to begin with prayer. Take your liberty, said the Respondent, who after the Preface (wherein like a good Orator, the Opponent told the people that Truth must look for opposition, and that the Respondent was a native of the place, and himself a stranger) and the prayer done, spake thus: You will now give me leave also to speak three words, 1. To God. 2. To the Hearers. 3. To the Opponents 1. To God I make my humble address, and intreat you to lift
up your hearts with me, that he would be pleased to open our eyes that we may see the Truth, to open our Hearts that we may embrace the Truth, and to give us courage to confess the Truth, and to hold it fast un∣to the end, for Jesus Christs sake, to whom be glory for ever. 2. To the Hearers my ear∣nest desire is, that you would lay aside all prejudice, and partiality, and listen to what shall be said on either side with silence and patience. And because I am a man of a slow Tongue, of a tender Forehead, of a frail Memory, of a weak Judgement, I have the more cause to beg of you my friends, your secret assistance by your mental prayer, that God would support me so far as I defend his cause. For I declare in the presence of God, the searcher of hearts, that I do verily think that to be true which I maintain, and that I am not willingly an enemy to true Refor∣mation, or the work of God in this place (as I have been grievously charged,) nor am I a friend to any thing that can justly be called Popish, or Antichristian, God knows I detest and abhor it. 3. Lastly to these Gentlemen my Opponents my request is, that you would deal with me fairly and Scholar∣like. Take you your turns, and give me mine to speak: come you on, one after one,
and let me have liberty to repeat, to deny, to distinguish, to explain what I say, so far as is needful. And to conclude, if we cannot agree in our opinions, let us yet (I pray) be one in Affection, and preserve amongst us that Christian Peace and Charity which is the mark and the honour of the Disciples of our gracious Lord and Master. The Respondent in one of his papers afore this exercise had called the publick Meeting place (as they term it) the House of God; But one of the Opponents Mr. W. put for∣ward, and, omitting the Question, began in a light velitation about that Appellation after this manner. W. The House of God, it is Superstition to call the place so. B. I deny that proposition; prove it. W. The People of God are alone his House: God dwells in the Hearts of his Saints. B. I Answer, the House of God, is either the Spiritual House, or the Material House; The Hearts of his Elect People are the Spi∣ritual House wherein it pleaseth God to dwell and reside; This place built by our pi∣ous Ancestors, and separated from other uses to his Honour and Service, may without of∣fence be called his Material House. W. This House was not built for the Ho∣nour and Service of God.
B. I expect your proof of that Proposi∣tion. W. Thus: The House built in the reign of Popery, and for the Honour and Adoration of Saints, was not built for the honour and Service of God: But, this House was built in the reign of Popery, and for the Honour and Adoration of Saints; Therefore this House was not built for the Honour and Ser∣vice of God. B. I repeat, The House built, &c. And I answer to the major by distinguishing of the end for which the House was built. The End is either principal, or less principal: This House was built for the Honour and service of God, as the principal End; it was built for the Honour and Adoration of Saints as the less principal End. In the Reformation of Religion our Church reteined the first End, and rectifyed the second, Honouring the Saints with a pious Memory, not Ado∣ring them with divine Worship. Hear the Church her self speak in her excellent Li∣turgy.— W. & H. Away with it, we will hear none of your Liturgy and old Forms. B. But I must clear the Church from all suspicion of Adoring the Saints, and make the Truth evident out of the Collect for All-Saints
day, and 'tis worthy to be heard of All: Almighty God, which hast knit to∣gether thy elect in one Communion and fellowship, in the mystical body of thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord; grant us grace so to follow thy holy Saints in all vertuous and Godly living, that we may come to those unspeakable joys which thou hast prepared for them that unfeignedly love thee through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. I beseech you All to take notice that our Church is free from that superstition, or what∣ever it be called, wherewith the Church of Rome is justly charged. The Saints are in our Prayers for imitation, not for adoration. Our Houses therefore being truly built at first for God's Service, and now used by us for the right end, the setting apart of such places for divine Worship, makes them relatively holy, and gives God a peculiar Title to them, and he owns them for his; My House shall be called a House of prayer. W. Your own House may be as well used so, and called Gods House, and a holy place. B. No, Though God may be served in e∣very place, and I serve him dayly in my own house, yet the publick place separated for his service, I say, becomes his by a peculiar right. All the world is his, but our Churches
are his to a singular and holy purpose, by a singular dedication. As he hath his Day, so also a place for his Worship, both Holy. Keep ye my Sabbath, and reverence my Sanctuary. For your satisfaction see Mr. Mede's Divine Treatise upon Hallowed be thy name, and his letter to D. Twiss. Now let us Hoc agere, and come to the business of the day. H. To the Question of the day, my first Ar∣gument is this. That it is not lawfull to ad∣minister the Sacrament in your Parish-Churches, thus I prove: If you have not a true calling in your Church of England, then it is not lawfull for you to administer the Sacrament in your Parish-Churches: But you have not a true Calling in your Church of England; Therefore it is not lawfull for you to minister the Sacrament in your Parish-Churches. B. I repeat, If we have not, &c. I deny your minor, and affirm, we have a true cal∣ling in our Church of England. H. If in your calling by the Bishops you are engaged to superstitious and unlawful pra∣ctices, then your calling in the Church of England is not a true Calling: but in your calling by the Bishops you are engaged to su∣perstitious and unlawful practices; Therefore your Calling in the Church of England is not a true Calling.
B. I deny your minor, and affirme, we are not engaged to any superstitious and unlaw∣full practices is our Calling by the Bishops. H. The keeping of Holy-dayes [I do not mean Holy-dayes upon occasion, as our Thanks∣giving dayes, but your set holy-dayes] the keep∣ing of your holy-dayes is an unlawfull practice: But in your Calling by the Bishops you are in∣gaged to the keeping of Holy-dayes; Therefore in the Calling by the Bishops you are ingaged to unlawfull practices. B. I deny your major, and affirm, that the keeping of our holy-dayes is not an unlawfull practice. H. A practice against Gods command is an unlawfull practice: But your practice is against Gods command; Therfore your practice is an unlawfull practice. B. Not against God's command; how prove you that? H. My text is in 20. Exod. where you shall find it a part of the fourth Commandement, Six dayes shalt thou labour and do all that thou hast to do: Therefore, it is against Gods com∣mand to keep any one of the six dayes holy. B. I answer two wayes, 1. By retortion. 2. By interpretation. 1. By retortion, I say your Argument rebounds upon your self, and condemnes your own practice; and that Text
in your sense, that we are commanded to la∣bour six dayes, takes away as well occasionall holy-dayes as set and recurrent. For our Thanksgiving dayes are not dayes of labour. 2. By interpretation, the words you urge are not preceptive but permissive. God requires one day in seven, and allowes us six, not de∣nying us the liberty, if we be so devout, as to consecrate some part of them also to his pu∣blick Service. The Jewes had among their holy-dayes the feast of Dedication, of human Institution, which yet we read that Christ himself observed. H. Worship not instituted by God is unlaw∣full Worship: But your Holy-dayes are a Wor∣ship not instituted by God, but by human au∣thority; therefore your holy-dayes are unlawfull Worship. B. I answer to the minor, and say, that our holy-dayes are not the Worship it self, but a circumstance of the Worship: and circum∣stances of Gods Worship may be ordained lawfully by men. H. Well, your calling by the Bishops (howe∣ver) is not lawfull, and thus I prove it. If the Scripture allowes of no Diocesan Bishops, then your calling by the Bishops is not lawfull, But the Scripture allowes of no Diocesan Bishops; Therefore, &c.
B. I deny your minor, and affirme, the Scripture does allow Diocesan Bishops. H. There is not so much as the name of a Diocesan Bishop in all the Scripture. B. But there is more than the Name; there is the Thing, there is the Office. The word Trinity is not in the Scripture, yet we Believe the Trinity. H. Where doth the Scripture shew us any such office? bring forth your proofe of it. B. 'Tis my part to answer your proofs. Now you put on the Respondent the part of an Opponent. Let them that have been bred in the Schools judge whether you do like a fair Disputant. H. Our dispute is not an University Dis∣pute, but for the clearing of the truth to some Godly People. B. Do you think the University Disputa∣tions (which are the best in the world) are not for the clearing of the Truth? But what saith Mr. Tr. shall I propose my Argument, to prove Diocesan Bishops by the Scripture? Tr. You have liberty to propose your Argu∣ment, and shew in what part of Scripture you can find the Office of any Diocesan Bishop. B. I allege principally the Epistles of S. Paul to Timothy and Titus, and particularly Tit. 1. 5. For this cause left I thee in Creet,
that thou shouldst set in order the things that are wanting, and ordaine Elders in e∣very City, as I have appointed thee. Out of which Text I will prove that Titus was a Bi∣shop, and Creet his Diocese, and therefore here we have found the Diocesian Bishop. But before I proceed, let me aske you, Gentlemen, do you not put me upon this to ensnare me? Do you mean no harm to me? Tr. No I assure you; wherefore in Gods Name speak freely. B. I humbly thank you: but first let me openly declare before all this Assembly, that I have no mind to oppose any act of State, nor will I meddle at all with the Lands and Lord∣ships of Bishops, only I plead for the Order and Function of Bishops, I plead for the primitive Apostolicall Bishop and no other; And that this Text is for me, thus I prove: He that hath a power to ordaine Elders, and set things in order in the Church is a Bishop: But Titus hath a power to ordaine Elders, and to set things in order in a Church: Therefore Titus is a Bishop. H. But you must prove him to be a Dioce∣san Bishop. B. So I do. Creet was his Diocese; the whole Iland was committed to his Gover∣ment. Diocese, my friends, is a Greek word
(, to order and administer the af∣faires of Gods House) signifying the territory or circuit of a Bishop. So Creet may be well called the Diocese of Bishop Titus, having under his inspection (as tis plaine) the El∣ders of the Cities there. W. The Cities were not under Titus his Goverment, he was not a Ruler of the Iland. B. He was Ruler of all the Christians (I mean onely them) through all the Cities and Country. Tr. But Titus was an Evangelist: There∣fore no Bishop. B. I deny the Consequence: He was an Evangelist, while he went about Preaching and Planting the Gospell, And he was the Bi∣shop of Creet when he was fixed there by Paul to Ordaine Elders, and put in order the things that were wanting. H. We find Titus in other places beside Creet, and Bishops of those times were not non∣residents: Therefore he was not Bishop of Creet. B. Bishops may lawfully be (and were an∣tiently) non-resident for some time, to wit, while they attend the business of Religion a∣broad, and procured the greater good of the Church: In which time of their absence their places are supplyed at home by their De∣puties.
Tr. But Sir, I pray, consider Titus was an extraordinary Governor, and therefore no Dio∣cesan Bishop. And you dispute fallaciously, unless you put in the word Ordinary. B. I say he was a Diocesan Bishop, or (if you will) rather an Archbishop, For I con∣ceive the Elders of every City to have been Bishops and Overseers of severall Ministers and Congregations: therefore he was an ordina∣ry Governour. Thus I argue: He that or∣daines Elders, and orders the things in the Churches, is an Ordinary: But Titus ordaines Elders, and orders things in the Churches; Therefore Titus is an Ordinary. Tr. But I mean he was called to that office in an extraordinary manner. B. No neither. He was called in the same manner as Timothy and others, by Imposition of the Presbytery: Therefore He was called in an Ordinary manner. Col. A. Timothy was called (saith Paul in another place) by the laying on of his hands. B. Noble Sir, you say very true; and the places are easily reconciled thus: Divers El∣ders laid hands on Timothy, among whom S. Paul probably was chief. H. And was Paul too a Diocesan Bishop? B. The Apostles common Diocese was the whole world, which by agreement they di∣vided
among them: and S. Paul was especial∣ly the Apostle of the Gentiles. But in the A∣postles I grant some things are extraordinary, Tr. Pray, make it out cleerely that Titus his case is not extraordinary, otherwise you dis∣pute fallaciously. B. Truth needs no sophistry. Thus I make it out. The office that is to continue in the Church, and to be succeeded in through fol∣lowing ages, is no extraordinary office: But this office of Titus is such; Therefore, &c. H. What? is it to continue to the worlds end? B. Yes, to the worlds end. For it is Christs Promise; I am with you alway even to the end of the world. Mat. ult. ult. What say you to my argument? Ordination and Ju∣risdiction are Offices or Powers needfull to the Church in all Ages: This Office of Pow∣er or Titus was Ordination and Jurisdicti∣on; Therefore this Office of Titus is needfull to the Church in all Ages, and therefore no extraordinary Office. And my Brethren, I would have you to know, we are able to shew out of the best Records and Monuments of the Antient Church, that there was a succes∣sion to the Apostolicall Bishops in these parts of their Office; And the Catalogues of succee∣ding Bishops in severall Apostolicall Sees are
yet extant: And the Fathers and Councills and Ecclesiasticall Histories come in here with undeniable evidence, that Diocesan Bi∣shops are successors of the Apostles in the Government of Churches. H. See, godly Brethren, the subtilty of this man: He will not contain himself within the Holy Scripture, but tells us of Fathers and Ec∣clesiasticall Stories, and human Authorities. B. Who succeeded in the government of Churches after the Apostles, we must learn out of the writings of the next Ages. And I tell you not only Fathers and Church-story, but all other good learning is requisite in a compleat Divine. Mark this, you bold un∣learned new-speakers and expounders of Scripture; Mark it and remember it well. And for the question of Church-government especially▪ it is impossible to find a better way to understand the Scripture, than by the pra∣ctice of the primitive times of the Christian Church. H. Expound Scripture by the practice of the primitive Church? Do ye heare him bre∣thren? as if Scripture needed the help of the Church. We thought we should finde him en∣clining to Popery. B. I detest all Popery, charge me not so ig∣norantly. Upon my life I will make it good
by the judgment of the most learned▪ and sound Protestants, that the practice of the pri∣mitive Church is a great light to Scripture. But this requires the searching of Books, which at your lesure I should be glad to shew you. W. Protestants, Whom do you mean by Protestants? B. I mean those that protest against the Errors & Innovations of the Roman Church in latter times, and endeavour to reform Re∣ligion according to the Scripture, and the primitive pattern. H. You see he takes in the practice of the Primitive Church again. B. I do and must; and thus I argue: That Government which in the primitive Ages took place in the Churches planted by the A∣postles, is the Apostolicall and Scripture Go∣vernment: But the Government of Diocesan Bishops took place in the Churches planted by the Apostles; Therefore the Government of the Diocesan Bishops is the Apostolicall and Scripture Government. Now let me see who will answer me. W. Antichrist, Antichrist was working be∣times. B. Whether it be Antichristianism to esta∣blish, or to over throw the Function of Bi∣shops,
let all considering men judge by the Premises. W. But why do you take in any thing else with Scripture, as if that alone were not suffi∣cient for us? H. Yea Scripture, Scripture, we are conten∣ted with Scripture. B. Give me leave to explain my self to All, and I entreat you, Harken, The Scriptures perfection I do thankfully acknowledge: but the things conteined in the Scripture are some of them conteined in it plainly and expresly, to be apprehended by every Reader; other things are conteined there implicitely, virtu∣ally, and so as there is need of many helps to make our deductions thence. And for the Scripture-government I know no better light to shew it than the practice of the Antient Church. I argue thus: They that have com∣mended to us the very Books of Scripture are fittest to give us the sense of them, especial∣ly in point of Government: But the Antient Church hath commended to us the very books of Scripture; Therefore the Antient Church is fittest to give us the sense, &c. And I pray Mr. W. how will you prove that the Scripture is the Word of God? W. I know it by the Testimony of the Holy Spirit in me.
B. But how will you convince another that will not believe your Spirit, that the Scripture is divine? Here you may make very good use of the Testimony of the next Ages, that received it from the Apostles and gave it down to their Followers. W. and H. Popery, to depend upon the Te∣stimony of the Church. To. Since you are many at once upon one (which is not fair) give me leave to put in sometimes in behalf and for the case of the Respondent. We say, we depend upon the testimony of the Antient Church, not of the now Roman Church. The Roman Church is a very corrupt Church, the Primitive times were far more pure. W. What do you talk of Purity after the Apostles times? Did not many Heresies creep in? To. By this Argument you will condemn the Apostles times also: for even then were not wanting Schismes and Heresies. B. Will you leave this as it is, and pro∣ceed to some farther Argument, and come close to the business of the Sacrament? I say, it is lawfull for me to Minister the Sacrament in the Congregation at Sudeley. H. Thus I proceed to shew, that your cal∣ling is null: therefore you cannot Minister.
Ministers that Prophane the holy things of the Lord, their calling is null: But many Parish Ministers prophane the holy things of the Lord; Therefore their Calling is null. B. You should say All Parish Ministers: for you hold it is not lawful to Minister in any mixt Congregation, and such you say are all Parish Churches. But say neither All, nor Many, but apply the minor to me, whom you have publikely in your Sermons condemned (before you used the Christian wayes of more private Admonition:) and then I deny both your premises, both Major and Minor, both are false and Scandalous. Neither doth the prophaning of Holy things null the Ministers calling: nor have I prophaned the Holy things in the said Ministery. H. First then I prove the major fully: you that have Bibles, Brethren, pray turn to the places. Ezek. 22. 26. & 44. 13. B. What prove you thence? H. That prophaning the Holy things nulls the Priesthood, for they shall be no Priests unto me, saith the Lord. B. I answer to the Text, by distinguishing between the Order of a Priest, and the Office of a Priest. They shall be no Priests unto me: here is a suspension from the Office and work of the Priests, no nulling of the Priesthood it self.
W. Then it seems by you. They were Priests and no Priests. God saith, They shall not; you say, they shall remain Priests. To. He hath shewed you how. They were Priests and no Priests in divers re∣spects: They were still of the Order and race of Priests, they were not to officiate any more in the Priestly office. God would not accept them, he saith, They shall be no Priests unto me. Yet who knoweth but upon their re∣pentance God might readmit them, not by a new Consecration, but by Absolution. And so Ministers, when they are restored after sus∣pension, are not new Ordained, but only the Censures taken off. Tr. Well, you grant at last a removall and suspension from the office, though the calling be not nulled: And so you will confess you de∣serve to be removed from Officiating, if you prophane the Holy Things of the Lord. B. I will grant, that a Minister, if he be so prophane, ought not to officiate: but I think the proceedings against a Minister must be tender and wary; Receive not an accusati∣on against an Elder without two or three wit∣nesses. Conviction must go before Censure, and upon Repentance restauration followes. And I refuse not to be so dealt with. Tr. Proceed therefore, and prove your mi∣nor,
that he doth prophane the holy things of the Lord. H. They that administer the Sacrament promiscuously to All, do prophane—But you so administer; Therefore, &c. B. Your minor's false and Scandalous. The Congregation of my hearers, I will confess, is mixt: not so the Company of my Communicants. Understand what my pra∣ctice is. After divers preparations, when the Sacrament is to be administred, I proclame, All that are not prepared Depart, You that are prepared, Stay. These, after the depar∣ture of the rest, I look upon as prepared in some measure, and so I go on. H. If you do administer the Sacrament to the unregenerate— Tr. No, no, say thus—to the ignorant and Prophane. H. You Minister the Holy Sacrament to the ignorant and prophane. B. You do well to prompt one another. Prove it. Or, if you please, I answer, persons may be ignorant and prophane, either in the eye of God, that searcheth the secrets of the heart; or in the eye of the Church, that looks upon the outward appearance. In the for∣mer sense some of us may be such, we are not so in the latter.
Tr. Pray Mr. B. let me ask you, Do you know every one that you Minister the Sacra∣ment to? B. I will give you an ingenuous answer: I do not know every one. Tr. O! how can you justify your self in this? W. Why here's a confession of the fault we lay to your charge: you give the Sacrament you know not to whom? We have done now. H. We thank the Lord, Brethren, that the good work is so happily brought to a conclu∣sion this day. You hear what he confesseth, he doth not know some of them, who they are, and yet he should know them to be visible Saints. A good Shepheard knows his flock. B. Hold a little, my Masters, and take me with you. Have patience while I give in my Answer. I do not know them, and yet I do know them. I know them not, some of them, by name, I have no familiar acquain∣tance with them, I do not know them in civil relations: but I do know them, and own them in a religious relation. I know no hurt by them. Tr. You Know no hurt by them. Alas, Alas, poor creatures! B. Hear me out. I do not only know no hurt by them, but I know much good by
them, their visible and cheerful profession of the true Christian Faith, their reverent be∣haviour at their Prayers, their humble Con∣fession of Sins, earnest desires of pardon, hearty promises of new obedience. An ap∣pearance of Faith and Repentance, joyned with Charity and thankfulness satisfies me very well for the time, till I find they do deceive me. H. You are deceived with too good an opini∣on of them. If I durst, I could say somewhat against some particulars. B. God forbid you should have hurt for telling any one a necessary truth. For my part, I think and hope the best of all, that promise fair, I Judge according to charity. I know one may act the Saint to day, and the Devil to morrow. Let me tell you, 'tis the judgement of our Church, after the Fathers, that Christ delivered the Sacrament to Judas also, who went out immediatly after to be∣tray him; and, before that, was discovered by his Master to be a Devill. You will not grant this: however, you know Peter him∣self, that was so zealous, upon triall, the ve∣ry next day denied his Master, yea denied him with cursing and swearing. All the rest forsook him and fled. Their strength was little, and their knowledge was less: witness
the Disciples going to Emaus, fools and slow of heart, and the question proposed about the Kingdom, Acts 1. What is the lowest measure of grace I will not determine. Where I see any hopes or weak beginnings of Chri∣stianity, I embrace and cherish them. In the School of Christ there be many little ones, that must be gently used; and there be some great ones, that must not be offended, but upon great reasons. Why should I not think better of others than my self, when the B. Apostle calls himself the chiefest of sinners, and less than the least of Saints? He that hath beams to cast out of his own eve, must not be picking motes out of his Brothers eye. 'Tis true the Brother must be admonished, especially by the Minister: but this must be done discreetly and orderly, and with meek∣ness of spirit. He that obeys one, or a few, scapes the censure of the Many: and may not be reckoned as an alien. None is so, but he that proves obstinate after the me∣thods of Counsel and Reproof. And verily, Mr. H. it had been a good method for you, to have admonisht me and the rest of the Con∣gregation, whom you are offended with, and to have received our Answer, before you con∣demn'd us in your Pulpit. And that Answer will serve now: In what we have offended God,
we ask his pardon: In what we have offen∣ded you, we will give you satisfaction. Thus doing, we shall not be excluded from Com∣munion by any just sentence. H. You have some that might be named, that both before and after the Communion, have shewed themselves no sober men. B. That may be, and I shall desire to be informed of them, that I may labour to re∣form them, or exclude them if they be pro∣ved open and notorious evill livers. And I do often commend and endeavour to bring into better practice, the Duty of fraternall Admonition and Correption, which is now the more necessary, because we want publick Discipline [see D. Hammond of Fraternall Admonition] Having declared my self thus, I must conclude your Argument against my Communicants, till you prove your Accusa∣tion better, to be only an Argument of your own uncharitableness. H. I cannot yet allow of your Call to Mini∣ster: For Ministers truly called are appoin∣ted and ordained by the Godly people: But you are not so appointed; Therefore— B. You will, I hope, hereafter allow me equall liberty to oppose your Orders: I have mine from a Bishop assisted by his Presby∣ters, according to Apostolicall Institution,
and the constant practice of the Church. The People cannot confer on us our power: They may approve and assent to our Calling, and give testimony of our good conversation, and receive us when we are sent unto them. I am owned as a Rector of the People to whom I Minister. W. We are servants of Gods people. Paul, I am sure, saith so of himself. B. He saith so, and so doe I, their servant for Jesus sake. Let them acknowledge us their spirituall Rulers and Fathers in Christ, and we will in all humble condescension, be their Servants for Jesus sake. Jesus himself, our Lord and Master, stiles himself a Mini∣ster or Servant of his Servants: and he hath said, He that will be greatest among you, let him be Servant of all. 'Tis easy to distin∣guish between a servant by voluntary conde∣scension, and a servant by necessary sub∣jection. Tr. You said before, that in case of propha∣ning the holy things, you would confess a Mi∣nister deserves suspension. Who shall suspend him, but the Congregation? What other power is there? B. I confessed the prophaner of Holy things to deserve great punishment: but, after due Admonition, and upon his obstinacy, not else.
Yet, I cannot see, how the people have any Authority to sentence him. Tr. Who would you have to do it? Who? B. To speak freely, I would submit my self to my Ordinary, the Apostolicall Bishop (or, if you like the Latin word better, the President or Superintendent:) for whom I have spoken before. And I am ready to joyn with you in a Petition, that we may have an Apostolicall Bishop set over us, as it was in practice of the antient Church. H. You stand too much upon the practice of the Antient Church: come to the Scripture. B. I am sorry you value the practice of the antient Church so little. Pray, where is your maine strength in Scripture for your In∣dependent or Congregationall Churches. H. Let us read the famous Text, Mat▪ 18▪ 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. 20. Out of which Text I frame this Argument: If here, be meant by the Church a Congregation from which lyes no Appeale, then is the Independent Church foun∣ded upon this Text: But here is meant a Con∣gregation, &c. What else will you conceive by the Church? B. I am very inclinable to Saint Chryso∣stome's interpretation, who by the Church, understandands the Elders and Rulers of the Church.
H. The word Church is no where so taken in all the Scripture, and therefore it cannot be so taken here: shew us any place. B. It doth not follow: for some word may possibly signify that in one place, which it sig∣nifies no where else; and again there may be other places, though I cannot readily shew them: I will consider of it. H. No, I doe assure you, tis never so used: and therefore I hope you will yeeld to the Word, that we may go on with one consent in the work of God. B. God grant it, if it be the Work of God: but you have not cleered it yet. I cannot yield to your sense for this Reason: That sense of Scripture (concerning Church-go∣vernment) which was never received by the Doctors of the Antient Church, is not the true sense of Scripture: But your sense of the place was never received, &c. H. Still, still he declines Scripture, and would lead us to human Ordinances. B. As for human Ordinances, I can em∣brace them so far as they are not opposite to Scripture: but now we are upon the Interpre∣tation of Scripture, I must profess I have been ever bred in the Church that requires all her Ministers to receive the Scripture, as inter∣preted by the Antient Fathers, and to propose
nothing to the people, contrary to what was derived out of the Scripture by them. I am not ashamed of my Mother the Church of England, nor (by Gods grace) ever shall I. And I doe heartily warn all that hear me, to take heed (as they tender their Soules) of departing rashly from the Communion of of the said Church. W. I thought where we should have you. B. You have me where I have ever been, and where I mean to abide, till I am convin∣ced. I am not unwilling to learn of any one. And pray Mr. W. tell me, whether you hold not a Synod of chosen men, gathered out of your Churches, to have authority over them all? W. No authority at all; such a Synod may be of use for advice and counsell, not for gover∣ment, or for the exercise of any jurisdiction. B. Then as I conceive your modell is ve∣ry imperfect, and me thinks your Ministers in their severall Congregations look like so ma∣ny little Popes, For, the Pope is the Great Independent, and will allow of no Appeal from him, no more will you. H. Pray Mr. B. quiet the People. B. I beseech you good people, I beseech you attend with silence and patience. Tr. Where presently followes Execution▪
there can be no appeal: But after the sentence of the Congregation presently followes executi∣on; If he hear not the Church, let him, &c. Therefore from the sentence of the Congrega∣tion can be no appeal. B. Well argued: I repeat. Where present∣ly, &c. I answer first to the major or first pro∣position. There may be an appeal after exe∣cution of the sentence of the Congregation. [In your own way may not the wronged per∣son appeal from you to your selves?] In the Presbyterian you know there lyes an appeal to the Classis: but that I take not on me to maintain. I know no power to excommuni∣cate but Episcopall. Tr. Then it seems by you, the Bishop is the Church, and the sole judge of the Congrega∣tions. B. Not so neither. Hear my Answer, I pray, and do not you ignorant fellowes laugh at that you do not understand. The Bi∣shop is considered, either Sole or alone, or as he sits in Cathedra crowned with Presbyters. In this later sense▪ I humbly conceive the Bi∣shop is (or ought to be) Governour of the Congregations within his Diocese: And such Bishops we can shew innumerable in the an∣cient Records of the Catholique Church. I am very sorry these Gentlemen are so ill read
in good Books of our own English Divines, as to deny a truth shining so bright upon them. Mr. Tr. have you not seen the learned Thorndike of the primitive Government, &c? Tr. We cleave to the Scripture, and call you to the foresaid text. Can you shew one place where Church is taken for the Bishop and his Presbyters? B. What if I cannot? The Authority of the antient Fathers is sufficient for the pre∣sent to commend my interpretation to such as reverence Antiquity. But because I would gladly please you, I will offer another sense of the words in question, which will come neer to you, but is not fully yours, That is, after the first admonition by one, and the se∣cond before two or three, it is the mind of Christ, that a greater number should be made acquainted with the business, tell it to the Many for the shaming of the offendor, as the Apostle somewhere speaks; the words may the more probably be taken in this sense, because as yet the Disciples were not setled under a Church-government, and so there remaining no more to be done, after this shaming of the offendor before a good number of Fellow-Christians, i. e. the Church, he was to be henceforth, till his amendment, accounted as
a heathen, and might be prosecuted for any offence before the heathen Tribunalls, Which prosecution was not lawfull against those that would hear the Church. [See 1 Cor. 6.] But this will do you no pleasure, unless that which followes in the next verse belong un∣to the Congregation too: but that cannot be, if Christ spake the words to his Apostles, and gave the Keys, and Power of Binding and Loosing to them and their successors, as I be∣lieve he did. Consider of it. See the learned Dr. Hammond of binding and loosing. To. Give me leave to add somewhat here in confirmation of what was last said. Scrip∣ture you know gives light to Scripture. Christ elswhere saith to Peter that he would give the Keys to him, Matth. 16. 19. And John 20. 21, 21, 23. he speaketh to his Disciples and thus enstateth them in that power: Then said Jesus to them again, Peace be unto you, as my Father hath sent me, even so send I you; And when he had said this, he breathed on them, and said unto them, Receive yee the holy Ghost, whosoever sins yee remit, they are re∣mitted unto them, and whosoever sins ye retain, they are retained: these are the solemn words of Ordination. W. The words are spoken to Peter, and to the Disciples as they were Christian professors,
(and so they do belong to our people) not as they were appointed by Christ to be Governours of his Church. To. The words signify a power commit∣ted to them, which they used as Governours ('tis plain) and which they left to the Bi∣shops their Successours. Tr. The Apostles had no successors being gifted with a miraculous power. B. The Apostles are to be considered in two respects, either as planters of the Chur∣ches, and to that purpose endued with a miraculous power, to make way for, and to give confirmation to the Gospel, or else, as Governours of the Churches, invested with the ordinary lasting power of ordaining El∣ders, of binding and loosing, and of setting things in order: herein who were their Suc∣cessors, you may see if you will inform your selves in the book of binding and loosing, and in the Latin dissertations against Blondellus. Pray take it not ill that we often assert this: it is of such concernence, that with this truth the Ministers of England must either stand or fall. We speak not for Bishops to be Lords of Lands, but Fathers of the Church. You must all mark that. Tr. The differonce 'twixt us appears plain∣ly, you are for Bishops, which you call the Pri∣mitive
Apostolical Bishops, and in them you place the power which Christ hath left to his Church: We are for the Bodies of Congrega∣tions, which we say are under no superiors neither Bishops nor Presbyters, but absolute and independent in respect of man, and imme∣diatly under Jesus Christ. Col. A. Bishops and Presbyters are all one in the New Testament, namely Acts 20. 17. Paul sent to Ephesus, and called the Elders of the Church , and v. 28. the holy Ghost hath made you overseers, ; There∣fore Presbyters and Bishops are all one. P. Noble Sir, I answer, Bishops in the new Testament, are also called Presbyters, but they are more than those we now call Presbyters, who are to be ordained and go∣verned by the Bishops. Any Presbyter may be called Bishop or Overseer of his own Pa∣rish, but those we eminently stile Bishops now, who are Bishops, or Overseers and Ru∣lers of those Parish Bishops or Presbyters. The Presbyters St. Paul sent for from Ephe∣sus were properly Bishops. Tr. No, Hear my Argument. The Church of Ephesus was but one Congregation. I prove it out of Eph. 2. the two last verses: In whom (Jesus Christ) all the building fitly framed together, &c. A building fitly fra∣med
together is but one Congregation: But the Church of Ephesus was a building fitly framed together; Therefore, &c. B. To the Major. Not only one single Congregation, but many united under one Bishop may be so called. And that Ephesus was not a single Independent Congregation, but a Metropolitical Church, you may learn of the most Reverend Primate Dr. Usher, a man I think of great Authority among you also, as among all Scholars, most justly. I refer you to his Geographical Tract of the Asian Diocese. Tr. Return to the Text, Mat. 18. v. 19. I shall prove it undeniably, that a single Church hath an independent power. But first will you grant me, that two or three may be taken for a small Congregation? B. Yes, I desire to grant you all I can, without injury to the Truth. Tr. Then thus I argue: Where is the Du∣ty and the Blessing, there is the Power: But in a small Congregation [where two or three, &c.] is both the duty and the Blessing; Therefore there is also the Power, namely of Excommunication. B. Where is the duty, &c. You leave out a very necessary word, Independent. For supposing that a power of Excommunication
were in a particular Congregation, I cannot grant it is there independently, but there may be an Appeal: But did you ever hear of an Indepent Church of two or three? Tr. Yes, there may be a Church of so few, and that independent. B. A private Church, I grant▪ not a pub∣lick, enabled with power of Excommunica∣tion, a power supreme. Lo you, here is Po∣pery in a little volume: an independent, abso∣lute, supreme Church made up of two or three. H. Did you not grant to Mr. Tr. that two or three may be taken for any small num∣ber? now you recall your words. You know, if there be twenty in a company, we sometimes say there be two or three. B. No indeed, that's too far wide. Let the people judge of this, whether any will say there be two or three, if there be twen∣ty persons met in a room. Two or three, that is, twenty. (silence I pray!) But Sir, the words of Christ are verified, if there be but barely two. And therefore I may justly think it too small a number to make the Church, mentioned v: 17. It cannot be for this reason. The Church in the 17. v. is of more autho∣rity, and more in number, than the two or three mentioned in the second admonition, v. 16. But two or three v. 19, 20. are not of
more authority nor more in number, than the two or three mentioned v. 16. Therefore the two or three v. 19, 20. are not the Church mentioned v. 17. Answer this, and you shall hold your Supremacy to the worlds end for me. H. You hold an Appeal from the Church to the Civil Power, which is plain Erastia∣nism. B. Erastianisme? I shall make it appear to be Christianisme. But what was Erastus, pray? H. I came not here to be Catechized by you. B. Erastus was one that denied the pow∣er of Excommunication in the Church: which I do not, but desire it may come into pra∣ctice upon true Rules. If you would know Erastus, see the Book of Binding and loo∣sing, at large. And noble Sir, you that are a Civil Magistrate, let me call you to wit∣ness, that I stand here an Advocate truly to plead for the Supreme authority of this Land, and I undertake to shew that the Highest powers in the Commonwealth have also the Highest Rule of the Church, and may receive Appeals from any Christians that complain of wrong in any Congregation whatsoever. Col. A. The Highest Powers haply doubt
of that Authority, and forbear to execute any such, till they be more fully satisfied. B. Were I worthy, I would request them to know their power, and use it for the re∣stitution of Primitive Episcopacy. They doubt, you say; but Sir, these men flatly de∣ny that authority of the Civil Magistrate in matters of Religion. H. And how I pray do you prove it? B. Let every soul be subject to the High∣er Powers. Every man, saith St. Chrysostome, whether Lay or Clergy. Col. A. There is no such distinction of Lay and Clergy in the Scripture. All the Lords people are  his Portion. B. Sir, you say most true, that All the Lords people are his Portion, that is, as se∣lected and called out of the World: but his Ministers are more peculiarly his, as called from among his People, and admitted nearer to him, being separated for the Ministration of Holy things. But however, all sorts of men, I say, whether Ministers or others, must be subject to the Highest powers. Tr. Yea, in Civil things they must be sub∣ject, not in Ecclesiastical. The Powers are distinct. B. They are distinct in their Objects or Matters about which they are exercised:
they are united in the same Subjects or Per∣sons that are supreme in all causes both Eccle∣clesiasticall and Civill. W. You were wont to pray for the King in that stile. B. Yes, when the King was, and now they that have the Kingly power may withall assume the same title, if they please. W. By no means, Temporall Governors, power Spirituall? B. The power of Civill Magistrates, in matters of religion, is called Ecclesiasticall or Spirituall in respect of the object of it, about which it is conversant, not in respect of the manner of operating: For the supreme powers do not minister in holy things, in the Word, and Sacraments, and censures, but they take care and provide, that these ministrations be rightly and orderly performed. H. But how prove you an appeal to be made to the highest power in a Church-case? B. Saint Paul appealed unto Caesar, Act 25. 10, 11. Tr. Yea but that appeal was in a cause concerning sedition. B. Hear himself speak, For the Resurre∣ction of the dead am I called in question, Act. 23. 6. W. That was said in policy to divide the Pharisees and Sadduces.
B. However the Apostle spake nothing but the truth, as appears also by the words of Festus, Act. 23. 19. The question was whe∣ther he might preach Jesus and the Resurre∣ction. Tr. That Caesar was Nero, a heathen ty∣rant and persecutor, a fit man to meddle with Religion. B. He was, it seems, fir for Paul to ap∣peal unto, for want of a better, and had he acquitted the Apostle, he had thereby given him a right against the Jews [See Grotius of Authority, concerning this particular and the whole matter:] As for the Supremacy of Christian Kings this is one argument: If the Jewish Kings had power in matters of Reli∣gion, then have the Christian Kings the like power: But the Jewish Kings, &c. To. Let me adde another Argument out of the Prophet, concerning the Christian Church, Kings shall be her nursing Fathers, and Queenes her nursing Mothers. W. Read out the verse, and you are answe∣red:—They shall bow down to thee with their faces to the earth. Is. 49. 23. Here is subje∣ction rather than superiority. To. A superiority of Government and Pa∣tronage is included in the name of Father: but these Fathers are Sons of the Church too
in another sense, and subject to the spiritu∣all guides of their soules; subjection and Go∣vernment may consist together in severall respects. B. Will you turne to the Text in Matth. 18. once more, and hear a fair Interpretation of it out of the Excellent Paraphrast: Tell it to the Church] i. e. to the Rulers of the As∣semblies. Verily I say unto you] to you the designed Rulers of the Church, and your Suc∣cessors the Bishops— H. Enough, enough, pray who is your Au∣thor there? B. Regard not so much, who, as what. No matter whose the words are, if they cleer the Text. This Author Mr. Tr. shews you the true sense of the next verse concerning two or three. It is the manner of Scripture, where severall things are mentioned, to re∣sume the last first, and so go back. In this re∣trogradous order, the Power of the Church which was last mentioned is spoken of v. 18. and then the two or three are again mentio∣ned, which were spoken of v. 16. I will cleer it, if you please, by sundry the like passages. [See in of Binding and Loosing pag. 12. &c. W. We have enough of you already. I would not goe over the door sill to Dispute with
one▪ upon whose spirit I see so much of the Pope. B. No Gloster-Hall man would say so, but you. And you say so, because you have no∣thing else to say. I am far from Popery, and I doubt you are neer it, with your Indepen∣dency. Col. A. But Pray-thee, what Author have you there on the Text? B. I will obey you. It is the great or∣nament of the English Church, the Learned and pious Doctor Hammond. W. &c. An Arminian, an Arminian! To. That's a very indirect answer, when the words alleged tend not to Arminianism, but to the support of Christianism. B. I feared you would cast some aspersion upon this Brave Man, and therefore would have concealed his name under a silent ve∣neration. But you are mistaken when you think the Doctrine of Universall Redempti∣on Arminianism. It was the Doctrine of the Church of England before Arminius was born. Wee learn it out of the old Church-Catechism. I believe in Jesus Christ, who redeemed me & all mankind. And the Church hath learned it out of the plaine Scripture, where Christ is the Lamb of God that taketh away the sins of the World, &c.
To. God would have all men to be saved: Therefore Christ is the Redeemer of all men. Col. A. Paul in that Text to Tim: speaks de generibus singulorum, not de singulis ge∣nerum. B. S. Paul speaks de singulis generum: for elsewhere it is said, Christ tasted death for every man, Heb. 2. 9. a convincing Text. W. There is a distinction of voluntas signi, & beneplaciti. B. If God hath signified and revealed to us, that he would have all men to be saved, then it is most true, that he would have All men to be saved. But he hath signified, &c. He knows not to lye or to dissemble. C. I desire to propose an Argument in this Question, if you please to answer me. B. Most willingly. You are a courteous Gentleman. C. If Christ died for all men, then shall all men be saved: But all men shall not be saved; Therefore— B. I deny the sequel of your major. C. Christ cannot fail of his intention: Therefore if Christ died for all men, all men shall be saved. B. I deny your Antecedent. C. To fail of ones intention argues imperfe∣fection:
But you must not lay any imperfection upon Christ:— B. No, by no meanes. Therefore I an∣swer. One may fail of his intention two waye: either by ones own fault, or by the fault of ano∣ther to whom good is intended. Christ failes of his intention, not through his own fault, but ours: he is not wanting to us, we are wanting to our selves. And I beseech you all, dear Christians, take heed of conceiving hard thoughts of God & of Christ, as if he would the death of a sinner. Tr. God in his eternall Purpose hath appoin∣ted to save some, and to damne others. B. The purpose of God is absolute or con∣ditionall: God purposeth not the damnation of any absolutely, but Conditionally upon his refusall of the meanes. [And for election, con∣sider what the Apostle saith, He hath chosen us in Christ, Eph. 1. 4. See also the judici∣ous Mr. Hooker's distinction of Gods gene∣rall inclination, and his occasioned Will: lib. 5. s. 49.] Wherefore Beloved, I charge you again, Take heed, that you think not ill of God and of Christ, as if he were not really and sincere∣ly willing you should be saved. Hear Christ mourning affectionately over Jerusalem, How oft would I, and thou wouldst not! Hear
God speaking most pathetically in the Pro∣phet: As I live saith the Lord, I desire not the death of a sinner. Will you not take his word? Take his Oath: As I live saith the Lord, I desire not the death of a sinner, but that he turn from his way and live. Turn ye, Turn ye, why will ye dye, O house of Israel! Turn yee, Turn yee, why will ye dye, O yee opposers of the Truth▪ H. You see, Brethren, what he is: we have enough of him. It is high time to conclude. Sir, I desire to conclude all with Prayer. B. Sir, I have answered your Objections, and I take my leave of you. For, to your Prayers, I fear, I shall not be able to answer AMEN. PSAL. 115. 1. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto Thy Name give the Prayse, for thy Mercy, and for thy Truths sake.
ADDITIONS. ON the By, it was said by Mr. To. that although there be no precept for Epis∣copacy in the New Testament, the Apostoli∣call Institution of it is enough to commend it to us. For we have not more to shew for the Lords day, than for Episcopacy: How then can we maintain the one, and abolish the o∣ther? When the opponent rejected the Authori∣ty of the Primitive Church, Mr. To. said: You do the Papists greater service than you are aware, when for feare of Popery you dis∣claim the Fathers. Col. A. In the Revelation the Lords day is called , there is the name, and we have the practice in other places: Holy assemblies on the first day of the week. To. True Sir, and so much we have for Episcopacy, as hath been shewed already. B. I remember well, I have heard the Learned Doctor of the Chair, Dr. Prideaux, publickly declaring in the Divinity School, that he could not prove the observation of the
Lords day by Divine Command, in any place of the New Testament, but that the Aposto∣licall practice and example followed by the Church, was sufficient to give it a kind of Divine right; The like may be said for Epis∣copacy. Church by plain Grammaticall con∣struction doth signify no other thing than the Lords house. From  Kyrc, and by ad∣ding letters of aspiration Church. Hooker l. 5. 13. [See the great Hugo Grotius of Authori∣ty, Ch. 11. Also the Considerations touching the change of Church-Government.] The Respondent not knowing the most ea∣ger Disputant among his Opponents, craved his name: I was your Collegue, saith he. B. What I. W. of Gloster-Hall! you were an early student in Divinity. I remember you read Dr. Prideaux Lectures De Absoluto Decreto, &c. when you were but a Fresh-man. He is now admonished to study his Anteces∣sor at Tewksbury Mr. Geeres Book against Separation, entituled Vindiciae Ecclesiae An∣glicanae. Another of the Opponents Mr. Tr. asked the Respondent, whether he did not Preach before he was Ordained: Yes, said he, once or twice in this Church above twenty years since, being Mr of Arts, and after that Tryall of my self, I entred into Orders. Your men
do not so. [See Grotius of Authority pag. 181.] Mr. W. At the mention of Christmas was startled and cried Popery. Mr. B. Answered there is no hurt in the Word, and for the Thing, the keeping of that and other Chri∣stian Festivalls, we commend the sober Chri∣stian, to the Resolution of the sixt Quaere by the eminent Dr. Hammond. Where the Respondent distinguisheth of Bishops as Lords & as Fathers, he would not have the Reader suspect him as if he envied a∣ny temporall Honour or Riches to the Fathers of the Church. For who knew how to abound so well as They? The good works of the Bi∣shops of England would make a fair volume, which perhaps some body will collect. Our Mother Oxford especially cannot forget how magnificent Founders and Benefactors she hath had of this sacred Order. One of the Opponents, about admission of people to the Sacrament, urged that prover∣biall speech of Christ Matth. 7. 16. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? No, said the Respondent, while they continue such, but on their Conversion they may. For the true sense of that place hear the Divine Pa∣raphrast. By their fruits ye shall know them.] Ye shall certainly know them and discern
them, if you take notice of, and weigh the doctrins, which when they have gotten some Authority with you, they will presently en∣deavour to infuse into you. They that make no other use of their being counted Pro∣phets, but to infuse higher degrees of all kind of piety and charity into you, ye may re∣solve they are sent from God. For the Devill would never help men to credit and reputa∣tion in the world, who should make use of it only to the advancement of piety. But if their designs be to infuse into their followers any seeds of impiety, injustice, uncleanness, un∣charitableness, sedition, rebellion, &c. Let their pretences and behaviour be never so fair, be sure they are false Prophets. When it was said by the Respondent that Christ died for all men: one Cr. a disciple of Mr. H. was heard to say, Then, it seems, Christ dyed for the Devills and all: not consi∣dering that Divine Text to the Hebrews, 2. 16. For verily he took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of A∣braham. Where the Paraphrast judiciously, as his manner is, amending the Translation, saith: For tis not said any where that he catches hold of Angels, as they are falling, or running, or carried captive from him, to save or rescue them from ruine, or to bring them
out of captivity, but only to men doth he this favour peculiarly. To his Congregation at Sudeley-Castle. ANd now, Beloved, I end with a Request to you, in Saint Peter's words: Gi∣ving all diligence, adde to your Faith, Ver∣tue; and to your Vertue, Knowledge; and to Knowledge, Temperance; and to Tempe∣rance, Patience; and to Patience, Godli∣ness; and to Godliness, Brotherly-kindness; and to Brotherly-kindness, Charity; For if these things be in you & abound, the greatest objection of our Opponents will be then ful∣ly answered, if it be not yet. Let no man suffer sin upon his Brother, but let us ex∣hort and admonish one another, lovingly and faithfully; and let the most knowing and Zea∣lous among you assist the Minister in the dis∣charge of his duty, that no open and notorious liver may presume to come with us to the Holy Table. Let us pray for a setled Publick Discipline, but in the mean, let us settle our selves, and keep as good order as we can; Let us shew the sincerity of our Religion by our mutuall Love, and by our Meekness and Charity to our Enemyes and Calumniators;
Let us evidence our having the Spirit, not by bold intrusion into offices not committed to us, but by bringing forth the fruits of the Spirit, Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering and the rest. Finally, let us not be weary of Welldoing, but go on in every good Work with courage and alacrity, with our eyes fixed upon Heaven, so shall the mouth of the Adversary be stopped; and the Lord shall open our lips, and our mouth shall shew forth his praise. Amen. Your Servant for Christs sake. C. B. Scripsi 23. Novem. die St. Clementis na∣tali meo 45. An. Ch. 1653. N. N. To the Reader. CHristian Reader, Know that after the Disputation ended, between two and three in the Afternoon, Mr. B. and Mr. To. re∣tired to their Inn, whither the Baylifs and Churchwardens, and some other honest men of the Town came to them and gave them thanks. The next morning was deliver'd to a Servant of the Parish, a Paper to be pre∣sented
to Mr. H. and published, declaring that some Neighbouring Ministers would be rea∣dy (by Gods help) on the Monday following to make good in the same place against Mr. H. and his brethren this necessary Truth, which they deny; That Parish-Churches of England are the true Churches of Jesus Christ. They came, but could not prevail with Mr. H. to come forth to Answer, Wherefore after some little conference with him at his own house (with the Account whereof I shall not now detein you) Mr. B. departed and Preacht at Sudeley, concluding with an ex∣hortation to Peace and Unity, and with an earnest Request to the Congregation, that they would give no offence, neither by word nor deed, to the other party. When the Account of the former Dispute was come down, Mr. B. sent two Copies, one to Mr. H. another to Mr. W. enclosed in these Letters, which be∣ing come unto my hand, I think fit not to conceal, and shall adde unto them some other since, to the end you may the better under∣stand the Temper of the Author, and in what condition he is at this present, December 17. 1653.
Master Helm. HAd you hearkned unto me and embra∣ced my motion for a private confe∣rence, both you and I had saved some trou∣ble; but since the matter is come thus far, I intreat you to peruse the account with judgement, and let me receive from you any thing that may serve for the perfecting of it. I have not wronged you, nor do I remember any greater provocation in my former Letters, but that I once said, Your simple Disciples, which word I have cause to retract, finding by experience that they have much more of the Serpent, than of the Dove. From them I suppose, rather than from your self, is a tempest a raising against me in the Higher Region: The opinion I have had of your Moderation and Ingenuity, yea and some degree of friendship with you formerly, enclines me to hope, that by your discretion all may be calmed. However, be∣ing not conscious to my self of any evill Do∣ing either against private or publick per∣sons, I do securely wait for the Event. I am enemy to no man: that's my Religion. They that make it a part of their Religion to per∣secute Dissenters, must take heed, lest at their
great peril they do good to those they ma∣lign; for that Good will accrew to those that suffer for the Truth is out of question with Your Servant, C. B. Decem. 9. Master Wells, IF so high a comparison may be used, it may be said of us, as it was of two great Romans by the Historian: They learned in the same, that which in contrary camps they practized. You and I were collegues in our Youth, and lately had some clashing. But Sir, I wish you to use no carnal weapons; for I am informed there is some intent of force to be offered me. Forbear I pray, and take off any such prosecution. Let us pro∣ceed in debate of what is in controversy (if you please to proceed) without any other arms but such as become Scholars and Di∣vines, that is, reasons and Arguments. You shall find me, I assure you on the word of a Christian, very willing to yield to any thing I cannot answer. Read the enclosed as if you were not a party but a judge; and re∣member the conclusion in Minutius Faelix, if you cannot forget you are a party, Tu vi∣ctor
mei, ego erroris. Do not disdain to write your mind to your old acquaintance and Countryman, and, if you permit, Lo∣ving friend still, Cl. Barksdale. Decem. 9. To the Right Worshipful Richard Aylworth Esquire, and to the rest of the worthy Justices met at Winchcomb. Decem. 17. 1653. Noble Sir, TO you I address my self, and by you to the rest of the worthy Justices present with you, protesting my readiness to wait on you, and to be obedient to the present Go∣vernours in all lawful things, and namely, in using or not using the Book of Common Prayer. I am ready to use it, if it be per∣mitted (as I suppose it is by Order of the Council of State November 12. last,) and I am ready Never with contempt. to lay it aside, if they require it to be laid aside: For I never thought it the only way of serving God. I have done nothing in contempt of any Act or Ordinance of State. I have ever Preacht Obedience to Superiours. Nor do I desire to live any
longer than I may be a profitable Member of this Common-wealth, in my little sphear. And you will be so tender (I hope) of the Honour of publick Justice, as not to con∣demn such a man unheard. Let not Christi∣an Gentlemen and Englishmen be less equal than Pagan Romans. You will in your pie∣ty and wisdom (I hope) give a check to the violence of my Accusers, whose Religion is Revenge. You will in your Charity and Goodness endeavour (so far as lawfully you may) the preservation of Gods Servant and your poor Friend. Cl. Barksdale. Decem. 17. 1653. To Master William Towers. Decem. 17. 1653. Dear Sir, AS God hath vouchsafed us the honour to appear for some Great Truths in our Religion, so it seemeth by the Justices pro∣ceeding at Winchcomb, we shall have this second honour, to suffer for them. Te Deum laudamus! I have sent them a Letter this
morn, to put them in mind of the manner of the Romans (I hope 'twill not seem to them Antichristian) not to condemn men unheard. I do not find in my self any fear of them. Though I cannot say, as the good Archbi∣shop Whitgift said, He had two things to give him courage against his potent Adver∣saries, Orbitatem & Senectutem, being in the midst of my Course, and being call'd Father by six little motherless children: Yet I can say, Si Deus nobiscum—and take courage enough from the Cause. If all the world op∣pose it, Truth is Truth, and God is Truth. To whose Grace and protection I commend us and all ours. Your assured friend and Brother, C. B.
C. B. to D. W. December 19. 53. SIR, It is very true, that I told you, the first draught of that dispute was the work but of one day, while the memory of it was fresh: and the carefull observer is no other than the Respondent himself, who is not ashamed to own as well the penning as the publishing of it. My worthy▪ friend, that stood in subsidiis, if he hath noted any considerable Defect in it, may do well, as I requested him, to send me his supplement. But the setting down an En∣thymen for a Syllogism, and the omission of little matters on the by, I conceive is no very considerable want. Indeed there was a passage between him and the opponents concerning the Institution of the Sacrament, which, be∣cause I found not the particulars in my frail memory, I mentioned not. Now Sir, for the proceeding against me at Winchcomb the last week, which together with a very frivolous report about the D. of Y. (in the inquiry whereof, methinks, the Religion of an oath was made cheap.) was the business of the three Justices, I must tell you what good people say; That the new-saints there discover what they are by their pride
and spightfulness; That they procured war∣rant to fetch in some of my neighbours to swear against me for using the Common-Pray∣er-Book, who are not so Book-learned, that they can well tell when I use it, when not: That they, some of them, gave this false evi∣dence, that on the Monday sollowing the Dis∣pute, when Mr. Helme would not appear, I had drawn to the Church a company (you were one) of lewd persons: That the Justices have not obliged me by any humanity or cha∣rity toward me, suffering me to be accused by such fellowes in my absence, that—But no more of this now. To conclude this scribble, I would have all know, that I do forgive my Adversaries (whom I have assay∣ed to cool by kind letters) and that I do not fear them: that I am well affected to all Go∣verment, by which I am protected, and that I am so well opinioned of the present Gover∣nor, that I believe he will at least tolerate that Religion, wherein himself, as well as we, were once baptiz'd. C. B. to Mr. G. December 24. 1653. SIR, I have seriously considered both what you writ to me, and what you said. You said, Let Ministers preach at home, and take heed
of Meetings. It is good to be wise and wary; but to omit the means and opportunity of doing good in our Callings, even when there is some shew of perill to our selves, I doubt will argue rather a timorous deserting of our Cause, than a prudent wariness. Mini∣sters must not only labour single and in their own Cures, but by a brotherly union, and mutual assistance, advance the work of their Master, and procure the peace of the Church. When so many unlearned new Teachers, both single and united, shew such zeal to make proselytes, shall we that have gone through the Schools to S. Maryes, and through uni∣versity degrees have ascended the Pulpit, and by a regular mission are employed in our sta∣tions, shall we I say let the people lose the fruit of our long studyes, shall we be cold and heartless, and suffer our sheep to wander as if they had no shepheards? You writ to me, That the Truth and our Cause did not suffer by my Dispute, but my friends fear is, that I in my estate may suffer in defense thereof. Truly Sir, the grave judgment of you and other friends, that I have done some service to a good Cause, doth more comfort me, than your fears of my suffering can discourage me. I think upon the Psalmists words, Trust in the Lord, and be doing good. I think upon Gods words to Paul▪
Be not afraid, but speak and hold not thy peace: For I am with thee. I think upon Paul's words to the Philippians, To you it is given not only to believe, but to suffer. I think upon Christ's words, Blessed are ye when men shall revile you and persecute you for my sake: Rejoyce and be exceeding glad. I need not comment upon these passages, nor apply them. Assure your self, I am not afraid to suffer, as a Christian. My estate indeed is but small; if it were great, God forbid I should love it more than a good Conscience. I am in hope to keep both safe; and my hope is confirmed, since I hear, that at the very same time when our Adversaries were con∣triving to undo me and other of my worthy brethren, The Generall was declared Pro∣tector, who is said to be of a moderate, and a gentle, and obliging Disposition. From whom I may justly expect such a preserva∣tion in my place, whereby I may be able (which is all my ambition) to breed up my five little Boys, to fear God, to love their Countrey, and to obey their superiours.
C. B. to D. C. December 30. 1653. MOst dear Sir, I have born a loss, which will make all that can happen seem but light unto me (ô passi graviora!) so that the danger threatned moves me not; But truly upon the late change (which I hope will turn to the general good, as well as mine) I wrote to you, that the dan∣ger, I conceiv'd, was past; and therefore you might burn the letters. No wonder, that in the delivery of my papers to that man, you receiv'd vile words, and threats against me. Such are the Civilities of some new-Saints, that have sound out a Religion of another temper from His, who as himself is meek and lowly, so requireth all his. Disciples to be like him; and that are of another spirit than that whose fruits are long suffering and gentle∣ness. 'Twas well you ventur'd not to deli∣ver the other letter, having had such expe∣rience. Now Sir, to answer your Question, where I am prosecuteed, I cannot: only I conjecture I shall hear of my Adversaries at the Sessions, and there I may hope well of the equity of the other Justices. As for the Articles against me, it seems by what I have learned concerning the examinations, they
will run thus: 1. That he said, he would out Mr. Helme (though I think, when they sought false witness to prove this, they found none; And indeed I do not use to threaten.) 2. That he hath sometime used some part of the Common-Prayer-Book (Them∣selves use not the Directory: and the Order of the 12. of November last, protects all As∣semblies but Popish.) 3. That he Christned such a mans child with the sign of the Cross: in token that he should not be asham'd to confess the faith of Christ crucified. 4. That he dined at an Ordinary with the D. of Y. at Winchcomb. [About whom there hath been much a doe among those Justices, to the ex∣posing of themselves and their office to much contempt among the people.] Terrible Ar∣ticles! But, since the Dissolution, the Men are not terrible: so that I may banish them from my studies, and return unto my Gro∣tius; or, rather use the words of the Psal∣mist, Return unto thy rest, O my Soul, for the Lord hath been good to thee. The Lord taketh my part against my adversaries. The Lord shall give his people the blessing of Peace. To his gracious providence I commend you and all yours.
Testimonies pertinent to severall passages in the Letters and Dispute, Collected out of Pro∣testant Divines as they came to hand, to be referred to their proper places by the diligent Reader. Dr. HAMMOND Of Binding and Loosing, Pag. 74. THey quite deform the primitime Insti∣tution (of Excommunication) who deny the Sacrament to Whole Congregations at once, without any charge laid to all or any part of them (save only that they are a mixt Congregation, wherein there are some evill men, which yet is not legally proved nei∣ther:) and they also who deny it to parti∣cular men sufficiently catechised, without any publick cognizance of their crime, or process of admonition first and second; or that de∣signe
that exclusion to any other end, than ut peccantes resipiscant, the reducing sinners to repentance: and therefore no small petty trifle is a sufficient matter for this, but contumaci∣ous continuing in some scandalous sin after admonitions: from which when they return again by a sincere approved repentance, they are to be absolved. In his Preface. THat the power of Binding and Loosing may be restored to its full vigour in this Church againe, and, wherever sobriety shall advise, by addition of penitentiall Canons be reformed or regulated; and being put into the primitive chanell, may there be permit∣ted to shew forth it self in the native purity and brightness; and so being ordered accor∣ding to Gods designation, obtain Gods bles∣sing to make it effectuall to its end, shall be the prayer of him who professes to love and admire the beauty of this fabrick [of the Church of England] even when it lys pollu∣ted in its blood, and to wish no greater bles∣sing to its dearest friends, or, for whom he daily prayes, most implacable enemies, than that the scales may fall off from all our eyes,
that we may see and value what is so illustri∣ously conspicuous and estimable in it self, &c. If the abuses and excesses and mistakes were removed, and that which is Christian and Apostolicall revived and restored in pru∣dence and sobriety, might yet again shew the world the use of that Prelacy, which is now so zealously contemned, and recover at once the order, and the estimation of it; set more Saints on their knees, in petitions for the reducing and restoring, than ever employed their hands toward the suppressing of it. D. Jer. Taylor in the Dedicatory before his Winter-Sermons. Of preaching. WHo would have in him so little of a man as not to be greedy of the Word of God, and of holy Ordinances, even therefore because they are so hard to have? And this evill, although it can have no excuse, yet it hath a great and a certain cause. For the Word of God still creates new Appetites, as it satisfies the old; and enlarges the capacity, as it fills the first propensities of the Spirit. For all spirituall blessings are seeds of Im∣mortality, and of infinite felicitie; they swell up to the comprehensions of Eternity: and the desires of the soul can never be wea∣ried,
but when they are decayed: as the stomack will be craving every day, unless it be sick and abused. But every mans expe∣rience tels him now, that because men have not Preaching, they less desire it: their long fasting makes them not to love their meat: and so we have cause to fear, the people will fall to an Atrophy, then to a loathing of ho∣ly food, and then Gods anger will follow the method of our sin, and send a famine of the word and Sacraments. Paulo post. And by the same instrument [Preaching] God restored the beauty of the Church, when it was necessary she should be reformed: it was the assiduous and learned Preaching of those whom God chose for his Ministers in that work, that wrought the Advantages, and perswaded those Truths, which are the enamel and beauty of our Churches. And because by the same means all things are preserved, by which they are produc'd, it cannot but be certain, that the present State of the Church requires a greater care and prudence in this Ministry than ever: espe∣cially, since by Preaching some endeavour to supplant Preaching, and by intercepting the fruits of the flocks; to dishearten the shep∣heards from their Attendances.
The same Author. Of Zeal, p. 185. ANy zeal is proper for Religion, but the zeal of the Sword, and the zeal of an∣ger; this is , the bitterness of zeal; and it is a certain temptation to every man against his duty: for if the Sword turns Prea∣cher and dictates Propositions by Empire instead of Arguments, and engraves them in mens hearts with a Ponyard, that it shall be death to believe what I innocently and ignorantly am perswaded of, it must needs be unsafe to try the Spirits, to try all things, to make enquiry. And yet without this liberty, no man can justify himself before God or man, nor confidently say, that his Religion is best: since he cannot without a final danger make himself able to give a right sentence, and to follow that which he finds to be the best. This may ruin Souls by making Hypocrits, or careless and com∣plyant against conscience or without it; but it doth not save Souls, though peradventure it should force them to a good opinion. This is inordination of zeal. For Christ by re∣ptoving St. Peter drawing his Sword, even in the cause of Christ, for his sacred and yet
injur'd person,  (saith Theophilact) teaches us not to use the Sword, though in the cause of God, or for God himself: because he will secure his own interest: only let him be served as himself is pleased to command: and it is like Moses passion, it throws the Tables of the Law out of our hands, and breaks them in pieces out of indignation to see them broken. This is the zeal that is now in fashion, and hath almost spoiled Religi∣gion: Men like the zealots of the Jews cry up their Sect, and in it their Interest, they affect Disciples and fight against the Oppo∣nents: And we shall find in Scripture, that when the Apostles began to Preach▪ the meekness of the Christian institution, sal∣vation, and promises, charity and humility, there was a zeal set up against them. The Apostles were zealous for the Gospel: The Jews were zealous for the Law. And see what different effect these two zeals did pro∣duce. The zeal of the Law came to this, They stirred up the City, they made tu∣mults, they sent parties of Souldiers to si∣lence and to imprison the Preachers, &c. But the zeal of the Apostles was this, They Preached publickly and privatly, they pray∣ed for all men, they wept to God for the
hardness of mens hearts, they became all things to all men, &c. They endured every man and wronged no man, They would do any good thing and suffer any evill, if they had but hopes to prevail upon a Soul: They perswaded men meekly, they entreated them humbly, they convinced them powerfully, they watched for their good, but medled not with their interest, &c. L. Hatton in the Preface to his Psalter. Of Union. HE that is ready to joyn with all the so∣cieties of Christians in the world, in those things which are certainly true, just and pious, gives great probation that he hath at least animum Catholicum, no Schismatical Soul, because he would actually communi∣cate with all Christendome; if bona fides in falso articulo, sincere perswasion (be it true or false) did not disoblige him; since he clearly distinguishes persons from things, and in all good things communicates with persons bad enough in others. This is the Communion of Charity: and when the Communion of belief is interrupted by mis∣perswasion on one side, and too much con∣fidence
and want of Charity on the other, the erring party hath humane infirmity to excuse him, but the uncharitable nothing at all. This therefore is the best and surest way, because we are all apt to be deceived, to be sincere in our disquisitions, modest in our determinations, charitable in our censures, and apt to communicate in things of evi∣dent truth and confessed holiness. Since all Christians of any publick confession and Government, that is, all particular and na∣tional Churches, agree in the matter of pray∣ers, and the great object, God in the mystery of the Trinity, if the Church of Rome would make her Addresses to God only through Jesus Christ our Lord, and leave the Saints in the Calendar, without drawing them into her Offices (which they might do without any prejudice to the sutes they ask, unless Christ's intercession without their conjun∣cture were imperfect) that we might all once pray together, we might hope for the bles∣sings of Peace and Charity to be upon us all.
Hieronymus Zanchius, in Confess. Cap. 24. 19. De Ecclesia. NOn enim ab Ecclesia Romana simplici∣ter & in omnibus defecimus: sed in illis duntaxat rebus, in quibus ipsa defecit ab A∣postolica, atque adeo à seipsa, veteri & pura Ecclesia: neque alio discessimus animo, quàm ut, si correcta ad priorem Ecclesiae formam redeat, nos quoque ad illam revertamur, & communionem cum illa, in suis porr coetibus habeamus. Quod ut tandem fiat, toto ani∣mo Dominum Jesum precamur. Quid enim po cuique optatius, quam ut ubi per Baptis∣mum renati sumus, ibi etiam in finem usque vivamus, modo in Domino. Ego H. Z. cum tota mea familia testatum hoc volo toti Ec∣clesiae Christi in omnem aeternitatem. Huic pii viri sententiae libenter sub∣scribit C. B. Idem in observat. ad Cap. 5. ATtque haec de patrum autoritate: à qui∣bus nisi manifestissimis rationibus cogar, me pro mea tenera conscientia, vel in dogma∣tibus,
vel etiam in scripturarum interpreta∣tionibus, praesertim ubi plerique omnes con∣sentiunt, deflectere non audere, toti Ecclesiae Christi ingenuè fateor. Et postea. Hoc ego ingenuè denuò profiteor, talem esse meam con∣scientiam, ut à veterum patrum, sive dog∣matibus, sive scripturarum interpretationi∣bus, non facile, nisi vel manifestis sacrarum literarum testimoniis, vel necessariis conse∣quentiis, apertisque demonstrationibus con∣victus atque coactus, discedere queam. Sic exim acquiescit mea conscientia: & in hac ment is quiete cupio etiam mori. Idem ad Cap. 25. QUid? quòd in Ecclesiis etiam Protestan∣tium, non desunt reipsa Episcopi, & Archiepiscopi: quos mutatis bonis Graecis nominibus in malè Latina, vocant superin∣tendentes, & generales superintendentes? Sed ubi etiam neque illa vetera bona Graeca, neque haec nova malè Latina nomina obtinent, ibi tamen solent esse aliquot primarii, penes quos fere tota est autoritas. De nominibus ergo fuerit controversia: verùm cum de re∣bus convenit, quid de nominibus alterca∣mur?
Idem in fine. PRecor omnes Christianos per Dominum Jesum, ut positis vanis privatorum homi∣num somniis, positis etiam propriis carnis af∣fectibus, odiis, inimicitiis; amplexi verò certum ac salutarem veteris Ecclesiae doctri∣nam, Christianamque dilectionem; coeamus omnes in unam fidem, sanctamque amicitiam: sicut nobis quoque omnibus unus est Deus, unus Mediator, unum Baptisma, una spes vocationis nostrae: ad gloriam nominis Dei, Ecclesiae aedificationem, salutemque animorum nostrorum. Citius enim quam putamus, si∣stemur ante tribunal Christi, ut referat u∣nusquisque prout se gessit in corpore, & in hac vita, quando post hanc vitam nulla spes veniae, nullus resipiscentiae locus est. Hooker in his Preface. Sect. 4. A Very strange thing sure it were, that such a Discipline as ye speak of, should be taught by Christ and his Apostles in the word of God, and no Church ever have found it out, nor received it till this pre∣sent time: contrariwise, the Government
against which ye bend your selves, be ob∣served every where throughout all genera∣tions and ages of the Christian world, no Church ever perceiving the word of God to be against it. We require you to find out but one Church upon the face of the whole earth, that hath been ordered by your Discipline, or hath not been orderd by ours, that is to say, by Episcopal regiment, sithence the time that the blessed Apostles were here conversant. The same. Sect. 6. AS for the Orders which are established, sith equity and reason, the Law of Na∣ture, God and man, do all favour that which is in being, till orderly judgement of decision be given against it; it is but ju∣stice to exact of you, and perverseness in you it should be to deny thereunto your willing obedience. Not that I judge it a thing al∣lowable for men to observe those Laws, which in their hearts they are stedfastly per∣swaded to be against the Law of God; but your perswasion in this case ye are all bound for the time to suspend; and in otherwise doing, ye offend against God by troubling his
Church without any just or necessary cause. The same. Sect. 8. AGain it may justly be feared, whether our English Nobility, when the matter came in tryal, would contentedly suffer themselves to be alwaies at the call, and to stand to the sentence of a number of mean persons assisted with the presence of their poor teacher, a man (as sometimes it hap∣neth) though better able to speak, yet little or no whit apter to judge than the rest. From whom, be their dealings never so absurd (un∣less it be by way of complaint to a Synod) no appeal may be made unto any one of higher power: in as much as the order of your Discipline admitteth no standing ine∣quality of Courts, no Spiritual Judge to have any ordinary Superior on earth, but as many Supremacies, as there are Parishes and several Congregations. Neither is it altogether without cause that so many do fear the overthrow of all learning, as a threat∣ned sequel of this your intended Discipline. For if the worlds preservation depend upon the multitude of the wise; and of that sort
the number hereafter be not likely to wax over great, when (that wherewith the Son of Syrach professeth himself at the heart grie∣ved) men of understanding are already so little set by: how should their minds, whom the love of so precious a Jewel filleth with secret jealousy, even in regard of the least things which may any way hinder the flou∣rishing estate thereof, choose but misdoubt, lest this Discipline, which alwaies you match with Divine Doctrine, as her natu∣ral and true Sister, be found unto all kinds of knowledge a Stepmother; seeing that the greatest worldly hopes, which are propo∣sed unto the chiefest kind of learning, yee seek utterly to extirpate as weeds: and have grounded your platform on such Propositi∣ons, as do after a sort undermine those most renowned habitations, where through the goodness of Almighty God all commendable Arts and Sciences are with exceeding great industry hitherto (and so may they for ever continue) studied, proceeded in, and pro∣fest. To charge you as purposely bent to the overthrow of that wherein many of you have attained no small perfection, were in∣jurious. Only therefore I wish that your selves did well consider how opposite certain your positions are, &c.
Master Edward Leigh, a dilligent Colle∣ctor, in his Body of Divinity P. 454, &c. THe Socinians say, Cum adhuc nova, &c. The Apostles had a call when the Gospel was newly published: there needs not a Ministry now that the Gospel is generally taught, and it is promised we shall be all taught of God. If we should look for a Mi∣nistry, where shall we find it? Our Mini∣stets were ordained by Bishops, they by the Pope: Therefore their Calling is Anti-Chri∣stian. But, That there is such an Institu∣tion of Christ, and this to continue till the worlds end, may be thus proved. First, there are some to whom the word of reconciliation is committed, and not to others. 1 Cor. 5. 18. Rom. 10. 15. there is a peculiar mission: Men cannot Preach as the Embassadors of Christ, unless sent, Jo. 20. 21. Gal. 1. 1. Se∣condly, because a special authority is com∣mitted to such by vertue of their office, they have the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. Is. 22. 22. Mat. 16. 19. The Brownists say, our Ministers are not rightly called into their offices, because we received it from Rome▪ Ans. Not every thing ordained by Anti-Christ
is forthwith to me rejected, but only that which he doth, qua Antichristus, as he is Antichrist. But Bishops were before ever Antichrist appeared in the world.—Brown the father of the Brownists was the first of note that did separate himself from the Church of England, and said, that we had no Church; he meant a true Church; But after he went into France, and being at Geneva, he saw the Sabbath much prophaned, and the wafer-cake given in the Sacrament instead of bread; whereupon he began to think better of the Church of England, and returning home he became Pastor of a Church in Northham∣pton-shire, called Achurch. The Church of Rome was a true Church; the Reformed Churches separated from it becoming a false Church. Though Ministers were ordained in the most corrupt estate of the Church of Rome, yet if they forsake the corruptions of the Church of Rome they are true Ministers, as the Church of Rome it self if it would cast off its Corruptions, should be a true Church. There is a double Calling necessary to a dispensor of the Mysteries of salvation, In∣ward and Outward. The Inward enableth men, the Outward authorizeth them to dis∣charge their sacred function. Where there are Gifts, if God encline the heart of the
party to enter into the Ministry, there is an inward Calling: Yet this alone sufficeth not without an outward Calling, either Ordinary, or Extraordinary. We are not now to expect extraordinary callings since Miracles are ceased. The Ordinary calling is by the Im∣position of the hands of the Presbytery, Jer. 14. 14. & 27. 15. Rom. 10. 5. No other Ordination was heard of for fifteen hundred years, or at lest approved of. Dr. Featly's distinction of Clergy and Laity. In the Reformed Churches of France and Geneva, the people give no voice in the Elec∣tion of Ministers, but are only permitted, if they have any causes of dislike or exception, to make them known to the pastors & guides of the Church, and the power of judging such exceptions resteth wholly in them. When one Morelius a phantasticall companion sought to bring the Elections of Bishops and Ministers to be popular, and swayed by the most voices of the people, he was condemned by all the Synods in France, as Beza sheweth, Epist. 83. In Scripture we find Election and Ordina∣tion frequently distinguished, not only as di∣stinct acts, but oft-times in distinct hands; Deut. 1. 13. The people chuse them who shall be Rulers, but Moses makes them Ru∣lers.
Act. 6. 3. The people chuse, the A∣postes appoint the Deacons. The chusing of a person to an office, is not the authorizing of the person elected, but the designation of the person to be authorized. See Mr. Gillesp. Miscell. e. 4. The Socinians acknowledge it is fit for Or∣der and Decency to retain Ordination in the Church. Peradventure many of the Sectaries of this time will hardly acknowledge thus much.—Some think, that the Ceremony of laying on of hands may be omitted; some∣times we must be tyed to example in the lest gesture, though not prescribed, and yet men presume to dispense in a circumstance pre∣scribed, Tit. 1. 5. Timothy was ordained by laying on of hands, and enjoyned to lay hands on others in their Ordination, 1 Tim. 5. 22. Thus were the Deacons ordained, Act. 6. 6. and thus were Paul and Barnabas set apart for the execution of their calling, Act. 13. 3. Augustin and Chrysostom preached every day in the week and year, (at least once or twice without fail:) Ye heard yesterday, yee shall hear to morrow, is common in their Tra∣ctates and Homilies. Mr. Bull's trial of Sepa∣rat. p. 81. The Papists by way of scoff called the Evangelical Ministers praedicantici. Wher∣as
Paul judged preaching his chief Office, and would not baptize lest it should be an impediment. Bellarmine and the Councill of Trent style preaching praecipuum Episcopi of∣ficium. The Question (saith Mr. Mode on Act. 5. 3, 4, 5.) should not be, Whether Tithes are due to the Ministers of the Gospel, meaning as a duty of the people unto them, but rather, Whether they be not due to God: for so is the style of the Scripture, All the Tithes are mine; These I give to Levi, and not you. There are many other uses for the employ∣ment of Bona sacra, if they be more than is competent for them and theirs. That men, though gifted without being called to the Ministry, and by Ordination set a∣part for it, should take upon them the office or ordinary exercise of preaching, seems repug∣nant to those Scriptures, Rom. 10. 15. Heb. 5. 4. 1 Tim. 5. 22. Christ therefore fre∣quently urgeth this, That he was sent from his Father. Punishments have been inflicted on those that have medled beyond their call, as Uzziah. Apage vaesanam illam prophetandi libertatem, imo licentiam blasphemandi: ut li∣ceat maleferiato cui{que} tyroni prodigiosissima cerebri sui phantasmata in apricum producere, & populo commendare & praelo. Concio D▪
Halli ad Syn. nat. Dord. Such as want Au∣thority from the Church, 1. are none of Christs Officers, Ephes. 4. 11. 2. They are expresly forbidden it, Jer. 23. 21. 3. The blessing on the Word is promised only to sent Teachers, Rom. 10. 15. Mr. Owen's duty of Pastors and people distinguished, p. 46, 47. In∣primis displicet mihi illa quam tuentur liber∣tas prophetandi, certissima pernicies religionis nisi cert is finibus acriter coerceatur. Casaub. epist. 320. The same Collector, pag. 683, 684. WE are commanded not to eat with  a Brother if he be so and so. Ans. It signifieth to have familiar civill society with them, in inviting them or feasting them. But, if one may not have familiar civil conversati∣on with such, much less may he eat with them at the Sacrament. It follows not, for in withdrawing our selves from them we punish them, and shew our dislike of them: but in withdrawing our selves from the Sacrament, because of them, we punish our selves.—Mr. Downame on 1 Cor. 11. 28. saith, None ought to refrain coming to the Lords Table, because they see scandalous sinners & unwor∣thy guests admitted. For, 1. The Apostle here doth not enjoyn us to examin others, but
our selves. 2. Because the Apostles, (yea even Christ himself) did joyn with those As∣semblies in the service of God, and particular∣ly in the use of the Sacraments, which were full of corruptions, both in respect of doctrin and manners, viz. This Church of Corinth it self.) 3. Because one mans sin cannot defile another, nor make the seals of the Covenant uneffectuall to him who cometh in faith and repentance, and even hateth that sin which he seeth committed: especially when he hath no power committed unto him by God and the Church, of repelling the wicked from this holy Communion. 4. Because the punish∣ment denounced against unworthy Receivers is appropriated to them who thus offend, and reacheth not to the innocent because they are in their company. Zanchy saith, Non aut ob talem abusum Ecolesia de sinit esse Ecclesia Chri∣sti, aut pii impiorum in sacris Communione possunt contaminari. Beza de Presbyt. p. 28. Etiamsi suis oculis Minister quenpiam vide∣rit aliquid agentem, quod coenae exclusionem mereatur, jure tamen, nec debeat nec possit, ni∣si vocatum, convictum legitimè, deni{que} secun∣dum constitutum in Ecclesia ordinem damna∣tum à mensa Domini cum auctoritate prohi∣bere. Object. We are commanded to separate
our selves from the wicked, and to come out from amongst thom, 2 Cor. 6. 17. Ans. We must indeed come out from amongst those that do serve false Gods, and separate our selves from the familiar society of wicked persons; but other separation was never practised by a∣ny Prophet or Apostle, or ever meant. Im∣mediatly there it follows, Touch not the-un∣clean thing: that is, Do not joyn with others in their pollutions. Ephes. 5. 6, 7, 11. p. 682. This Sacrament (saith Mr. Burroughs on Hos. 5. 3.) is not defiled to the right recei∣vers of it, meerly because wicked men are present there, but because the Congregation neglects their duty of casting out the wicked from thence, whence they discover them∣selves—Particular persons and Communi∣cants come to be defiled in this, if they ne∣glect the duty that belongs to them as Chri∣stians, Matth. 18. 15, 16. If thou hast done thy duty to all scandalous persons in the Con∣gregation, then the sin be upon the Church, thou maist receive the Sacrament with comfort, though wicked men be admitted there. [p. 481.] Dr. Ames saith, Falsum est iniernas virtutes à nobis requiri, ut aliquis sit in Ecclesia quoad visibilem ejus statum. Bel∣larm.
enerv. Tom. 2. l. 2. c. 1. s. 5. The A∣postles at the first gathering of the Church of the new Testament never required any more than the profession of the faith of Christ in fundamentals, and that they were willing for the time to come to walk in Gospell rules. John Baptist received Publicans and sinners, Soldiers, Scribes, Pharisees, when they con∣fessed their sins, and desired to be admitted into the faith of him whom John preached. See Act. 2. 41, 47. Vide Calvin▪ ad Matt. 3. Many a one that may have real grace, yet out of bashfulness, and because he hath but weak parts, may not be able to evidence it to others: and others, who have greater gifts, may carry it away when they are not inwardly wrought upon. I suppose therefore, those are to be received into Church-Communion which profess the faith of Christ, and subject to the rules of the Gospell, if they be free from dam∣nable errors and scandalous conversation. Mr. Martial on Rom. 12. 4, 5. I am ve∣rily perswaded, that were the union and Com∣munion of the people of God rightly known, there is no Saint in any part of the world, but where ever he comes, might demand upon the profession of his faith, and his voluntary subjection to the Gospell, his right in the Or∣dinances, hear the Word with them, pray
with them, receive the Sacraments with them. Mr. Baxter in the Dedicatory of his Rest. YOu know I never conformed to the use of mystical Symbolical Rites my self (but only to the determination of Circumstantials necessary in genere) and yet I ever loved a godly peaceable Conformist, better than a tur∣bulent Non-conformist. I yet differ from ma∣ny in severall Doctrins of greater moment than Baptism, &c. And yet if I should zea∣lously press my judgment on others, and seek to make a party for it, and disturb the peace of the Church, and separate from my Bre∣thren, I should fear lest I should prove a fire∣brand in hell, for being a firebrand in the Church. Paulo post. Make conscience of the great duty of reproving and exhorting those about you: Make not your souls guilty of the oaths, ignorance and unworthiness of others by your silence. Admonish them lovingly and modestly; but be sure you do it, and that se∣riously. This is the first step in Discipline. Expect not that your Minister should put any from the Sacrament, whom you have not thus admonished once and again.—Punish not before due process.
Dr. Ham. Pract. Catech. l. 6. s. 3. Of preparation for the Sacrament. THat every man is infinitely concernd to have his soul always possest with every part of that preparation. That he careless os∣citancy, & fatal stupidity of the world, in never so much as considering whether they have any of them or no, is a most prodigious thing. That the time of preparing our selves for the Sacrament (which ought to be frequent, but how frequent is not defined in Scripture, but left to the judgment of the Church) is a very fit time for that self examination. That till that be done, and all and each of those graces [Re∣pentance, faith, &c.] found sincere in our hearts, we ought not to come to that holy Sacrament: which yet will not excuse any for not coming, because he is not prepar'd, but rather aggravate the sin upon him, that ra∣ther than thus fit himself he will part with so great a treasure. The same Authour, Of Idolatry, s. 70. FOr the sign of the Cross, used by our Church in Baptism, which hath been by some cryed down under the title of Idolatry,
two things it will not be amiss briefly to have observed; 1. That the same ground of zeal or passion that hath incited some men lately to charge it of a breach of the second Com∣mandement, hath long since moved one [Par∣ker on the Cross] of the same spirit, to accuse it as à sin against the other nine, and to en∣title his severall Chapters of the swearing, Sabbath-breaking, murder, adultery, stealing, fals-witness, and at the last of the concupis∣cence of the Cross, as well as the Idolatry of it, the reasons being much alike for the whole charge. 2. That the signing with the sign of the Cross in that Sacrament, is somewhat di∣stant from that which the Papists use, and an act of departure from them, in King Ed∣wards second Liturgy, more than had been in the first Reformation. The former custome was to cross the Child at the Church dore, when it was brought to Baptism, but this of ours as a mark of initiation or reception into Christs flock, immediately following Baptism, and a kind of tessera, or military sign that the person thus consigned into Christ's Militia shall for ever after think himself ob∣liged manfully to fight, &c. A change made meerly out of compliance with them who were jealous of too great an inclination to Popery, and yet now charged with the guilt
of that, which it was on purpose designed to decline. The same Author, Of fraternall Ad∣monition, pag. 11. THis of Correption (saith Gerson) is by Christ's precept become our duty, when∣soever these 6. Conditions do concur. 1. That I have a certain knowledge of the brothers sin, a suspicion being not ground sufficient for so doing. 2. That I use all mildness or man∣suetude in admonishing, the angry passionate correption being apt rather to provoke than to amend. 3. If on consideration I discern not that some other is fitter for that per∣formance than my self; i. e. either more fa∣miliar with him, or els his superiour, that may have some authority over him (as for a third consideration, whether some body els be not more pious, or better qualified, I shall not put that into the scheme, lest the most pious men being also the most humble, should by that , judge themselves superseded from thar duty:) Yet this also with this limi∣tation, that if all other do appear to neglect that performance, then it must de∣volve to me again, and as far as concerns that condition, become my duty, if all the other
conditions do concur with it. 4. If I have any probable ground of hope that he will be re∣formd or betterd by my Correption: where∣as on the other side, if there be no such hope, but rather that he will he provoked, inflamed, and grow worse, I am not then bound to con∣tribute thus to his deeper condemnation. 5. That the matter of the sin be of some weight: and again, that it were done upon advice and deliberation, not out of surreption, sudden motion, or imperfect consent. And lastly, if there be not hope of springing some happier opportunity for this performance at some other time which may make it prudent and charitable to defer it till then. The con∣currence of these conditions is that which makes the exercise of this duty necessary, and neglect a sin: and the concurrence of at least so many of them, as may give me hope of the designed success (that unto which the first mention of it by Christ was ordered, to save that which was lost:) the reforming any lapst trespasser, lays it upon me as a most excel∣lent work of Christian mercy: the usefulness of which to my poor brother, is able to com∣mend it to every Christians practice, though there were no obligation, or precept lying on him. Read the whole Treatise.
The same Author in his preface to, Of binding and loosing. THe Lord grant us unprejudicate honest hearts to judge uprightly, and every one of us that meekness and quietness of spirit, to think some others may possibly discern be∣twixt good and evill, as well as our selves; and when that prayer is once heard, I shall then suppose that  that hath given The∣mistocles the , or preheminence over his fellowes in the judgment of all posterity (viz. that every man named him next after him∣self) will certainly end the present contro∣versy. A moderate Episcopacy, with a standing assistant Presbytery (and every of these assig∣ned his full task and province of employment also) being the only fourth, which as it will certainly satisfy the desires of those whose pretensions are regular and moderate; so will it appear to be that which all other parties can best tolerate; and which next himself, both Presbyterian, and Independent, and Era∣stian will make no question to chuse and pre∣fer before any of the other pretenders.—The severall excellencies of the other three, by which they set themselves out amiable and desirable to admirers or followers (the Pres∣byterians
sharpness and severity against all ig∣norance and sin, the Independents zeal against mixt Congregations, and the Erastians care that the civill power may not be intrencht on, and that they that might receive benefit by the word and Sacraments, should by no means be interdicted the use of them) may all and each of them be found, at least as in mixture, refracted and compounded in this fourth. The same Author in his Considerations con∣cerning Church-govern-ment. p. 11. THe restoring Episcopacy to its due bur∣then as well as reputation, were a care worthy of Reformers: and it is so far from my desire that any such care should be spared, that it is now my publick solemn Petition both to God and Man, that the power of the Keys, and the exercise of that power, the due use of Confirmation, and previous to that, Examination and tryall of youth; a strict search into the manners and tempers and suf∣ficiencies of those that are to be admitted in∣to Holy Orders, and to be licentiate for pub∣lick Preachers; the Visitation of each Parish in each Diocese, and the exercise of Church-Discipline upon all offenders; together with
painful, mature and sober Preaching and Catechizing; studies of all kinds, and parts of Theological learning, Languages, Con∣troversies, Wrirings of the Schools and Ca∣suists, &c. be so far taken into considera∣tion by our Law-makers, and so far conside∣red in the collating of Church-preferments and Dignities: so much of duty required of Clergy-men, and so little left arbitrary or at large, that every Church-preferment in this Kingdom may have such a due burthen an∣nexed to it, that no ignorant person should be able, no lazy or luxurious person willing or forward to undergo it. And if this might be thus designed, I should then resolve, that the setling and continuing of this Govern∣ment would prove the common Interest of All, and only the burthen of those few that have those painful offices assigned to them? &c. D. Davenant Determin. 42. p. 189. SIt igitur hoc fixum & stabilitum, inter multos Presbyteros, qui in una aliqua Civitate Verbum & Sacramenta administra∣bant, fuisse unum ab ipsis Apostolis praeposi∣tum caeteris, & singulari quadam dignitate
ac potestate munitum. Hisce Episcopis Apo∣stolorum autoritate sic stabilitis, Constat per∣petua serie Successores fuisse subrogatos in iisdem Civitatibus: novos etiam ad idem exemplar (quando Ecclesiae sic visum fuit) in aliis Civitatibus Constitutos. Jo. Calvinus Protectori Angliae. QUod ad formulam precum & rituum Ec∣clesiasticorum, valde probo, ut certa illa extet, à qua pastoribus discedere in fun∣ctione sua non liceat: tam ut consulatur quorundam simplicitati & imperitiae, quam ut certius ita constet omnium inter se Eccle∣siarum consensus: postremo etiam ut obviam eatur desultoriae quorundam levitati, qui no∣vationes quasdam affectant, uti eo pertinere Catechismum ipsum ante ostendi. Sic igitur statum esse Catechismum oportet, statam Sa∣cramentorum administrationem, publicam i∣tem precum formulam.
Doctor Gauden to the Reader of his Apology. BUt if the Sins of this Nation, and the decrees of Divine Justice, do indeed hasten an utter overthrow here of the Refor∣med Ministry, and the Reformed Religion; If Ministers of the antient Ordination, law∣ful heirs of the true Apostolical Succession, are therefore accounted as Sheep for the slaughter, because they are better fed, and better bred, than others of leaner Souls, and meaner Spirits; If they are therefore to the men of this world, as a favour of death unto death, because they hold forth the word of Truth and Life, to the just reproach of a lying, dying, and self-destroying Generation; If we must at last perish and fall, with our whole function and Fraternity, after all our Studies, charges, labours and sufferings: yet it is fit some of us (and the more the better, lest our silence may argue guilt) give the world both at present, and in after Ages some Account, Why and How, in so learned, va∣liant wise and Religious a Nation as this of England hath been, &c.
Of the Church of England. I Cannot but take notice of the style that some Romanists have in these last years chosen to make use of, calling us, The late Church of England: The interpretation whereof is to my understanding this; that the Calamities under which now we suffer have made us cease to be a Church.—But, Blessed be God, the Church of England is not invisible: It is still preserved in Bishops and Presbyters rightly Ordained, and mul∣titudes rightly Baptized, none of which have fallen off from their profession. And the only thing imaginable to be objected in this point, being this, that the Schism hath so far been extended by the force, that many, if not most Churches parochial are filled by those who have set up a new, or a no-form of worship, and so that many men cannot any otherwise than in private Families serve God, after the Church-way; that sure will be of little weight, when the Romanists are remembred to be the objectors, who cannot but know, that this is the only way that they have had of serving God in this king∣dom these many years; and that the night meetings of the Primitive Christians in Dens
and Caves, are as pettinent to the justi∣fying of our condition, as they can be of any: and when 'tis certain that the forsaking of the Assemblies Heb. 10. 25. is not our wil∣ful fault, v. 26. but only our unhappy lot; who are forced either not to frequent the As∣semblies, or else to encourage (and incur the scandal of seeming to approve) the practices of those that have departed from the Church. See the eminent Doctor in his new Book of Schism, last Chapter. Master Medes answer to Doctor Twiss, touching Holiness of Times and Places. p. 660. SIR, I Say still, there is eadem ratio Loci & Tem∣por is sacri quà talis: to wit, for the san∣ctification or discrimination due to them both, and the formal reason for which it is due: For the formal reason why a thing is to be sanctified (or sanctè habendum) is, because it is sanctum or sacrum: and whatsoever is appropriate to God and his service is such; be it by Gods own immediate ordination, or humane devotion, it is all one in this point, so the consecration be supposed lawful and
agreeable to the divine will. For this sanctifi∣cation depends neither upon the difference of the institution, whether divine or humane; nor the diversity of natural and artificial Being, but upon the formalis ratio of the object, because it is sacrum. Moreover, I believe the one was intended in the fourth Commandement, as well as the other: not only from that general rule whereby the Decalogue is to be interpreted, but because the Lord himself hath conjoined them, Lev. 19. 30. Keep my Sabhaths, and reverence my Sanctuary. Why may not I say, Those whom God hath joined together, let no man put asunder? And it may be, the sanctifica∣tion of the Lords Day would be urged with more advantage upon the ground I have in∣timated, than upon that other which is so much controverted. But it is Partiality that undoes all. Of Christian Prudence. CHristian prudence forbids us to provoke a danger, and they were fond persons that run to persecution, and when the Pro∣consul sate on the life and death, and made strict inquisition after Christians, went and
offer'd themselves to die: and he was a fool that being in Portugal run to the Priest as he elevated the host, and overthrew the mysteries, and openly defyed the rites of that Religion. God, when he sends a persecution, will pick out such persons whom he will have to dy, & whom he wil consign to banishment, & whom to poverty. In the mean time, let us do our duty when we can, walking  (as the Apostles phrase is) not prevaricating in the least tittle: and then if we can be safe with the arts of civil, innocent, in-offensive com∣pliance, let us bless God for his permissions made to us, and his assistances in the using them. But if either we turn our zeal into the ambition of death, and the follies of an unnecessary beggary; or, on the other side, turn our prudence into craft and covetous∣ness; to the first I say, that God hath no pleasure in fools; to the later, If you gain the whole world, and lose your own Soul, your loss is infinite and intolerable. Doctor Jer. Taylor. Serm. 20. Sum.
Of Liturgy, and the use of Gifts in Prayer. THough I am not against a Grave, mo∣dest, discreet and humble use of Mini∣sters gifts, even in publick, the better to fit and excite their own, and the Peoples af∣fections to the present occasions; Yet I know no necessity, why private and single abilities should quite justle out and deprive the Church of the joint abilities and concurrent gifts and graces enabling them to compose with serious deliberation and concurrent ad∣vice, such Forms of Prayers as may best fit the Churches common wants, inform the hearers understanding, and stir up that fidu∣ciary and fervent application of their Spi∣rits (wherein consists the very Life and Soul of Prayer, and that so much pretended Spi∣rit of Prayer,) than any ptivate man by his solitary abilities can be presumed to have: which what they are many times (even there▪ where they make a great noise and shew) the affectations, emptiness, impertinency, rude∣ness, confusions, flatness, levity, obscurity, vain and ridiculous repetitions, the senseless and oft-times blasphemous expressions, all these burthened with a most tedious and in∣tolerable length, do sufficiently convince all
men, but those who glory in that pharasaick way. . 16. Of Moderate Episcopacy. THe Abuses of Episcopacy deserve to be ex∣tirpated as much as the use retained; for I think it far better to hold to Primitive and u∣niform Antiquity, than to comply with divi∣ded Novelty. A right Episcopacy would at once satisfy all just desires and interests of good Bi∣shops, humble Presbyters, and sober people: so as Church affairs should be managed neither with tyranny, parity, nor popularity: nei∣ther Bishops ejected nor Presbyters despised, nor people oppressed, ibid. 17. Of the Primitive Church and Fathers. IF the practice of the Primitive Church, and the universal consent of the Fathers, be not a convincing Argument, when the In∣terpretation of Scripture is doubtful, I know nothing: for if this be not, then of necessity the Interpretation of private Spirits must be admitted, the which contradicts S. Peter, 2 Pet. 1. 20. is the Mother of all sects, and
will (if not prevented) bring these King∣doms into confusion. And to say that an Argument is ill, because the Papists use it, or, that such a thing is good, because it is the cu∣stome of some of the reformed Churches, can∣not weigh with me, untill you prove, these to be infallible, or that to maintain no Truth. And how Diotrephes ambition (who directly opposed the Apostle S. John) can be an Argu∣ment against Episcopacy, I do not understand. His Majesties second paper to H. Of the same. MY Conclusion is, that albeit I never esteemed any Authority equall to the Scriptures, yet I do think the unanimous con∣sent of the Fathers, and the Universall pra∣ctice of the Primitive Church, to be the best and most Authenticall Interpreters of God's Word, and consequently the fittest Judges between Me and You, when we differ, untill you shall find me better. Fift paper. A pious Offer of the English Clergy, Anno 1644. I Shall offer in the name of my brethren of the Clergy (not that I have took their par∣ticular
votes, but that I perswade my self so far of their piety;) That rather than the Glo∣ry should thus depart from Israel, by laying wast this flourishing Church of ours, every one single of us, that have any possessions or titles worthy any mans envy or rapine (and so are thought now by our own Interests to have been bribed or fee'd Advocates in this cause;) may forthwith be deprived of all that part of the Revenues of the Church wherein we are legally invested; And he that shall not cheerfully resign his part in the pre∣sent prosperity of the Church, on the meer contemplation and intuition of the benefit, that may now, and after his life, redound to others, let him have the charge of being di∣sturber of the State.—And if the Function it self, with the necessary adjuncts to it▪ be not swept away in the calamity, we shall be per∣fectly pleas'd whatsoever befall our Persons, and desire that tryall may be made of the in∣genuity of Clergy-men, whether we have not thus far profited under Gods rod, as to be willing to yield to any possible proposition, which will bring no guilt of sin upon our Consciences, toward the averting the Judg∣ments of Heaven. Dr. Hammond's Consid. of Church-government.
Of Universall Redemption. THese two propositions are very reconci∣lable, that Christ redeemed all men, and yet that the whole number of the impenitent, unbelieving, reprobate world shall never be saved by him. The great Benefits of Christ's death (which I affirm to be general) are gi∣ven upon condition, not absolutely: as God's love to the world, and the effect of it, giving his Son, is not designed, that all absolutely, but that all conditionally, i. e. Whosoever be∣lieveth in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life: They which do not perform that condition (as Gods knows a great mul∣titude do not,) shall never be saved by his death. To which purpose is that of Prosper, one far enough from all kindness to the Pelagi∣ans, Redemptor mundi dedit pro mundo sangui∣nem suum, & mundus redimi noluit. The Re∣deemer of the world gave his bloud for the world, and the world would not be redeemed. Ad Gall. cap. 9.—To that testimony Heb. 2. 9. (so clear, that it alone hath, to my knowledge, convinc'd one as learned a man as doth in this Church of ours maintain the doctrins contrary to the Remonstrants) I shall ex abundanti add these other plain testi∣monies:
Not only that of Gods giving his only Son, mention'd by Christ, as an effect or expression of his love to the world (which it would not be, if he did not give him for the world, whom he is said to love;) but, (to prevent all distinctions concerning the noti∣on of the world, as if it signified only the elect,) more particularly these two. First, that of 2 Pet. 2. 1. Where the Lord, i. e. Christ is plainly said to have bought (i. e. paid the Price, satisfied for them) who deny him, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. The other testimony is that of S. Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 14. Where speaking of the constraining obliging love of Christ, he said; We thus judge, that if one dyed for all, then were all dead: that is surely All in the full latitude, not only the elect, but All others; and this conclusion the Apostle infers by this medium, because One, that is, Christ dyed for All. Which being a proof of the other must cer∣tainly be as true, and the All as generall and unlimited, &c. Dr. Hammond, Vindic. of the Prac. Catech. p. 4, 5. Of set forms of Prayer. THat it is lawfull to use a set determinate form of words either written or fastned
in our memory is apparent both by the exam∣ple of Christ, (who in S. Luke bids us when we pray, say, Our Father, &c. not only pray after this pattern (as the words in S. Mat∣thew may be interpreted) but use these very words (when you pray, say, Our Father, &c. Luke 11. 2.) and of John Baptist, who taught his disciples to pray in some form, though we know not what it is, Luke 11. 1. As also of the Priests, that used set forms of blessing the people, Numb. 6. 24. and of our Saviour himself, who used a part (if not the whole) of the 22. Psalm upon the Cross, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me, &c. And of the Church of the Jews, and Christian Churches through all times, who have had their Liturgies as ways and forms of serving God publickly, and as means to preserve the true Religion from all corruptions in do∣ctrine.—Add the great benefit that accrews to the Congregation in having discreet well∣formed prayers, and so not subject to the te∣merity and impertinences of the sudden ef∣fusions; and the same still in constant use, and so not strange or new to them, but such as they may with understanding go along with the Minister, and by the help of their Memory the most ignorant may carry them away for his private use. Pract. Catech. lib. 3. sect. 2.
Melancthon Calvino. 1543. Maii. 11. SCio Deum inter fatales Imperiorum tumul∣tus Ecclesiam suam servare mirabiliter. Non igitur frangamur animis, sed dum possumus sonemus, ut conversus Latro in cruce, doctrinam de Filio Dei, de{que} arcana sapientia, quae est Ecclesiae propria, de magnitudine humanae in∣firmitatis, de poenitentia & fiducia promissae misericordiae propter filium, de vera invoca∣tione & veris Ecclesiae virtutibus, de mysteriis non polluendis, de Ecclesiae politia, non illa quam fingunt Pontifices, sed qualis fuit Prophetarum & Apostolorum, deni{que} de vita aeterna. Ad harum maximarum rerum doctrinam ornan∣dam transfer as velim eloquentiom tuam: quae & confirmare nostros, & terrere adversarios, & sanabiles juvare poterit.—Fortassis no∣stra Germania paulo post à Turcis vastabitur: quod si fiet, eo magis vobis alibi in locis tuti∣oribus studia literarum excitanda erunt, & pugnandum vehementius, ut in reliqua Euro∣pa Evangelii lucem accendatis, & retineatis▪ Quod ad quaestionem de praedestinatione, habe∣bam amicum Tubingae doctum hominem Fran∣ciscum Stadianum, qui dicere solebat, se utrum{que} probare, evenire omnia, ut divina providentia
decrevit, & tamen esse contingentia: sed se haec conciliare non posse. Ego cum hypothesin hanc teneam, Deum non esse causam peccati, nec velle peccatum, postea contingentiam in hac nostra infirmitate judicii admitto, ut sciant rudes Davidem sua voluntate ultro ruere: & eundem sentio, cum haberet Spiritum Sanctum, potuisse eum retinere, & in ea lucta aliquem esse voluntatis actionem. Haec etiamsi subtilius disputari possunt, tamen ad regendas mentes hoc modo proposit, accommodata videntur. Accusemus ipsi nostram voluntatem cum la∣bimur, non quaeramus in Dei consilio causam, & contra eam nos erigamus: sciamus Deum & velle opitulari, & adesse luctantibus: , inquit Basilius, . Ex∣citetur ergo cura in nobis, & laudetur Dei im∣mensa bonit as, quum & promisit auxilium & praestat.—Haec non scribo ut tibi tradam quasi dictata, homini & eruditissimo ac peri∣tissimo exercitiorum pietatis. Et quidem scio haec cum tuis congruere, sed sunt , & ad usum accommodata. Haec Bonnae scripsi a∣pud D. Bucerum, cum eo accersitus est ut Ec∣clesias in Diocesi Coloniensi emendaret. Haec consilia Deo piis votis commendes. Philippus Melancthon.
Of the power of the Congregation. LEt not any man think now that the Apo∣stle communicateth this power with the Congregation of the Church of Corinth, when he writeth to them, 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5. be∣ing assembled with his spirit, to deliver the in∣cestuous person to Satan. For it is plain, that the sentence is given by the Apostle vers. 3. where he writeth: For I verily, as absent in body but present in spirit, have judged already, as though I were present, concerning him that hath so done this deed. And to cause this pro∣ceeding to be the better digested, he hath vouched his power in the end of the chapter afore, verse 18. Now some are puffed up, as though I would not come unto you: but I will come unto you shortly, if the Lord will, and will know, not the speech of them that are puf∣fed up, but the power. What will you? shall I come unto you with a rod, or with the spirit of meekness? Which power otherwhiles he setteth before them, in case of their disobe∣dience. And therefore it must be acknowled∣ged, that he writeth to them to see his sen∣tence published, ratified and executed: which the Presbyters there had either neglected to do, or perhaps were not able to bring the
people under the Discipline of Christ's King∣dom; which must needs oblige the Apostle to interpose.—And this without doubt is the reason why the Apostle writeth in these terms 1 Cor. 5. 12. For what have I to do to judge those that are without? do not ye judge those that are within? speaking to the Church in general, though the sentence passed by Bi∣shop and Presbyters; because matters were censured in the Congregation, and executed by the people. And thus the practice of that time giveth a reason without straining, why our Lord seemeth to refer these matters to the Congregation, when he saith, Tell it to the Church, because they passed at their As∣semblies, though under Censure of Bishop and Presbyters. And great reason there is, why this regard should be had by the A∣postle, and by the Church afterwards, to the People; because the Church, being a meer spiritual Commonwealth, and not indued with temporal strength, so much as to exe∣cute those sentences which the power of the Keys given by Christ obligeth it to inflict (always setting wide that power of working miracles, which was in the Apostle, upon which some think he reflecteth in some pas∣sages of those Epistles;) requisite it was then, the Congregation should be satisfied of the
course of those proceedings which must come into execution and effect by their voluntary submission to the will of God, and the office of his Ministers: And, as the matter is now, that things of this nature proceed not upon mens private Consciences and Judgments in particulars, but upon general rules of Com∣mon right, requisite it is, that the Common∣wealth have satisfaction of those Laws accor∣ding to which the Church now must proceed in their censures, it being acknowledged that they cannot proceed with effect but by ver∣tue of those Laws that are put in force by the secular Arm. Mr. Thorndike of Prim. Government. p. 144. Reader, Take for a Conclusion of all at this time, that too pertinent Relation, which you may read more at large in Mr. Hookers pre∣face, collected out of Guy de bres. Of the Errour of the Anabaptists. THey so much affected to cross the ordinary custome in every thing, that when other mens use was to put on better attire, they would be sure to shew themselves openly a∣broad in worse; the ordinary names of the days in the week they thought it a kind of
prophaness to use, and therefore accustomed themselves to make no other distinction than by numbers; The first, second, third day-They boldly avouched, that themselves only had the truth, and that since the Apostles lived the same was never before in all points sincerely taught. Other disputation against their opi∣nions than only by allegation of Scripture they would not hear: besides it, they thought no other writings in the world should be stu∣dyed, in so much as one of their great Pro∣phets exhorting them to cast away all re∣spects unto human writings, so far to his mo∣tion they condescended, that as many as had any Books, save the Holy Bible, in their custo∣dy, they brought and set them publickly on fire. When they and their Bibles were alone together, what strange phantasticall opinion soever at any time enterd into their heads, their use was to think the Spirit taught it them. Their own Ministers they highly magnified as men whose vocation was from God; the rest their manner was to term dis∣dainfully Scribes and Pharisees, to account their calling an human creature, and to de∣tein the people as much as might be from hering them. The custome of using God-fathers and God-mothers at Christnings they scorned.
Baptizing of Infants, although confest by themselves to have been continued ever si∣thence the Apostles own times, yet they altogether condemned. The Eucharist they received (pretending our Lord and Savi∣ours example) after Supper; and for a∣voiding all those impieties which have been grounded upon the mysticall words of Christ, This is my Body, This is my Blood, they thought it not safe to mention either body or blood in that Sacrament, but rather to abro∣gate both, and to use no words but these, Take, eate, declare the death of our Lord; Drink, shew forth our Lords Death. In rites and ceremonies, their profession was hatred of all conformity with the Church of Rome; for which cause they would rather endure any torment, than observe the solemn Festivals which others did, in as much as Antichrist (they said) was the first inventor of them. The pretended end of their civil reformation was, that Christ might have dominion over all, that all Crowns and Scepters might be thrown down at his feet, that no other might reign over Christian men but He, no regi∣ment to keep them in awe but his disciplin; amongst them no sword at all to be carried, besides his, the sword of spirituall excommu∣nication. They laboured to bring in Commu∣nity
of goods, because Christ by his Apostles hath given the world such example, to the end that men might excell one another not in wealth the pillar of secular Authority, but in vertue. These men at the first were only pi∣tyed in their errour, and by a mercifull To∣leration they gatherd strength, much more than was safe for the state of the Common∣monwealth wherein they lived. The means whereby they both allured and reteined so great multitudes were most effectuall: First, a wonderfull shew of zeall towards God, wherewith they seemed to be even rapt in e∣very thing they spake. Secondly, an hatred of sin, and a singular love of integrity, which men did think to be much more than ordi∣nary in them, by reason of the custome which they had to fill the ears of the people with invectives against their authorized guides, as well Spirituall as Civill. Thirdly, the boun∣tifull relief wherewith they eased the broken estate of such needy creatures, as were in that respect the more apt to be drawn away. Fourthly, a tender compassion which they were thought to take upon the miseries of the common sort, over whose hearts their manner was even to powr down showers of tears in complaining that no respect was had unto them. Lastly, a cunning slight which
they had to stroke and smooth up the minds of their Followers, as well by appropriating unto them all the favourable titles, the good words, and the gracious promises in Scrip∣ture, as also by casting the contrary always on the heads of such as were severed from that retinue. Whereupon the peoples com∣mon Acclamation unto such Deceivers was, These are verily the men of God, these are his true and sincere Prophets.—Nothing more clear unto their seeming, than that a New Jerusalem being often spoken of in Scriptures, they undoubtedly were them∣selves that New Jerusalem, and the Old did by way of a certain figurative resemblance signify what they should both be and do. Here they drew in a Sea of matter by apply∣ing all things unto their own company which are any where spoken concerning divine fa∣vours and benefits bestowed upon the old Commonwealth of Israel, concluding that as Israel was deliverd out of Egypt, so they spi∣ritually out of the Egypt of the worlds servile thraldom unto sin and superstition; as Israel was to root out the Idolatrous Nations, and to plant in stead of them a people which fea∣red God, so the Lords good will and pleasure was now, that these new Israelits should un∣der the conduct of other Joshuas, Samsons,
and Gedeons perform a work no less miracu∣lous in casting out violently the wicked from the earth, and establishing the Kingdom of Christ with perfect liberty. Now whatsoever they did in such sort collect out of Scripture, when they came to justify or perswade it un∣to others, all was the heavenly Fathers ap∣pointment, his Commandement, his will and charge. These men in whose mouths at the first sounded nothing but onely mortification of the flesh, were come at the length to think, they might lawfully have their six or seven wives apeece; They which at the first taught judgment and justice it self to be merciless cruelly, accompted at the length their own hands sanctified with being imbrued in Chri∣stian blood; They who at the first were wont to beat down all dominion, had at the length both Consuls and Kings of their own crea∣tion amongst themselves; Finally, they which could not brook at the first, that any man should seek, no not by law, the recovery of goods injuriously taken or withheld from him, were grown at the last to think they could not offer unto God more acceptable sacrifice, than by turning their Adversaries clean out of house and home, and by enrich∣ing themselves with all kind of spoil and pil∣age;
which thing being layd to their charge, they had in a readiness their answer, that now the time was come, when according to our Saviours promise, The Meek ones must in∣herit the Earth. Jan. 6. THE END.
