C3205 14756834 102729
C2 R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms By the King. A PROCLAMATION. CHARLES R. THe Kings most Excellent Majesty taking it into His Princely considera∣tion, That by reason of the great distance of His City of Tanger from this His Kingdom, many Merchants of Forreign Nations Tra∣ding thither may apprehend, that in case of a Rupture of War be∣tween His Majesty and any Prince or State whose Subjects may have Goods or Estates there, such their Estates may at the plea∣sure of His Majesties Governour and Officers for the time being, be liable unto Seizures before Notice and convenient time given to them for the Removal thereof, which may discourage them and bring great prejudice to the Trade of that City, which now through the blessing of God is in a flourishing condition; His Majesty for the prevention of all fears of that kind, hath thought fit by the Advice of His Privy Council, and doth by this His Royal Proclamation Publish and De∣clare, That if any Rupture or War shall at any time hereafter happen between His Majesty and any other Prince or State whatsoever, yet the Goods or Effects of the Subjects of any such Prince or State at Tanger shall not be Seized or liable to any Seizure by reason of the same, until Six moneths after such Rupture shall be there Published; And that it shall and may be lawful for all persons concerned, without any fear or apprehension to continue their Trade and Estates at Tanger, until Six moneths after any Rupture shall be so Published as aforesaid. And His Majesty doth hereby strictly Charge and Command His Governour of the said City, and all other His Officers and Ministers whatsoever both Civil and Military for the time being, and all other His Subjects, to take notice of this His Royal Pleasure, and without further di∣rection to see the same duely observed. Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Thirteenth day of January, 1674. in the Six and twentieth year of Our Reign. GOD SAƲE THE KING. LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker. Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1674.
