C3377 15564721 103795
C R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms By the King. A PROCLAMATION For Prohibiting the Exportation of Iron Ordnance and all great Guns. CHARLES R. WE Iudging it a matter of great Importance to the Strength and Safety of this Our Kingdom, That no Iron Ordnance or other great Guns be at this time Exported into any parts beyond the Seas, Have thought fit by this Our Royal Proclamation (with the Advice of Our Privy Council) strictly to Prohibit and Forbid, And We do hereby strictly Prohibit and Forbid all persons whatso∣ever, to Export or Transport out of this Our Kingdom into the parts beyond the Seas, any Iron Ordnance or other great Guns whatsoever, for and during the term of one whole Year from the date hereof, and from thenceforth until We shall signifie Our further Pleasure therein. And to the intent all Offenders may know their danger, in acting contrary to this Our Royal Prohibition, We are Graciously pleased hereby to Declare, That they shall be proceéded against according to the utmost Severity of Law. And We do hereby Charge and Command the Commissioners, and all other Officers of Our Customs, that they take especial care, That no such Guns during the continuance of this Our Prohibition, be Entred in any of Our Custom-houses, or be permitted to be Shipped or Water born to be laid on any Ship or Vessel, with intent to be Transported into the parts beyond the Seas, as they will answer the contrary at their peril. And We do hereby likewise Charge and Command all Lieutenants, Deputy-Lieutenants, Iustices of the Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bayliffs, and other Officers and Persons whatsoever, to take notice of this Our Royal Proclamation, and to be aiding and as∣sisting to the Commissioners and Officers of Our Customs, in the Execution of Our Royal Pleasure herein, as they tender Our Royal Displeasure, and upon pain of be∣ing proceéded against as contemners of Our Royal Authority. Given at Our Court at Whitehall this Ninth day of November 1681. and in the Three and thirtieth Year of Our Reign GOD SAVE THE KING. LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1681.
