C7109 08495967 41416
Lieut: Generall Cromwells LETTER TO The Honorable William Lenthall Esq Speaker of the House of Commons, OF The Surrender of Langford-House neer Salisbury: VVith the Articles of Agreement concerning the same: Together with a Letter concerning a great Victory obtained by Col: Rossiter, against Prince RUPERT and Prince MAURICE, neer Belvoyr-Castle in Leicestershire. Also, another Letter concerning the taking of Two hundred Horse, and Sixty Foot, by the Forces of Abingdon and Gaunt-House. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That these Letters be forthwith printed and published: H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons, Octob. 20. 1645.
To the Honourable William Lenthall Esq Spea∣ker to the Honourable House of Commons. SIR, I Gave you an Accompt the last night of my marching to Lang∣ford House, whether I came this day, and immediatly sent them in a Summons; the Governour desired I should send two Officers to Treat with him, and I accordingly appointed Lieutenant Colonell Hewson, and Major Kelsey therunto. The Treaty produced the agreement, which I have here enclosed to you. The Generall I hear is advanced as far West as Columpton, and hath sent some Horse and Foot to Teverton: It is earnestly desired, that those Foot might march up to him, it being convenient that we stay a day for our Foot that are behinde and coming up; I wait your answer to my Letter last night from Wallop; I shall desire that your pleasure may be speeded to me, and rest, Sir Your humble Servant Oliver Cromwell. Salisbury Octob. 17. at 12. at night.
October the 17. 1645. Articles of agreement made between Sir Bartholomew Pell Knight, and Major Ed∣mond Vvedale, Commanders in chiefe of Langford Garrison; And Lieu. Col. Hewson, and Major Thomas Kelsey, on the behalfe of Oliver Cromwell, Lieu. Gen. to Sir Tho. Fairfax Army. FIrst, That the said Commanders in chief of the said Garrison, shall surrender the said House and Garrison to the said Lieut. Generall Cromwell, to morrow by twelve of the clock, being the eigh∣teenth of October instant. 2. That all Arms and Ammunition in the said Garrison, be then delivered to the use of the Parlia∣ment, without any imbezeling of them. 3. That the said Commanders in chief with fif∣teen Gentlemen of the said Garrison, shall march a∣way with horse and arms; And the private Souldi∣ers without arms to Oxford within ten dayes, And to have a Troop of horse for their guard the first day, and a trumpeter with a passe the rest of the way. 4. That the rest of the Gentlemen not exceeding fourteen more, shall march with their Swords, and Pistols, and horses, if they can lawfully procure them. 5. That the said Commanders in chief, shall have
a Cart or waggon allowed them to carry their goods to Oxford. 6. That if any Gentlemen of the said Garrison have a desire to go to any other Garrison or Army of the Kings, They shall have passes to that purpose. 7. That the goods remaining in the said Garrison, shalbe delivered to the severall owners thereof, upon demand within two dayes next following the date hereof. 8. That Lieutenant Colonel Bowles, and Major Fry be left Hostages untill these Articles be per∣formed. Iohn Hewson. Thomas Kelsey. Bartho. Pell. Edm. Vvedale. The Substance of a Letter sent to the Ho∣nourable William Lentball Esq Spea∣ker to the Honourable House of Commons. ON Tuesday night last, the forces of Abingdon and Gaunt House, went to Farringdon, and tooke two hundred horse, and sixty foot, and were like to take the Garrison.
A Letter concerning a great Victory obtained by Colonell Rossiter, against Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice, neer Belvoyr Castle in Leicestershire. SIR, I Shall give you an account of what intelligence these parts afford. On Tuesday morning we recei∣ved intelligence that Prince Rupert & P. Maurice were at Banbury upon their march towards Newark, some reported them to be twelve hundred, others six hun∣dred; Vpon which Intelligence all the horse belong∣ing to this Garrison, being three hundred, and four hundred more which lay at Stamford, were drawn to Melton by Colonell Rossiter, to interpose betwixt the King and the Princes, or to joyn with the Horse and Dragoons under Colonell Manwaring then at Lei∣cester, and since gone to Derby to joyn with Colonell Generall Points. Yesterday morning upon intelli∣gence from Burleigh, that the report of Prince Ru∣perts comming was false, and the King being retur∣ned backe to Newarke, our Horse were ordered to march back to Grantham, no sooner were we march∣ing, but from Leicester we recevied Intelligence that the Princes were upon their march towards Belvoir, we pursued them with all speed, they faced us twice
as though they would have charged, but upon our ad∣vance to them they run for Belvoir, we pursued them close to the castle walls, took a Major, three Captains, sixty Prisoners, Prince Maurice's Trumpeter, Trumpet and Banner, and about one hundred and forty Hor∣ses, we wounded and killed divers, some of quality, the two Princes hardly escaping with about one hundred more. Some of the Officers we have taken, told us that the Princes sent the Lord of Northamp∣tons Regiment back to Banbury, and marched with this small party onely to speake with the King, and take their leaves of him. The King is now in Newark, his Horse quartered betwixt Newark and Welbeck, part of them: and as we hear, Sir Marmaduke Langdale with the rest marched Northward, it is likely to releeve Skipton Castle, Colonell Generall Points is come to Derby, and Colonell Manwaring is gone to him, which I hope will give us a further occasion of sending to to you, Sir, Your Servant. Grantham October 16. 1645. FINIS.
