D1149 11752853 48616
A Description of Old England, A true Declaration of the times. Old England of late days it is grown new, As many by experience finds it true; Throughout the Land, in Country, City, and in Town, The times are harder then e're they were known; Observe these Verses which below are pend, And let us pray that these bad times may mend. To a pleasant new tune, Or, is not old England grown new. VVAs ever the like in any age known, Did England's grown New, and turned upside down, The times they are hard both in Country and town, Then is not old England grown new, grown new, Then is not old England grown new. Old England was once a stately brave place, When trastiqueing every where went on a pace, But now trading is dead, and mony's grown scarce, Then is not, &c. In days heretofore go'd and silver did flye, Then richmen upon their means liv'd gallantly, But the land now is over-ran with poverty. then is not, &c. Where is all the treasure that in England did flow, That with rich men and poor men did make a brave show The times they now harder and harder doth grow, then is not, &c. Where are your old souldiers with slashes and scars That never fear'd drinking in old time of wars Nor shedding of blood in mad drunken jars, then is not, &c. Where are your old Courtiers that used to ride, With forty blew coats and foot-men beside, It is turn'd to six horses a Coach and a guide, Then is not old England grown new, grown new, Then is not old England grown new. The second part, to the same Tune. VVHat is become of your old fashioned cloaths, Your long-sleev'd doublets, & your trunk hose, It is turn'd to French fashion, and other fine shews, then is not old England grown new, grown new, then is not old England new. For now there's new fashions comes up every day, VVith costly attire and sumptuous array, It is Pride in the Kingdom doth bear all the sway. then is not, &c. New triking, new triming, new measures, new paces, For the men they have new heads, and women new faces And several new tricks more to hide their base cases; then is not, &c. There's new fashion'd Caps, and new-fashion'd Locks, And new fashion'd heads for the old pated blocks, VVith twenty diseases, besides the french-P— then is not old, &c. In former days men loved one another, They always were faithful and true to each other, But now a man scarcely can trust his own brother, then is not old, &c. It was a brave time when men lived in fear, And us'd not themselves so much to curse and swear, But now dam ye and sink ye is us'd e'ry where, then is not, &c. There was not so much deceit us'd hertofore, Cheating and couzening men they did abhor, But now plain-dealing is turn'd out of door. then is not, &c. Most rich men were charitable formerly, And shew'd pitty to the poor in misery, But their hearts now are hardned with cruelty, then is not, &c. Envy and malice now raigneth too much, In the hearts of some persons both poor and rich, To see one another live many doth grutch. then is not, &c. And thus you may see how the times they do go, Both in town and City, and in Country to, I think there is none of you all but doth know, that old England is grown new, grown new, that old England is gorwn new. FINIS. Printed for F. Coles, T. Vere, J. Wright, and J. Clarke.
