D1156 R20208 12676775 65579
The Description of the CORONATION Of His Sacred MAJESTY K. JAMES II. And His Most ILLUSTRIOUS CONSORT Queen MARY. Celebrated on the 23th Day of April, 1685. With a Brief Account of the Famous FIRE-WORKS, Which were upon the Thames, April the 24th. A POEM. MY Ravish'd Muse in such bright Mazes dance, So Rapture-struck, and all dissolv'd in Trance, That I her Pensel but in vain provoke, To shadow out the Visionary Stroak; Since She, like Angels, that above the Blest, Feels Extasies too high to be exprest.
Nor blame the Muse that would this Subject shun! Poets & Limners should not meddle with Perfection. All common stroaks their stinted Art may draw, Whilst a Bright Vision keeps the Hand in aw. And if th'Original they don't Transcend, They only Libel, what they would commend. And who can add one little common Ray To the gay Splendor of this Happy Day? A Day that no Hyperbole can Grace; The only Paint that Beautifies a POEMS Face. Hail Happy Day! A Day so long Renown'd For Holy GEORGE, and several Monarchs Crown'd! Tho' now thy former Glories disappear, As twinkling Stars, when Day's bright Gods draw near; Yet greater Honours in their room are given, From Earth's ray Calander, thou art transcrib'd to that of Heav'n. Long hast thou worn red Characters below, But now the Gods will keep thee Holy too. Tho' the Morn was spread with rebel show'rs of rain Yet Jove's kind hand soon forc'd them back again: And now the Sun which long did Mourning wear, Does in his Noblest Gayest Robes appear. Whilst on Heav'ns brow no Cloudy frowns were seen, But as the First-day, Pleasant and Serene. The gazing Gods throw those dark Screens away, That they this Sight the Clearer might Survey. But if the Sun had layn a bed 'till now, Without his aid we'd seen the Glorious Show. The Souls of Kings and Heroes Blest above, With Choirs of shining Spirits hither move; Mantled in Rays of Light ne'r seen 'till now, On wings of Joy, they hover to and fro,
Follow'd by Chariots so Divinely bright; To which the Sun but Darkness is, and Night, Or had this fail'd, we might the Prospect take From the great Splendor which the Court did make. As when we would the Richest Jewels try, We need but their own Light to know them by. Hark! what soft Aires and Raptures fill the Skies, Perform'd by Infinite Choires of Deities? Whilst Mortals too, their rural Musick mix, And with their Concord the Charm'd Planets fix. Now Guardian-Angels quit their wasted Care, And slie in Troops to Guild the London Air. Where Aeolus too in gentle Breezes hast; Loaded with all the Odours of the East, The Essence of each Fragrant Flower He brings, And hovers o'er us with His Balmy Wings. The Gods owe much to Bounteous Nature too, From whose Rich Bosom several Treasures flow. For had She Awkward been, They had been set To the Expence of greater Wonders yet. But hold! where does my forward Pensel run To end the Day, before 'tis scarce begun? Early I rose this Triumph to attend, And saw the Royal Pair the Boat ascend. Whose Sacred Presence such Devotion strike, Poets themselves want Skill to feign the like. By slow degrees on Silver Thames they road, She as a Goddess, He so like a God, That I with Moses wisht an Interposing Cloud.
Objects so Bright should put on a Disguise, Least the Adorers faint beneath the Rays. In the same Sphere two mighty Suns behold! Each of which does contain a Heav'nly World. And did the Persians see this Royal Pair, They'ld slight their God, and pay their Homage here. He that has try'd to fix his daring Eyes On that vast Light which Guilds the Morning Skies, Will find it yet more daz'ling to Survey This Pair of Suns, this double Deity. The rest o'th' Court I with more ease could view, Yet they made more than Humane Figures too. With Radiant Jewels being cover'd all o'er, Half the Worlds Wealth, with its Pride, they bore. Scarlet beneath the Massy-Lace was hid With Imag'ry, o'er Splended Tissue spread. Here the Fair Sexes Art and Patience see, Emblem'd in ev'ry Rich Embroiderie! Eight hideous Weeks, which most should Work, they strove, Neglecting all the while their Health and Love. And the green Girls preparing for the Day, Made themselves Pale, to make their Lovers gay. On THAMES see numerous shining Vessels move, Which dance like some transported Orphean Grove. And like the Spheres their Artful measures take, From the soft Musick their own motions make. But when all did in one close Body meet, They look'd like some new-built Elisian-street: Or as if the highest Heav'n came down Fraughted Gems for his dear JAMES's Crown, An earnest of His brighter last Eternal one. Blest Thames! hadst thou a Tongue thy bliss to own, My Muse had not then made her weakness known, But since imperfect signs thy thoughts declare, I dare intrude as thy Interpreter.
Hail Sacred Princes! thrice she seems to say, Whom Instinct makes ev'n senseless nhings obey; Your Royal Barge on my soft Bosom made, The happy'd wound that Water ever had. Ʋnder whose weight may I for ever live, But, Oh, that wish, You cannot like, forgive! Long may You wear that Antient Potent Crown Which now, (Great Sir) You're going to put on! And may Your Sacred, Glorious Scepter stand For ever firm, and easie in Your Hand! Your Crown too, (Mighty Queen) long may You wear, And be as Happy, as You're Good and Foir! And when You'll (late) be pleas'd t'inrich the Skie; May some kind Stars exhale me too on high? Where (if the Gods so please) may I reside Your fix'd, and everlasting Pyramyde! In the mean while close by Your Palace side I will with soft, and constant numbers, Glide. The common Frowns which Nature bid me wear, Shall at Your awful Presence disappear. At that Command, I'll henceforth Ebb and low, And will no Neptune (Sir) no Thtis (Madom) own but You. This Speech being finisht, she resign'd her care To the now Honour'd Ground of Westminster; Where, lo, the Earth is ready to unfold That Pomp the Sea too narrow was to hold. But Cloaths of State o're all the ground being spread, This doleful Speech the sighing Tellus made. What have I done (ye Gods) that I must meet This curst Exclusion from my Sov'reigns Feet? Must I sustain more than half Europ's weight, Without the just return of viewing it?
whver did these Coverings lay, spoil the greatest Wonder of this day, my wrong'd Bosom lie, ih all her Summer Treasury; lghting on great CAESAR's Road Sweets to spread her self abroad. Hed, she had been Proud to meet e  from Your Royal Feet. —she'd something more to say, Tryumps, bore the sound away. mous Crouds both far & near were seen streets seem'd Pav'd, & houses Tyl'd with Men, with the Fair Sex, appear'd more bright, with hard gazing fed their eager sight, gh'd & wisht, & did the rest in dreams at night dy prest they did one Mass appear, hen bright James & his fair Queen drew near; ghty ulk did its own self divide, made a Golden Wall on either side. which they to the Princes Chamber past, ke Repose, for Gods themselves must rest. havin s some short Refection, Glorious proper Robes of State put on; Ably (now) where Pomp and Tryumph waits, ld the Royal God-like CANDIDATES? after numerous Ceremonies past, notion, Oaths, &c. which several hours did last, Sacred Heads receiv'd the Imperial Crown, CANTERBƲY's happy hand set on. an! what bliss hast thou receiv'd this hour? t couldst thou wish, or could Heav'd give thee more?
Th'exact Description of the Cavalcade, And the bright Figures e'ry Order made; What hands the Scepter, Sword, Staff, Or who Curtana, or the Spurs did bear, Or by what Peers the Crowns supported What Favourites next the Presence did Or what bright Youhs bore up the How from the Temple to the Hall They (Where waited for them a Stupendious What Hecatomb fell Victory to Their Board, Or what vast Seas of Wine it did afford And lastly, how with the vast Infinite They to White-Hall, (now Crown'd,) Are Thames, that would a mighty Volu Nor is't a Poets, but the Heralds task▪ Besides, it would more charge of time require, Then now my niggard Fate is pleas'd But having yet Survey'd the Court alone I now would make the Peoples transpts But I (alass) want Language to express my own. Ten thousand Bells in one loud Consort Both Earth and Heaven it self to Ent Sure for this Reason they were rais'd on That the Gods might the better hear The Pleasant Musicks nimble foot steps he, Passing Harmoniously from Sphere to Sphere Which now the Starry Battlements has sound, Which Hark, reverberates, and multiplies They Mans Officious and Injurious call, Who interpos'd the design'd Miracle. For Joy, their useless Rapes away they'l throw And Musick on their own acord bestow.
Next, Loyal Fires (the Peoples Offerings) see! Like Burning Groves raising their Heads on high! As if this night was destin'd to devour, What was design'd for the next Winter Store. See how it Roars, as if 't had an intent To reach the Stagerytes Fictitious Element! Whilst on Thames too they such vast Fire-works make, That all her Streams seem but one Flaming Lake. The Frightned Gods thinking their Skies on Fire, For safety to the farthest Heav'ns retire: They fear'd another Race of Gyants rose, Who now had Fire instead of Mountains chose, But when Discreeter Gods saw the intent, Instead of Thunder and Revenge, they sent A Herald to proclaim this Complement. Blest Change! And now the Heav'nly Powers rejoyce That England does approve of their Wise Choice: And to its Throne, wrong'd Loyalty restore, Where Treason stretch'd its ugly Limbs before. Being Loyal grown, Your Bliss is now compleat, For You before all Blessings had but That; This day you've Crown'd a King, whose God-like Reign Restores you the Blest Golden Age again. FINIS. Printed by Nathan. Thompson at the Entrance into Old Spring-garden near Charing-cross, 1685.
