D171 12004540 52264
HAving seen and consider'd this Al∣phabetical Dictionary of the Greek and Latin Antiquities, we cannot but approve of the same, and recommend it to all those who desire perfectly to under∣stand the Classic Authors, and the An∣cient Historians. AUGUST 1. 1700. Matt. Shortyng, D. D. Master of Merchant-Taylors-School, London. Rob. Uvedale, L. L. D. Tho. Walker, L. L. D. Master of the Charter-House-School, London. Sam. Mountfort, A. M. Master of the Grammar-School, in Christ-Hospital, Lond.
A COMPLETE DICTIONARY OF THE Greek and Roman Antiquities; Explaining the Obscure PLACES in Classic Authors, and Ancient Historians, Relating to the Religion, Mythology, History, Geography and Chronology OF THE Ancient GREEKS and ROMANS; Their SACRED and PROPHANE Rites and Customs; Laws, Polity, Arts and Engines of WAR: Also an ACCOUNT of Their Navigations, Arts and Sciences, AND The INVENTORS of them; WITH THE Lives and Opinions of their Philosophers. Compiled Originally in FRENCH, at the Command of the French KING, for the Ʋse of the DAUPHIN, the Dukes of BURGUNDY, ANJOU and BERRY: By Monsieur DANET. Made ENGLISH, with the Addition of very Ʋseful MAPPS. LONDON: Printed for John Nicholson, at the King's-Arms, in Little-Britain; Tho. Newborough, at the Golden-Ball, in St. Paul's Church-yard; and John Bullord: And Sold by R. Parker, under the Royal-Exchange; and B. Tooke, at the Temple-Gate, in Fleet-street: MD CC.
THE PREFACE. THE Greek and Roman ANTIQUITIES lying dispersed in so many large and chargeable Volumes, are almost lost to those who have not either Money to procure, or Leisure to peruse them; and the few Compendium's which have been made, being either very imperfect, or so immethodical, that it requir'd a great deal of Time to be tolerably inform'd concerning any particular Antiquity: Our AUTHOR thought it very necessary to digest that sort of Learning Alphabetically, that by that means it might be more readily consulted, and the Authors in both Languages better understood. His Design is very extensive, and comprehends both the Ancient Greek and Roman Religion, Mythology, History, Chronology and Geography; Sa∣cred and Prophane Rites and Customs; their Laws, the Opinions of their most famous Philosophers; their Polity, Architecture, Art of War, Warlike Engines and Navigation; the Lives of Men Illustrious for Arms and Arts, &c. All which, with vast Industry and Judgment, he has collected from the Anci∣ents themselves, and the best of the Moderns, well attested Medals, Inscrip∣tions, Statues, Relievo's and Basso-Relievo's. The Necessity of a Work of this Nature will be very evident to those who please to consider a few Instances, of a great many which might be produced. Every Scholar knows that Volumen is derived from volvo, to roll up, and that Volumen it self signifies a Book; but, perhaps, does not know, that before the Ʋse of Paper, Men wrote on the Skins of Beasts, or Bark of Trees lengthwise, which they rolled up as fast as they finish'd their Lines; whence evolvere Librum signified, to read a Book, because the Manuscript being rolled up, it was impossible to read it without unrolling it. Likewise how could that Expression of Horace, ad Umbilicum ducere Opus, be understood to finish a Work, if we did not know that the Romans used to roll up these Skins or Bark when written upon, and join them together at both Ends with Two Bosses of Horn or Ivory, each like a Navel, which oc∣casion'd that of Statius? Binis umbilicis decoratus Liber.
Also another of the same Author; Multaque pars mei, Vitabit Libitinam. is very much illucidated, when we know that Libitina was the Goddess which presided over Funerals. Who again can well apprehend that other of Horace, Sat. IX. Lib. I. Divina mota anus Urna. without being inform'd, that in this place Horace speaks of Divination, by the Ʋrn and Lots, which was perform'd by throwing several Letters and en∣tire Words into the Ʋrn, which being well mix'd, what Chance produc'd by the Ranging of the Balots, compos'd the Divination and Answer? Cicero calls the Letter A, litera salutaris, because the Judges used it in publick Sentences, causing it to be inscrib'd on the Balots, which they thren into the Ʋrn, to express their Absolving the Person accus'd, for the single Letter A signify'd Absolvo. Thus it appears, of what Importance it is to be acquainted with the Mytho∣logy and Antiquities of the Greeks and Romans, considering there are in∣numerable Difficulties which cannot be conquer'd, and Beauties which may be pass'd over and lost, without a competent Knowledge of them. Our AUTHOR having gain'd a sufficient Reputation by his former Dictionary, and being by the Illustrious Duke of Montausier, Governour to the Dauphin, thought very capable of Compiling this WORK, for the Ʋse of his Royal Pupil, and his Sons the Dukes of Burgundy, Anjou and Berry: The TRANSLATOR had rather leave his Performance to the Judgment of the Learned, than anticipate the Reader by saying any thing in its Praise. He cou'd have wish'd he had found the Original illustrated with those Mapps, which were absolutely necessary to be added, and has only this to say, that Care has been taken to have them perform'd after the best Originals, and improv'd by the best Information that cou'd be procur'd. The TRANSLATOR is sensible, that some Faults have escap'd Correction, but since they are merely Typographical, 'tis hoped, they won't injure the Sence of the AUTHOR.
Effigies ANTIQUAE ROMAE, ex vetustis Aedificiorum Ruinis, testi monio veterum Authorum, Monumentis Aeneis, Plumbeis, Saxeis, Ligneisque collecta atque in hanc Tabellam redacta et descripta secundum XIV Regiones in quas Urbem divisit Imp. Caesar August. Printed for Ino. Nicholson Tho: Newborough and Iohn Bullord. map of Ancient Rome
IMPERIUM ROMANUM H. Moll Sculp. Printed for Ino. Nicholson. Tho Newborough and Iohn Bullord. map of Roman Empire
GRAECIA ANTIQUA Sophiani. H. Moll Sculp. Printed for Ino. Nicholson. Tho. Newborough & Iohn Bullord. map of Ancient Greece
A DICTIONARY OF THE Greek and Roman ANTIQUITIES. A, Is the first Letter of the Alphabet in all Langua∣ges. The Hebrews call it Aleph, and the Greeks Al∣pha, but our Nation as the Latins, call it simply A. Of all the Vowels it is the most open and simple, and that which is most easily pronounced, being the first articu∣late Sound which Nature puts forth at the cry∣ing or smiling of Infants. It is often used to express the Passions of our Mind, as in case of Admiration, Joy or Grief, and to render the Expression more vehement, we sometimes pre∣fix or subjoin the Letter h to it, and say ha or ah. When this Letter makes a whole Syllable the Children call it A by it self A. The Antients distinguished exactly in their Pronunciation when this Syllable or Letter A was long, and in their Writing they did often repeat this Vowel, to signifie that it was a long Syllable; which Usage, as Quintilian testifies, continued till the time of Attius: sometimes they inserted the Letter h between the double a, to render the Pronunciation more vehement, as in Ahala for Ala, or Aala, and sometimes by striking out the first a, they made it Hala: But afterwards, for shortness sake, they only drew a small Line at the top of the Vowel, to shew that it was long, thus ā. This Letter A does often signifie an intire Word in the ancient Marbles, A. Aulus, A. Augustus, A. Ager, A. Aiunt, &c. When it is doubled it denotes Augusti: and when it is tripled it signifies Auro, Argento, Aere. When it occurs after the word Miles, it denotes that he was Young, as Isidore affirms. This Letter A was also used by the Ancients as a numeral Letter which signified 500, as may be seen in Valerius Probus. There are some ancient Verses related by Baronius and others, which describe the Letters signifying Numbers, whereof this is the first, Possidet A numeros quingentos ordine recto. When a streight Line was drawn above the A, it signified 5000. In the Tryal of Criminal Causes at Rome, an A drawn upon the Balots which were given to the Judges, and thrown into an Urn, signi∣fied the whole Word Absolve, or, I absolve the Person accused; whence Cicero calls A a saving Letter, Litera salutaris, because it was the sign of dismissing the Accused with Absolution. This we learn from Asconius Pedianus in his Commentary upon Cicero's Orations. The Judges (says that learned Interpreter) cast one Balot into the Urn, upon which was engraven or drawn the Letter A, to signifie, I absolve the Person accused; another upon which was the Letter C, to denote Condemne; and a third marked with the Letters N and L, Non Liquet, to order. That the Matter should be further en∣quired into; for the Judges hereby testified that the Cause was not sufficiently plain, and that they could not decide it while it remain'd so; which they sometimes expressed, vivâ voce, by this word Amplius, as we may plainly see from this Passage of Cicero, Causam pro Pub∣licanis dixit Caelius; Consules, re auditâ, amplius de Consilii sententiâ pronunciarunt; Caelius pleaded for the Publicans, the Consuls, after they had heard him, by the Advice of the Senate, pro∣nounc'd, Let this Matter be further inquir'd into. In the Assemblies of the Romans, where the People gave Suffrage upon Scrutiny, by Balots mark'd with the Letter A, it signified Antique, and Abrogo, or I reject the Law proposed, I abro∣gate that which is now in force. ALPHA is likewise the first Letter of the Greek Alphabet, which in Composition denotes sometimes Privation, and comes from  without; sometimes Augmentation, from ,
much; and sometimes Union, from , to∣gether. It was used for the most part for a Let∣ter of Order to denote the First, and of Num∣ber to signifie One; but when it was a Nume∣ral Letter, a little Stroke or an Acute Accent was drawn above it thus 'A, to distinguish it from the A which was a Letter of Order. Alpha and Omega in the Divine Writings sig∣nifie the Beginning and the End, and therefore the Hioglyphic of God is marked with these two Letters, A and Ω, as if you should say, that God is the Beginning and End of all things; and so God himself says in the Revelations, I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End. Thus Virgil having a mind to bestow a singular Encomium upon Augustus, by an Excess of Flat∣tery, tells him, A te principium, tibi definet. ☧ These three Characters were anciently en∣graven upon the Tombs of the Catholicks, to distinguish them from the Arrians: for the Name of JESUS CHRIST was signified, as he himself says in the Gospel, by these two Letters, A which is the first of the Greek Al∣phabet, and Ω which is the last of it; Ege sum Alpha & Omega, principium & finis: and from hence he proves that he was truly God as well as his Father, which the Arrians deny'd. They are also to be met with in the Letters Patents of Christian Princes, and on the Collars of Slaves. Alpha mark'd with a spiritus asper, and an acute Accent A, is also used for the Pro∣nouns ea and sua, in Homer and others: but with a spiritus asper and a circumflex Accent , it signifies the same with , ubi, as may be seen in the Poet Theocritus. Alpha with a spiritus lenis and a circumflex Accent A•, is an Interjection of one who is in some trouble, which moves him to complain or admire; but when it is doubled with a spiritus lenis and a circumflex Ac∣cent, it is an Interjection of one who is in a mighty Consternation, being under some great Affliction; if it be doubled and mark'd with a spiritus lenis and a grave Accent A•, it is an Inter∣jection of one who is transported with Joy, or the agreeable Surprise of something very plea∣sant. ABA, is a Greek Word, from whose Ge∣nitive , the Latins have formed their Word Abacus, which has many Significations: for it signifies sometimes an ABC, sometimes a Table of Numbers for casting up Accompts, which was of Brass, and called by the Ancients The Table of Pythagoras. It signified also the Fi∣gures of Numbers, and the Arithmetical Cha∣racters, which were drawn upon a Table co∣ver'd with Dust or small Sand, according to the Testimony of Martianus Capella, and of Per∣sius in Sat. 1. ver. 131. Nec qui Abac numeros & secto in pulvere mot. Scit resesse vnfer.— It signifies also a Cupboard, which the Italians call Credenza, upon which were plac'd in order the Pots, Glasses, and the Dessert of a Feast, viz. the Salads and Sweet-meats, and on which the Carver cut out the several sorts of Meat, and serv'd up some part of them in Plates to each of the Guests. In Vitruvius, and all those who have treated of Architecture, Abacus is nothing else but the four-squar'd Table which makes the Capital at the top of a Column, and which, in the Corinthian Order of work, repre∣sents that kind of Square Tile which covers a Basket or Pannier when it seems encompass'd with Leaves, but in the Corinthian Composite, or the Modern Ionick Order, which was taken from the Temple of Concord, and other anci∣ent Temples, it was dug and cut inwards. AB-ADDIR (a Term of Mythology) is the Name of a Stone which Saturn swallow'd, according to the Fable, instead of Jupiter: for he knowing that the Fates had decreed he should be dethroned by one of his Children, eat them all up to preserve himself from them, till such time as Ops his Wife put a trick upon him, and made him swallow this Stone instead of Jupiter whom she had a mind to save. Pris∣cian and Isidore in their Glosses make mention of it, and Papias testifies that this word does some∣times signifie a God. And indeed, since that Ab-addir is as much as to say Pater magnificas, Therefore, AB-ADDIRES is the Name of certain Gods. St. Austin, writing to Maximas of Me∣daura, says, that the Carthaginians had some Gods call'd Ab-addires, whose Priests were na∣med' Eccaddires: In Sacerdotibus Eccaddires, & in Numinibus Ab-addires. Thus the Gods Ab-addires of the Carthaginians, were without doubt those whom the Greeks and Latins sometimes called, Magnos, petentes, selectos Deos. ABALIENARE, (a Term of Roman Law,) to make a pure and simple Sale to a Ro∣man Citizen of the Goods which were called Res mancupii or mancipli, which were Estates si∣tuate in Rome or some place of Italy, and con∣sisted in Lands of Inheritance, in Slaves and Cattel. This Sale or Allenation was not valid but between Roman Citizens, and for the Payment a certain Ceremony was observed, with a Balance and Money in hand, or else the Seller was to transfer and renounce his Right before a Judge, as we learn from Cicero in his Topicks, Abalienatio ejus rei quae mancipii erat, aut traditio alteri nexu, aut in jure cessis. ABATON, a Greek word which signifies a Building so very high that no Man can come at it, and which is inaccessible. We have a fine piece of Antiquity concerning this sort of
Building in Vitruvlus l. 8. c. 2. The Rhodians being vanquish'd by Queen Artemisia the Wife of Mausolus, the Story says, that she erected a Trophy in the City of Rhodes with two Statues of Brass, whereof one represented Rhodes, and the other was her own Image, which imprin∣ted on the Front of that which represented the City the Marks of Slavery. A long time after the Rhodians, who scrupled the demolish∣ing of these Statues, because it was not lawful to destroy such Statues as were dedicated in any place, consulted how they might hinder the View of them, by raising a very high Buil∣ding round about them, after the manner of the Greeks, who call'd it . ABAZEA or ABAZEIA, ancient Ce∣remonies instituted by Dionysius the Son of Ca∣prius King of Asia; so called from the Greek word , which signifies silent, because these Feasts were observ'd with a profound Si∣lence. Cicero speaks of them in his third Book Of the Nature of the Gods. ABDERA, a City of Thrace, so called from one Abderus a Favorite of Hercules, who was torn in pieces by the Horses of Diomedes. Hercules reveng'd the Death of his Friend, causing his own Horses to eat him up, and then beating out their Brains with his Club; he built also this City in his honour, which he called from his Name. It was afterwards cal∣led Claxomena, because the Claxomenians who came from Asia into Thrace, enlaarged it very much. It is now called Pelistylo, according to Sophian, and was the place where Pretageras the Sophist, and Democritus the great Laugher were born. Near to this Place is a Lake called Bisto∣nis, in which nothing will swim, and the Pa∣stures round about it, make the Horses mad that feed in them. ABDERITAE or ABDERITANI. The Inhabitants of Abdera in Thrace, who were e∣steemed stupid and dull because of the Gross∣ness of the Air in which they breath'd, from whence comes that Expression of Martial, Ab∣deritanae pectora plebis haber, i. e. You are a stupid Fool: in which place he speaks to a certain Cri∣minal, who was pardoned upon condition, that in a full Theatre he would represent upon him∣self the Action of Mutius Scavola, who burn'd his Hand, with a Stoical Constancy, in the presence of King Porsenua, to punish himself because he had not kill'd him, but miss'd his Aim by striking one of his Courtiers in∣stead of him. The Natives of Abdera, says Lucian, were formerly tormented with a burn∣ing Fever, which ceased on the seventh day, either by a Sweat or by Loss of Blood; and, which is very strange, all that were seiz'd with it repeated Tragedies, and particularly the Androeda of Euripid, with a grave Air and a mournful Tone, and the whole City was full of these Tragedians, who started up on a fudden, and running to and fro in frightful and horrid Disguises, cry'd out, O Love, the Ty∣rant of the Gods and Men, and in this mad Frolick acted the rest of Perseus's Part in a very me∣lancholy manner. The Original of this Mis∣chief was the Actor Archelaus, who being in mighty Vogue, had acted this Tragedy with much Applause in the hottest time of Summer; for by this means it came to pass, that many upon their return from the Theatre went to bed, and the next day fell to imitating him, having their Heads still full of those tragical and bombast Terms they had heard the day be∣fore. ABDICARE, (a Term of the Roman Law) to Abdicate a Son is to abandon him, to turn him out of your House, to refuse to own him for your Son; it is also a common Phrase, abdicare Magistratum, or se Magistratu, to re∣nounce the Office of a Magistrate, to lay it down, to abandon it, either before the time prescribed, for some private Reason, or for some Defect that happened in the Election, or at last after the time is expir'd for the discharge of that Office. We read also in the Law, Abdi∣dicare se statu suo, to renounce his Condition, to become a Slave, and be degraded from the Privileges of a Roman Citizen, when any one was abandon'd to his Creditors, not being able to make them Satisfaction. ABDICERE, (a Term of Roman Law) which signifies to debar any one of his Demands and Pretensions, or not to allow them. And in this Sense 'tis said, Abdicere vindiciam or vindi∣cias, i. e. Not to allow one the possession of the thing which is controverted; on the con∣trary, dicere & addicere vindicias, is to grant and allow them the Possession of that which is con∣tested. Abdicere is also an Augural Term, and sig∣nifies to disapprove, to reject a Design or En∣terprise, not to favour it. For understanding this piece of Antiquity, we must know, that the Romans never undertook any thing of con∣sequence, till they had first consulted the Will of the Gods by the mediation of the Augurs; who, for this end, consider'd the flying and singing of the Birds, their manner of eating and drinking, and according to the Rules and Observations of this Augural Science they ap∣prov'd or disapprov'd of any Design; and an∣swer'd those who consulted them, Id aves abdi∣cunt, the Gods disapprove this Design, whose Will has been manifested to us by the Birds which we have observed. ABIGEI and ABACTORES, (in the Law) are the Stealers of Cattle, who carry away whole Flocks, or at least a great part of
them. The Lawyers do put a great difference between the words Fures and Abactores; for the former, say they, are those who steal only a Sheep or two, whereas the Abactores are those who carry off a whole Flock, or the greatest part of it. ABIRE. This Word, besides the Signifi∣cations I have already given of it in my Latin and French Dictionary, has also some other re∣lating to the Roman Law, as Abire ab emptione, to fall off from a Bargain, to break it, to refuse to hold it: so in Cicero we find, Res abiit à Sempronio, Sempronius fail'd in this Affair, it slipt out of his hands. Abire, a Term of Imprecation, as may appear from these Passages of the Comic Poets, Abi in malam rem, Abi in crucem, or in maximum magnum malum, Go in an ill hour, Go hang your self, Go to the Devil. The Word Abire is also us'd in the Form of granting Liberty to Slaves, as Abito quo voles, quo lubet, nihil te moror, or, Liber esto atque abito quo voles, or, Tu vero abeas, neque te quisquam moratur: I make you free, go now whither you will, no body detains you, you may go where you please. It is also used in the Law after this manner, Abiit dies actionis, the Time of Prosecution in this Cause is over, or, according to the common Phrase of the Court, There's an end of this Suit, it is quite out of doors, and cannot be brought on a∣gain. ABJUDICARE, (a Term of Law) to take away something from a Person by a Sen∣tence, to declare that it does not belong to him. ABJURARE Creditum, or, Si quid cre∣ditum est, to deny a Depositum or Pledge in a Court of Justice, to make oath that there was no such thing left with me. Plautus says, Quique in jure abjurant pecuniam, who deny in Court that the Money was left in their hands. ABLUERE se, (a Term of Religion us'd in the ancient Sacrifices) to wash and purifie our selves before we offer Sacrifice. The Ro∣mans look'd upon it as a part of Religious Wor∣ship, to wash their Hands and Feet, sometimes the Head, and oftentimes the whole Body, when they were to sacrifice to their Gods. And therefore Virgil brings in Aeneas telling Anchi∣ses, that he could not discharge his Duty to his Houshold-Gods, till he was purified in some running Water, because he was defiled with Blood and Slaughter, at the Sacking of Troy, Donec me flumine vivo abluero. We read also in the same Poet, that Dido, having a mind to sacrifice to the Infernal-Gods, told her Sister, that she must first wash and purifie her self in running Water, Dic corpus properet fluviali spargere lympha. The People and Assistants were also purified with a Water which was called Lustral, accor∣ding to the Practice of Aeneas at the Funerals of Misenus in Virgil, for he tells us that he sprinkl'd Lustral Water three times upon his Compani∣ons with an Olive-branch, Idem ter socios pura circumtulit unda Spargens rore levi & ramo felicis oliva. They us'd sometimes a sprinkling Instru∣ment to throw that Lustral Water, which they esteemed holy, because the Link or Torch which had been used at a Sacrifice was extin∣guished in it. It was their Custom also to place, at the Entrance into their Temples, Ves∣sels made of Marble triumphant (as Du Choul calls it) fill'd with Water, wherewith they wash'd themselves. A Custom which, with∣out doubt, they learn'd from the Jews, since we read in Scripture, that Solomon plac'd at the Entry into the Temple, which he erected to the true God, a great Laver, which the Holy Text calls a Sea of Brass, where the Priests wash'd themselves before they offer'd Sacrifice, having before-hand sanctified the Water by throwing into it the Ashes of the Victim that was slain in Sacrifice. ABOLERE, (a Term of the Roman Law) to abolish, to annihilate, to reduce to nothing, to destroy a thing after such a manner that nothing remains, not so much as the Remem∣brance of it. And according to this Notion of the Word is the Phrase Abolere crimen, to abo∣lish a Crime, and Abolere nomina reorum, to rase or expunge the Names of the accused out of the Table or Register, to strike them out of the List of the Prisoners. ABOLITIO, Abolition, the Remission of a Crime. Amnesty is a general Abolition of all that has been committed during a Civil War, or in any popular Commotion. This Abo∣lition was granted after three different manners: Either by the Prince on a day of Triumph, and for some remarkable Victory obtained by the Commonwealth; or else it was granted by the Magistrate, when the Accuser desisted from his Prosecution before him; or lastly, it was granted to the Accused after the Death of the Accuser. ABOLLA, a kind of Purple Garment doubled, which was very large, had many Plaits, and was adorned with great Buttons, which the Romans wore to defend themselves from Cold and the Injuries of the Weather. This Garment was used by Military Men, Per∣sons of Quality, and even by Philosophers, as the Verses of Martial and Juvenal do plainly prove. We read in Suetonius, That the Empe∣rour Caligula was much offended with King Ptolomy for appearing at the Theatre with this double Garment of Purple, which attracted the Eyes of all the Spectators towards him.
ABOMINANTES, (a Term of Exe∣cration) Those who abhor any bad Presage, and pray the Gods to prevent its falling upon their Heads. They made use of certain Latin Ex∣pressions frequent in the Comic-Poets and o∣thers, Quod Dii omen avertant; quod ego abomi∣nor; procul omen abesto; procul sit omen; procul haec avertant fata. Quod Dii prohibeant; Dii me∣liora; Dii melius: & Dii melius duint, for dent. Which God forbid, which I pray the Gods to remove far from us, and to turn away from falling upon our Heads; which Mischief may it never come upon us; which may the Gods preserve us from. ABORIGINES, a very antient People of Italy, about whose Original there are four prin∣cipal Opinions: the first is that of Aurelius Victor who calls them Aborigines, as who should say Ab∣errigines, i. e. Vagabonds, wherein he disowns that Division made by Berosus of Janigenes and Abori∣gines, and affirms on the contrary, that these Ab∣origines were wandring and vagabond Scythians, who came and settled in that part of Italy. Ne∣vertheless, against this first Opinion it may be said, that if these Aborigines had been Scythians, they would never have employed the Greeks against the Scythians, but, on the contrary, would have made use of them as safe Auxiliaries to aid them against the Natives of the Country, and against the Greeks, who were lately come thither. S. Jerom and Denis of Halicarnassus think, that they were call'd Aborigines, as who should say absque origine, without beginning; or rather as being the first Natives of the Mountains, from these Tuscan and Armenian words, according to the Talmuds; for Ab signifies a Father, ori a Cavern or hollow place, and  signifies a Race or Posterity, as who should say, Men born in Caverns. Some think that Chamasenus, aliàs Cham, the Son of Noah, who was the Saturn of the Egyptians, having gather'd together di∣vers wandring and vagabond People, conduct∣ed them into that part of Italy which at present is call'd Romania, and at that time was call'd Latium. Titus Livius and Dionysius Halicarnasseus assert, that the first Aborigines came from Arca∣dia into Italy, under the conduct of Oenotrus the Son of Lycam, and that they learn'd the Letters of the Alphabet from Evander, who was then King of it. Genebrard, one very well vers'd in Rabbinical Learning, thinks that the Aborigines were a People driven by Joshua out of the Land of Canaan, who cross'd over the Me∣diterranean Sea, and came and dwelt in Italy, where they had for King Sabatius or Saturn, who was set over them by Janus, and reign'd there Thirteen Years: They were banish'd beyond the Tyber, on account of the corruption of their Manners: But as to Janus, he settled on this side of the River, upon a Hill which he call'd Janiculum. ABROGARE, (in the Roman Law) to Abrogate, make void, annul, to bring into dis∣use any Law or Custom. This word has re∣ference to these other words, rogare, &c. when they are spoken of Laws whose Confirmation was demanded of the People. First, Rogabatur Lex, a Law was propos'd to the People for their Approbation, which they gave in these Terms; Ʋti rogas, I approve it, Be it so as is requir'd; 2ly, Abrogabatur, it was abrogated. 3ly, Dero∣gabatur, something was taken away from it. Sometimes, Subrogabatur, some Clause was ad∣ded to it. And lastly, Obrogabatur, some Ex∣ception or Limitation was put to it. Lex aut rogatur, i. e. fertur; aut abrogatur, i. e, prior lex tollitur; aut derogatur, i. e. pars prima tollitur; aut subrogatur, i. e. adjicitur aliquid primae legi; aut obrogatur, i. e. mutare aliquid ex prima lege. Ʋlp. in Leg. 1. D. ad Leg. Aquil. And Cicero, l. 3. of Ep. to Atticus: Si quid in hac rogatione scriptum est, quod per legem Claudiam promulgare, abrogare, derogare, obrogare, sine fraude sua non llceat. And again, in lib. 3. of the Republick: Hinc legi nec obrogari fas est, nec derogari ex hac aliquid licet, neque tota abrogari potest, It was not lawful to change this Law, or take any thing from it, neither could it be wholly abrogated. ABSOLVERE, (in the Roman Law) to absolve a Person accus'd, to acquit him of a Crime or any Accusation laid against him, to dismiss him with Absolution. The ordinary method in these Cases was this; After the Cause of the accus'd had been pleaded on both sides, the Pretor us'd the word Dixerunt, i. e. the Advocates have said; and then three Balots were distributed to each Judg, one mark'd with the Letter A, to absolve the accus'd, another with the Letter C, to condemn him, and a third with the Letters N and L, to respite Judg∣ment till further information. There was of∣ten also a fourth, which Suetonius calls Tabula remissionis, which was a pardon for a Crime whereof the accus'd was found guilty. In a Suit concerning a forg'd Will (says the same Historian) all the Witnesses who had sign'd it, being declar'd guilty by the Lex Cornelia, not only two Balots were given to the Judges for absolving or condemning the accus'd, but a third also for pardoning the Crime in those who had been surpriz'd or drawn in to sign it by fraud or mistake. Cum de testamento falsi age∣retur, omnesque signatores Lege Cornelia tenerentur, non tantùm duas tabellas absolutoriam & condem∣natoriam simul cognoscentibus dedit, sed tertiam quoque qua ignosceretur iis, quosfraude ad signan∣dum vel errore inductos constitisset. The Judges having receiv'd these Balots, took an Oath, that they would judg according to their Conscience, without Partiality to either side, either for Love or Hatred: After which Oath, they threw one
of the Balots into the Urn, according as their Judgment was, either for absolving or condem∣ning the Party accus'd. If the accus'd was condemn'd, the Judg gave his sentence in these words, Videtur facisse: The Crime is proved, he is attainted and convicted of it; and con∣cluded his Sentence in these Words, I lict, liga ad palu, expedi virgas, when the Criminal was not condemn'd to death; But if the Crime was capital, then he used these words, I Lictor, colliga manus, capus bbito, inselici arbari sus∣pendito, lege age. Go Lisr, seize the Criminal, cover his Face, and hang him up, by vertue of the Sentence now pronounc'd against him: But if the Person accus'd happen'd to be Ab∣solv'd, the Judg pronounc'd Sentence upon him thus, Videtur  facisse, or Nihil in  dam∣nationis dignum invenio, or, Non invenio in eo cau∣sam; which Expression was us'd by Pilate, be∣ing a Roman, in his Answer to the Jews, who had a mind to force him to put Jesus to death, whom he had declar'd to be innocent. ABSYRTUS, otherwise call'd Egia∣lus, (according to Pacs,) the Son of Ete∣ss King of Goaos. 'Tis said, that his Sister Mad, when she fled from her Father's House with Jason, whom she lov'd, tore the Body of her Brother Absyrtus in pieces, and scatter'd them up and down in the way, on purpose to hinder her Father from pursuing after her, by meeting with those sad Remains of his Son, which he was oblig'd to gather up, as Cicero tells us in his Oration pro Lege Manilia, Ut Medea illa ex pto profgisse dicitur, quam prae∣dicant in fuga fratris sui membra, in iis locis quà se pars persequeretur dississe, ut eorum colle∣ctia dispersa, marorque patrius celeritat perse∣quendi retardaret. Valerius Flaccus, Lib. VIII. Agona. says, That it was not her Father Etesius who went after her, but that he sent his Son Asyrtus with a Naval Force to pursue her, and that coming up with her at the mouth of the Danube, when Jason and she were upon the point of Marriage, he broke off the Match by threatning to burn them both, together with their Ship, Qui novus incaeptos impediit hymenaeos, Turbavitque toros, & sacra calentia rupit. Orpheus thinks that Etesius commanded Absyrtus to go after his Sister and fetch her back again; but that he following after her, by a mischance fell into the River Phasis, and was drowned, and that his Body was afterwards cast by the Waves upon the little Islands which are call'd from his Name Absyrtides: But Pliny on the contrary tells us, that he was kill'd on the Coasts of Dalmatia, where these little Islands are situate, which from his Name are call'd Absyrtides. Ab∣syrtides Graiis dicta à fratre Medeae ibi interfecto,  Absyrto: lib. 3. cap. 2. Let us see how Myginus relates this Story: Etesius, says he, be¦ing inform'd that his Daughter Medea and Jason had fled away from him, he sent his Son Ab∣syrtus in a Ship after them, who pursu'd them as far as the Adriatic Sea along the Coasts of Sevonia, and found them out at the House of King Alcinous. At their first meeting they were ready to go to blows, but the King in∣terpos'd his Authority, and offer'd them his Mediation, which they accepted of. The King resolv'd to restore Medea to her Father, provided that Jason had not yet enjoy'd her: But Jason being inform'd of this by the Queen, to whom the King had entrusted this Secret, enjoy'd her that night, and by this means ob∣tain'd Medea for his Wife. Absyrtus fearing the Anger of his Father, continu'd still to pursue after them, when they retir'd into the Coun∣try of Argos; but Jason at last, by killing him, was deliver'd from any further pursuit. There are some Authors who say, that it was his own Sister who cruelly tore him in pieces. ACADEMIA, the Academy, a place built near to Athens, and planted with Trees by one Academus, according to Diogenes Laertius, or according to others, by Cadmus a Phoenitian, and the Restorer of Polite Learning among the Greeks. In this place Plato taught his Disciples Philosophy, who from thence were call'd Aca∣demics, Atque inter silvas Academi quarere verum. id est, To enquire after Truth in the Academy, at the School of the Divine Plato. Cicero call'd one of his Country-Houses by this Name, where he planted Groves, and made very pleasant Walks, for entertainment of his Friends with Discourses upon Philosophical Subjects, such as these, Concerning the Nature of the Gods; Of Friendship; and the Offices of a civil Life, and particularly his Academical Treatises, so call'd from the place where they were compos'd. In process of time all places, where Youth were taught the Liberal Arts and Sciences, or other Exercises, were call'd by this Name. ACADINA, a Fountain in Cilicia near the Lake of Delos consecrated to Castor and Pol∣lux. The truth and sincerity of an Oath was prov'd by the Water of this Fountain; for the Oath was written upon a Table and cast into this Fountain, and if the Table did swim above the Water, it was a sign that the Oath was true; but if it sunk to the bottom, the Oath was judg'd false. ACANTHUS, , Bearsfoot, in Latin Brancha-ursina, so call'd, because its Leaves resemble Bears Feet; and in Greek , because one kind of it is prickly like a Thistle. There are two kinds of Acanthus, one which grows wild, and is full of Prickles, and another which grows in Gardens, which
Virgil calls mollis, because it is soft, and with∣out Prickles. The Greek Sculptors adorn'd their Works with the Figure of the latter, as the Gothic did with that of the former, which bears Prickles; which they represented not on∣ly in their Capitals, but also in their other Or∣naments. The occasion of their so doing, ac∣cording to the relation of Vitravins, was this, A young Woman in Corinth happening to dye when she was just upon the point of Marriage, her Nurse laid upon her Tomb, in a Casket, some Vessels which she had priz'd in her life-time; and because they lay open to the Wea∣ther, to preserve them from wasting too fast, she cover'd the Casket with a Tile: But this happening by chance to lye upon the root of an Acanthus, it so happen'd that in the Spring-time, when the Leaves began to shoot forth, the Casket which lay upon the mid∣dle of the root, was encompass'd with the Leaves of the Plant growing up about the sides of it, till meeting with the Tile that cover'd it at top, their extremities were forci∣bly bent into spiral Lines, like a Skrew. Cal∣limachus, the Sculptor, passing by this Tomb, observ'd how the growing Leaves encompass'd this Casket, and represented the manner of it in those Pillars which he afterwards made at Corinth. ACARON, the God of Flies. See Acca∣ron and Achor. ACCA LAURENTIA, the Wife of Faustulus, who was Shepherd to Numitor, and the Nurse of Remus and Romulus: This latter in gratitude erected an Altar to her after her death, and appointed a Feast, which he call'd Laurentalia, which was celebrated in the Month of April, according to Varro, or in the Month of December, according to Ovid, Lib. III. Fast. Plutarch attributes this Festival in the Month of December to another Acca, who was a fa∣mous Courtezan, and had amass'd great Riches by her lewd Practices; for she at her death left the People of Rome her Heirs, who in grateful acknowledgment of the Favour, consecrated Plays and a Festival to her Memory. Macro∣bius tells us, that Acca Laurentia, who serv'd as Nurse to Romulus and Romus, was this same pro∣stitute Whore, which gave occasion to the Fa∣ble, That a Wolf nurs'd them the Latins using the word Lupa for a debauch'd Woman. She married afterwards a very rich Man, who gave her vast heaps of Wealth, all which she left to the People of Rome, who therefore be∣stow'd great Honours upon her. This Rela∣tion appears to be true, which Macrobius had ex∣tracted from some antient Authors. ACCARON, the God of Flies, accor∣ding to Pliny l: 10. c. 28. Pausanias relates in his Elegiacks, That Hercules sacrificing one day to Olympius, was much annoy'd with Flies, but that having invok'd Jupiter, , or the Fly-Chaser, he was deliver'd from them, these Insects flying all away to the other side of the River Alpheus. From that time the Eleuns con∣tinually offer'd the same Sacrifice to Jupiter the Fly-Driver, to obtain of him the same Favou. See Achor. ACCEDERE and ACCESSIO, (in the Roman Law) regard a thing which tho separated from the Bulk or Gross of any Estate, Commodity, &c. yet of right be∣longs to it. The Tyles, for instance, which are taken off a House to be laid on again, are an Accessory when the House is to be sold. Tegulae quae detracta sunt ut reponerentur, aedibus accedunt, Leg. 18. de Action. Empti & Venditi. The Cask which contains the Wine that is left for a Legacy, is an Accessory to a Legacy, and not a Legacy. Vasa, accessio legatae penus, non le∣gata sunt, Leg. 4. de Pen. Leg. ACCENSUS, an Officer of the Roman Magistrates, and of the Military Men. ACCENSI Formses, Officers of the Roman Magistrates, viz. of the Consuls, De∣cemvirs, Praetors, or Proconsuls and Gover∣nours of the Provinces of the Republick, They were taken out of the number of the Enfranchis'd, and their Function was rather laborious than honourable, as Cicero testifies in a Letter to his Brother Quintus, Proconsul of Asia, Accensus eo etium numero, quo eum Ma∣jores nostri esse volaerunt, quod hoc non in beneficii loco, sed in laboris aut muneris, non temere nisi libertis deserebnt, quibus non multo secus quam ser∣vis imperabnt. They walk'd before the Ma∣gistrates, and received their Orders, which they executed. Their chief Business was to call the People together to Assemblies; and from this part of their Office, says Varro, they were called Accensi ab acciendo. The Form used by the Magistrates for calling any to a Meet∣ing, was this, Voca ad concionem omnes Quirites huc ad me, Summon, call an Assembly of the People, cause them to meet together immedi∣ately. The Accensus cry'd, Omnes Quirites itc ad concionem, Go to the Assembly, Gentlemen Citizens. Their Office was also to assist the Praetor, when he sat on the Bench, and to give him notice with a loud Voice every three hours what a Clock it was, as, for instance, that it was nine a Clock in the Morning, that it was Noon, and that it was the ninth Hour or three a Clock after Noon. Accensus inc. amabat horam esse ter∣tiam, meridiem & nonam. For three a Clock, among the Romans was the ninth hour, as nine a Clock was the third hour; because they did not begin to reckon the first Hour of the day till x a clock in the Morning; so that the third hour was nine a Clock, according to us,
and their ninth hour of the day was our three a Clock in the Afternoon. ACCENSI, in the Roman Armies, ac∣cording to the opinion of Festus, were the su∣pernumerary Souldiers, who serv'd to fill the places of those who died, or were disabled to fight by any Wound they had received. Ac∣censi dicebantur, quia in locum mortuorium militum subito subrogantur, ita dicti quia ad censum adjici∣ebantur. Asconius Pedianus assigns them a Station in the Roman Militia, like that of our Serjeants, Corporals, or Trumpeters. Accensus nomen est ordinis in militia, ut nunc dicitur Princeps, aut Commentariensis, aut Cornicularius. Titus Livius informs us, that Troops were made of these Accensi, that they were plac'd at the Rear of the Army, because no great matter was expe∣cted either from their Experience or their Cou∣rage. Tertium vexillum ducebat minimae fiduciae manum. ACCENTUS, an Accent, signifies a certain Mark which is set over Syllables, to make them be pronounced with a stronger or weaker Voice. The Greeks were more curious Obser∣vers of the Accents than the Mederus. Cardinal Perron says, that the Hebrews call'd the Accents Gustus, which is as much as to say, the Sawce of Pronunciation. There are three sorts of Accents, the Acute ´, the Grave `, and the Cir∣cumflex ^. The Jews have Accents of Grammar, Rhetorick and Musick. The Accent of Mu∣sick is an Inflexion or Modification of the Voice or Word, to express the Passions or Affections either naturally or artificially. Mr. Christian Hennin, a Hollander, wrote a Dissertati∣on to shew, that the Greek Tongue ought not to be pronounced according to the Accents; wherein he says, that they were invented only to make some Distinction of Words; that Books were formerly written without any such Distinction, as if they were only one Word, that no Accents are to be seen in Manuscripts which are above 800 years old; that none are found in the Pandects of Florence, which were written about the time of Justinian; that they were not commonly used till about the tenth Century, or in the time of Barbarism, and then they were taken to be the Rule of Pro∣nunciation; that there is no use of Accents in most Nations, neither in Chaldaea nor Syria, nor among the Solavonians, Moscovites, or Bulga∣rians, nor was among the antient Danes, Germans or Dutch, and that they were unknown to all Antiquity. He believes that they were an In∣vention of the Arabians, which was perfected by Alchalit, about the Death of Mahomet. He adds, that the Massoretes of Tiberias, about the middle of the sixth Century adopted this In∣vention, and introduced it into the Bible with the Vowels, in the time of Justinian; and that he who perfected the Accents, was Rabbi Juda Ben David Ching, a Native of Fez, in the ele∣venth Century; and that they were first used among the Greeks, only in favour of Strangers, and to facilitate the Pronunciation of Verse. ACCEPTILATIO, (a Term of the Roman Law) Acceptilation. A Discharge which is given without receiving of Money: a De∣claration which is made in favour of the Deb∣tor, that no more shall be demanded of him, that the Debt is satisfied and forgiven, and he is acquitted of it. The manner of doing this was by a certain Form of Words used by both Parties, Quod ego promisi facisne, or habesne acce∣ptum? said the Debtor; Do you acknowledg that you have received that which I promis'd you? Are you satisfied, do you acquit me of it? the Creditor answered, habeo or facio, I con∣fess I have received it, I discharge you of it. But this was anciently used only in Obligations contracted by word of mouth. ACCEPTUM, a Receipt. Tabula acce∣pti & expensi, a Book of Receipts and Disburse∣ments. Ratio accepti, an Accompt of Re∣ceipts. ACCEPTO ferre, (in the Law) to hold for received, to write Received upon the Book. Accepto & acceptum ferre, accepto & ac∣ceptum facere, to confess that 'tis received. Ex∣pensum ferre, to write down what is disbursed, to keep an Accompt of what is laid out and expended. ACCIA or ATTIA. Accia the Mo∣ther of Caius Octavius Caesar, surnamed Augu∣stus. Suetonius relates, in the Life of this Prince, that Accia his Mother having gone one night, with other Roman Dames, to solemnize a Feast of Apollo in his Temple, she fell asleep there, and thought in her sleep, that she saw a Serpent creep under her, which soon after dis∣appear'd: when she awoke, having a mind to wash and purifie her self, she perceiv'd upon her Belly the Track of a Serpent, which could never be obliterated, and upon the account of this Mark she was obliged for ever after to for∣bear the publick Baths. She became afterwards big with Child, and was brought to bed, at the end of ten Months, of Caesar Augustus, making the World believe, that she had conceived by Apollo. Augustus also gloried in it, that he was his Son; and Torrentius mentions a Silver Me∣dal of this Emperour, upon the Reverse where∣of was seen the Figure of Apollo holding a Harp in his hand, with these words, Caesar Divi Fili∣us, Caesar the Son of the God Apollo. ACCIPIO, (being spoken of a Law) to receive, approve and hold fit: as Rogationem accipere, to accept a Law proposed. Accipio O∣men, I take or hold this for a good Omen.
ACCIPITER, any Bird of Prey in ge∣neral, as an Hawk, &c. Ovid informs us, that an Hawk was a Bird of ill Omen, because it was very carnivorous, Odimus accipitrem quia semper vivit in armis. But the same Bird was a good Omen in Marri∣age, according to Pliny, because it never eats the Hearts of other Birds, which gives us to understand, that no Differences, in a married state, between Husband and Wife ought to go so far as the Heart; and Care was also taken, in the Sacrifices for Marriages, that the Gall of the Animals which were slain, should be taken out. ACCIUS, a Latin Poet, who wrote Tragedies in a very harsh style, according to Cicero. He was of an illustrious Family, be∣ing descended of two Consuls, Macrinus and Soranus. Decius Brutus held him in great e∣steem, took great pleasure in adorning the Temples with this Poets Verses, and erected a Statue to him in the Temple of the Muses. Suet. c. 4. ACCIUS Navius, one of the most cele∣brated Augurs, who liv'd in the time of Tar∣quinius Priscus: He opposed the Design which that King had of adding new Centuries of the Roman People, to those which were already established by Romulus, representing to him, that he ought first to consult the Will of the Gods by the Flight of Birds. Tarquin, in rail∣lery, bid him consult them, to know whether his present Design was feasible or no: Accius did it, and brought him back word that it was. I would know, replied the King, whether you can cut that Stone with this Razor which was whetted upon it: The Augur immediately took the Stone and cut it in two with the Ra∣zor. This wonderful Action gained great Cre∣dit and Authority to the Augurs in the follow∣ing Times; and the King caused a Statue to be erected to Accius in the place of their Assem∣blies, having his Head cover'd, and holding in his Hand the Stone which he had cut, to per∣petuate to Posterity the Memory of this A∣ction. ACCLAMATIO, Acclamation, a loud Expression of Joy, the Applause given to Per∣sons and Things, a practice used upon several Occasions. The Romans never failed to use these Acclamations, which included their Pray∣ers and Wishes for the Welfare of their Empe∣rours, when they bestowed upon them any Largesses for some Victory obtain'd over the Enemies of the Empire. These Acclamations were often expressed by one word, feliciter; or by many, Di tibi dent quicquid, Princeps Trajane mereris, Et rata perpetuò, quae tribuêre, velint. Or in these words, Augeat imperium nostri dutis, augeat annos. Many other Forms to this purpose may be seen in Brissonius de Formulis. The Senate in like manner made Acclama∣tions to the Emperours, either at their accessi∣on to the Throne, or in Acknowledgment of some Favours they had received from them, which they very often inserted into their pub∣lick Registers, or caused to be engraven on Plates of Brass, or Tables of Marble. They frequently deified their Emperours, and chose their Magistrates by sudden Acclamations, of which I shall relate some Examples. Aurelius Victor informs us, that Divine Ho∣nours were decreed to the Emperour Pertinax, after his Death, and that the whole Senate rais'd great Acclamations in his favour: Acclamatum est, Pertinace imperante, Securi viximus, neminem timuimus, Patri pio, Patri Senatus, Patri bonorum omnium; We liv'd in perfect Security under Pertinax, cry'd the Senate, we fear'd no People, Pertinax was to us a Father full of Tenderness, the Father of the Senate, the Father of all good Men. Trebellius Pollio relates the Acclamations which were made at the Election of Valerianus to the Office of Censor: Acclamatum est, Vale∣rianus in tota vita sua fuit Censor, prudens Senator, modestus Senator, amicus bonorum, inimicus tyran∣norum, hostis criminum, hostis vitiorum. Hunc Censorem omnes, hunc imitari volumus. Primus genere, nobilis sanguine, emendatus vitâ, doctrinâ clarus, moribus singularis, exemplum antiquitatis; These Acclamations were made, Valerianus was a just Censor during his whole Life, a prudent and a modest Senator, a Friend to good Men, an Enemy to Tyrants, an Enemy to Crimes and Vices. We have all chosen him to be our Censor, he is illustrious for his Nobility, re∣gular in his Life and Conversation, commend∣able for his Instructions, and an Example of Antiquity. The same thing happened at the Election of Tacitus to the Empire; for after the first, who gave sentence for him, proclaim'd him Emperour, the whole Senate cry'd with a loud Shout, Omnes, Omnes: And this good old Man endeavouring to excuse himself upon the account of his great Age, which render'd him unfit to bear the Weight of the Empire, they shouted again and cry'd, Caput imperare, non pe∣des; Animum tuum, non corpus eligimus, Tacite Auguste; Dii te servent; It belongs to the Head to rule and not to the Feet; we chuse your Mind and not your Body, O Tacitus Augustus, the Gods preserve you long. In the Armies the Roman Souldiers did often chuse the Empe∣rours and their Generals by sudden Acclama∣tions, without waiting either for the Order of the Senate or the Consent of the People; as happen'd at the Election of the Emperour Pro∣bus: For the Colonels having exhorted the
Souldiers to chuse for Emperour a Man of Pro∣bity, probum; all on a sudden they made a great Noise with confus'd Voices, which pro∣claimed Probus to be Emperour, Probe Impera∣tor, Dii te servent. These Acclamations were also us'd at Shows in the Theatres when they pleased the People's Humour, as it happen'd at the new Comedy of Pacuvius, Qui clamores saepè totâ caveâ exauditi sunt in M. Pacuvii nova fabu a; The like Acclamations were often heard over all the Pit, when the new Play of Pacuvius was acted. As the Romans were accustom'd to make these Acclamations to testifie their Joy and signifie their Satisfaction, so they were also sometimes us'd in Imprecations, to express their Indigna∣tion, as they did after the Death of the Empe∣rour Commodus; Let this Enemy of his Coun∣try, cry'd they, be despoil'd of all Honour, let this Parricide, this Gladiator be cut in pie∣ces in the place where Gladiators are laid up, when slain or wounded: Hosti patriae honores de∣trahantur, parricida, gladiator in spoliario lanie∣tur, &c. ACCO, the Name of a foolish and ridi∣culous Woman, who pleas'd her self with speaking to her own Image in a Looking-glass, and made a shew of refusing that which she most passionatly desired; from whence  is used for Pretending to refuse, for Dis∣simulation and Disguise. ACCUMBERE, to lie upon Couches for eating, to sit down, to seat your self at Table, as the Greeks did, and in imitation of them the Romans. For at the beginning the Romans did eat sitting at a Table as we do, be∣fore the Grecian Luxury and Softness had cor∣rupted them, as may appear from this Verse, Perpotuis soliti patres consistere mensis. But afterwards they were wont to eat after the fashion of the Greeks. For this end, in a lofty Hall a Table was fix'd, of a round or oval Fi∣gure, which the richer sort made of some pre∣cious Wood, adorn'd with Plates of Gold and Silver, or rather inlaid with some pieces re∣sembling Mother of Pearl: this Table was supported with Feet of Ivory, or some other matter, which represented the figures of divers Animals: round about it were plac'd two or three Couches, from whence it was call'd Biclini∣um and Triclinium: these Conveniencies for lean∣ing at Table were cover'd with richer or mean∣er Stuffs, according to the Quality of the Per∣sons, and adorn'd with Quilts and Pillows that they might lye more soft and easily upon them. They did commonly place no more than three upon a Couch, and to lay a greater number upon it, was accounted a sign of sordid Ava∣rice, as Horace tells us, Saepè tribus lectis, videas canare quaternos. In eating they lay along on their sides, having their Heads rais'd up with Pillows: He who fill'd the middle place was in that which is most honourable, as we learn from Virgil, —Aulaeis jam se regina superbis Aurea composuit spondâ, mediamque locavit. He who was at the head held the second place, and the third was at the lower end, or in the last place. They went into a Bath before they plac'd themselves at Table, and chang'd their Cloths, putting on a Garment which they cal∣led Vestis coenatoria, and putting off their Shoes that they might not dirty the Beds. They bound about their Heads Fillets of Wool, to prevent the Distempers of the Head, which the Fumes of Meat and Wine might cause; for which reason they used afterwards Garlands of Flowers. Their Women did not eat lying after this manner, such a Posture being esteem'd indecent and immodest in them, except at a Debauch, where they appear'd without any Shame or Modesty; yet in an antient Marble which is at Rome, we find the figure of a Wo∣man lying at a Table upon a Bed as her Hus∣band does; and Virgil also seems to attest this, when he represents Dido lying at Table at a Feast which she made upon the Arrival of Ae∣neas, unless he means that she was already smitten with Love with her new Guest. ACCUSARE, (in the Law) to Accuse, to draw up or lay an Accusation, or Process. The antient Lawyers put a difference between these three words Postulare, Deserre and Accusare: for first leave was desired to lay an Action against one, and this was called Postulare and Postulatio; after this he against whom the Action was laid was brought before the Judg, which was call'd Deserre and nominis Delatio; and lastly the Ac∣cusation was drawn up, accusabatur. The Accuser was obliged by the Law to sign his Accusation, at the head of which he plac'd the Name of the Consul, which signified the Year, when the Romans reckon'd Years by their Consuls; he set down also the Day, the Hour, and the Judg before whom he intended to pro∣secute his Accusation. We learn from Tacitus that the Accusers had two days given them to make their Complaint in, and the Accused three days to make his Defence; and that six days were allow'd between them both to pre∣pare themselves. From the very moment that any Person was accused of a Capital Crime that deserved Death he was stript of all his Marks of Honour, and appear'd in a careless Habit: he was obliged to give Sureties that he would ap∣pear in Court when there was occasion, which if he did not, he was laid up in Prison to se∣cure his Person. The Libel being drawn, the Accused was summoned to appear at three Market-days, in trinundinum; and he always
came attended with his Neighbours and Friends who were concerned for him, and threw them∣selves at the feet of the Magistrates and People to beg favour for him in case he were found guilty. If the Accused refus'd to appear, he was summoned with the Sound of a Trumpet before his House or Castle, and after the time allow'd was expir'd, he was condemn'd for Con∣tumacy. The Accuser had two hours wherein to speak against the Accused, and three hours were granted to the Accused to make his De∣fence, which was measured by an Hour-glass of Water, called Clepsydra, of which I shall give an account in its proper place; which made a Greek Orator say to the Judg, when he had a mind to signifie to him the Goodness of his Cause, That he would bestow part of his Water on his Adversary, i. e. of his Time, which the Lex Pompeia, made by Pompey in his third Consul∣ship, allowed him for his Defence. If the Ac∣cused was found guilty, Sentence was pro∣nounced against him in these words, Videtur fecisse, i. e. he is attainted and convicted of having committed the Crime: If, on the contrary, he was found not guilty, he was then declared in∣nocent in these terms, Videtur non fecisse, i. e. he is cleared from all Suspicion of Guilt. All these Circumstances which were observed in Accu∣sations, are related by Cicero and Tacitus. But if it appeared by the Event, that the Accuser was a Calumniator, i. e. that he had falsly ac∣cused the other Party; or that he was a Pre∣varicator, i. e. that he had betray'd his Cause, to make way for the Criminal to escape and ob∣tain Absolution; or at least, that he had de∣sisted from and given over Prosecution with∣out the Leave of the Magistrate or the Prince, and without a lawful Cause, then he was sen∣tenced by the Magistrate to suffer the same Pu∣nishment which the guilty Person deserv'd. ACERRA, a little Pot which held the Incense and Perfumes for Sacrifices, such as are now made in the form of a small Boat, and are used in the Church of Rome at this day. An Incense-Box for burning Perfumes upon the Al∣tars of the Gods, and before the dead Bodies. The Rich, says Horace, offer'd Boxes full of the finest Perfumes to their false Deities, Et plenâ supplex veneratur Acerrâ. And the Poor, according to Lucian, were ex∣cused for making a Bow, and throwing some grains of Incense into the Fire that burnt upon the Altars. ACESSEUS, the Name of a certain Seaman who was very careless, and always at∣tributed the bad Success of his Voyages to the Moon; from whence comes the Latin Proverb, Accessei Luna, to signifie a lazy and negligent sort of People, who always throw off the Blame from themselves, in case of any bad Success, tho their own Negligence was the on¦ly Cause of it. ACETABULUM, a small antient Measure, which contained about the fourth part of an Hemine, being about two ounces and an half of either liquid or dry things, as Pliny explains it towards the end of his twelfth book. This Measure held a Cup and an half, and an∣swers to our Quartern; but is now more in use among Druggists and Apothecaries than Victu∣allers, both for Liquids and Solids. It was also a kind of Spice-Box, which con∣tained all sorts of Spices, whereof the Ancients used to make their Sauces, to season their Vi∣ctuals together with Vinegar and Verjuice: It was made in the form of a Pyramid, and had several Drawers, wherein were put different sorts of Spices, as Pepper, Nutmegs, &c. ACHELOUS, a River whose Spring-head rises on Mount Pindus in Thessaly, and from thence crosses over Acarnania, which it separates from Etolia, and then dividing it self into two Streams, it runs into the Gulph of Corinth. This River was called Thoas, accor∣ding to Stephanus, and afterwards Achelous, from one Achelous who came from Thessaly to inhabit in these parts, with Alcmeon the Son of Amphia∣raus, who kill'd his Mother Eryphile: (he is commonly called Aspri, and according to others Catochi.) He was, according to the Poets, the Son of the Ocean and the Earth, or of Thetis, as Servius would have it, who makes him the Father of the Syrens. He wrestled with Hercu∣les for the fair Deïanira, whom her Father OEnus King of Calydon would not bestow in marriage upon any Man but him who was victorious in this kind of Exercise: Achelous, finding himself too weak, was put to his shifts, and changed himself sometimes into a Serpent, and some∣times into a Bull; but this avail'd him nothing, for Hercules overcame him and pluck'd off one of his Horns, which the Naiades took up, and having fill'd it with Fruits and Flowers they call'd it Cornutopia; the Horn of Plenty. He therefore being confounded with this Defeat, for shame hid his Head, that had lost a Horn, under the Waters of the River Thoas, which ever since bear his Name. Strabo, lib. 10. interprets this Fable allegori∣cally, and says, That Achclous is said to be changed into a Serpent, upon the account of the Course of that River, which is winding like a Serpent; and into a Bull, because the Noise which the Waters make resembles the Bellowing of a Bull. And because this River destroy'd all the Country round about by its frequent Inundations, Hercules confin'd it with∣in its Channel by cutting a Stream from it, which is the Horn that he pluck'd off, and that became the Horn of Plenty, by reason of
the Fertility of that Earth which was enrich'd for a long time after by the fat slime it left be∣hind. Virgil takes the Waters of the River Achelous for Water in general, in this Verse in the first Book of his Georgicks, Poculaque inventis Acheloia miscuit uvis. Which gives sufficient ground to suppose, that Scaliger did not without reason affirm, That the Latin word Aqua came from a word like it in the antient Greek Language, from which the River Achelous took its name, viz. Aqua and , lavare. Maximus Tyrius the Philosopher mentions also a Contest between this River and Hercules, who pluck'd off from it one Horn, whereof the Nymphs made the Horn of Plenty, having fill'd it with Fruits and Flowers. Ser∣vius explaining this Verse of Virgil, Corniger Hesperidum fluvius regnator aquarum. says, That the Floods were painted with Horns because of their winding Course, which twines about the Land like a Serpent. Thus the Ri∣ver Achelous was represented with Horns as well as the Po, whereof Virgil speaks. Diodorus Siculus gives an account how this River falling down at first from Mount Pindus, ran over the Rocks and made a great Devastation in the Country, whereupon Hercules opened a more large and united Channel, and so well water'd one Field with it that it became very fruitful. This is the Meaning of the Fable, and what Ovid has express'd in describing the Horn of Plenty, Dum tenet, infregit: truncâque à fronte revellit. Naïades hoc pomis & odore flore repletum Sacrarunt, divesque meo bona copia cornu est. Metamorph. lib. 9. ACHERON or ACHERUNS, accor∣ding to Plautus, a River of Hell, which Homer places in the Country of the Cimmerians, think∣ing that Country to be Hell; being a day's Journey from Circe, which is a Mountain in the Country of the Latins. Circe speaking to Ulysses when he embark'd in the Country of the Cimmerians, Navem quidem illic sistito in Oceano pro∣fundorum vorticum. Ipse autem in Plutonis eas do∣mum obscuram, ubi in Acherontem fluunt, & Cocy∣tus qui Stygiae aquae est emanatio. Servius ex∣plaining these words of Virgil, Tenebrosa palus Acheronte refuso, seems to confirm what Homer says, and to place these dark Cavities and Rivers of Hell in the Country of Italy. All Geographers place the River Acheron in Epirus, which joins to Arcadia. Diodorus Siculus shews, that the Hell of the Greeks was nothing but an Imitation of the Fu∣nerals of the Egyptians: For thus he discourses about them, Pratum verò & habitationem Defun∣ctorum confictam, esse locum juxta paludem Acheru∣siam: Plcrasque enim & maximas Aegyptiorum fu∣nerationes istic peragi, dum cadavera per amnem Acherusiam paludem deportata in cryptis illic siti deponunt; The Field which the Souls of the dead inhabit, is a place joining to the Morass of Acherusa near the City of Memphis, whither the Egyptians carry the Bodies of the dead to inter them. Which gave occasion to the Fa∣ble, that the Souls of the dead pass'd the River Acheron in a Boat. This River is encompass'd on all sides with high Mountains, so that the Sun never shines upon it; and this gave occa∣sion to the Name of Acheron, which is deriv'd from the Greek words, , or from , i. e. the River of Auguish and Pain, or at least , to be deprived to Joy and Pleasure, for asmuch as the Sun, which is the Father of Nature, never shines there. The Poets make this River the Son of Titan and the Earth, and say that he was banished to Hell by Jupiter for furnishing the Titans with Water in the War against the Gods. ACHILLES the Son of Peleus and The∣tis: he was a very magnanimous Grecian Prince, whom his Mother dipt in the Waters of Styx while he was very young, and by this means made him invulnerable in all parts of his Body but his Heel, by which she held him when she dipt him. She caused him to be educated by Chiron the Centaur, a Man very skilful in the Noble Arts, as in Medicine, Musick and Draw∣ing the Bow, who instructed him in these Sci∣ences and Exercises with great Care, and fed him only with Honey and the Marrow of Ly∣ons and Boats, to make him the more stout and formidable. Themis, whom his Mother consul∣ted about the Destiny of young Achilles, having foretold that he should be kill'd in the War which the Greeks were to undertake against the Trojans, to revenge the Rape of Helen by Paris the Son of King Priam, she address'd her self to Neptune, conjuring him to sink the Boat that carried that Princess; but this being deny'd, because the Decree of Destiny was inviolable, she resolv'd to send him, under the Disguise of a Girl, into the Isle of Scyro, to the Court of King Lycomedes, that he might there be educa∣ted with his Daughters, and by this means be stoln away from the Greeks, and hindred from going to that Fatal War. While he sojourn'd there he became very intimate with the young Deidama, the King's Daughter, insomuch that she became big with child, and was brought to bed of a Son, who was call'd Pyrrhus, from the disguised Name of Achilles who was called Pyrrha by reason of his Hair, which was of a shining red colour. Nevertheless he was dis∣cover'd by Ulysses and Diomedes, who landed on the Isle of Scyro in the habit of Merchants, and having exposed the Merchandize they had brought with them to Sale at the King's Court, which were nothing but Trinkets for Women
with some Arms; Achilles, tho under his Dis∣guise, never concern'd himself about the Trin∣kets, but presently seized upon the Arms, and thereby discover'd himself, and follow'd Ulysses to the War of Troy. Thetis his Mother seeing this fatal Necessity, obtain'd of Vulcan a Suit of Armour for him, so excellently temper'd that it was impenetrable. He signalized himself at the Siege of Troy by many brave Exploits; but out of indignation against Agamemnon for rob∣bing him of his Mistress Briseis, he retir'd from the Grecian Camp, and laid down his Arms, which he would never take up again till the Death of his Friend Patroclus, who was kill'd by Hector, which did so sensibly touch him, that he return'd to the Camp, and reveng'd the death of his Friend upon Hector, by killing him and dragging his dead Body about the Walls of Troy; but he, falling in love with Polixine the Daughter of Priam, and having demanded her for his Wife, was treacherously slain by Paris with an Arrow shot at his Heel, which was the only place of his Body wherein he was mortal. Divine Honours were decreed to him after his Death to be performed upon his Tomb, and in obedience to the Oracle of Dodona, the Thes∣salians offer'd there every year a Sacrifice of two Bulls, one white and the other black, which they brought from their own Country, whither also they took care to bring Wood from Mount Pelion, and Water from the River Specchius, to∣gether with Garlands made of Flowers, which were called immortal because they never faded. Philostratus on the Picture of Achilles, and Quin∣tus Calaber in lib. 3 of his Paralipomena, do not agree to all the Circumstances in the History of Achilles here related. The common Opinion is, That he was educated in the Island of Scyro with the Daughters of King Lycomedes, which is the Sentiment of Hyginus. But Philostratus thinks that he was sent by his Father against the Island of Scyro, to revenge the Death of Theseus, whom Lycomedes had cruelly put to death. Pausanias in his Attica is of the same Opinion, for he tells us, That Scyro was taken by Achilles, as well as the King Lycomedes. Quin∣tus Calaber maintains that Apollo kill'd Achilles with an Arrow; Apollo, says he, being angry at the insolent Answer which Achilles gave him, drew a Bow and shot him in the Heel with an Arrow, of which Wound he died: And Hyginus tells us, that Apollo, to give him this Wound, assumed the shape of Paris. ACHOR, otherwise call'd Myagris or Myodes, the God of Flies, to whom the Greeks and Cyre∣nians sacrific'd, to drive away the Flies which annoy'd them, and infected their Country. S. Gregory Nazianzen in his first Invective against Julian, calls him Accaron, because the Accaro∣nites, a People of Judea, made an Idol of him, whom they call'd Beelzebuth, i. e. the God of Flies. Pliny relates, that Hercules had been ve∣ry much annoy'd by these Insects at Olympia, but after he had sacrific'd to Jupiter, under the Name of , or, the Fly-chasing God, they flew all away over the River Alphaeus, and ne∣ver annoy'd him more, nor any of those who sacrific'd to him in the Temples built for him after he was plac'd among the number of the Gods: For Solinus tells us, that no Flies nor Dogs could ever enter into a Chappel built to Hercules at Rome by Octavius Herennius. ACIDALIA, an Epithet given to Venus, the Goddess of Love, because she was the cause of great Uneasiness and Vexation to those who were in Love. Some think that she was also so call'd from a Fountain of that Name, where∣in the Three Graces, which always attended her, us'd to bath themselves. ACILIA, the Name of a very illustrious Roman Family, from which was descended the generous Consul Acilius Glabrio, to whom the People of Rome erected a Statue cover'd with Leaves of Gold, for having defeated the Army of Antiochus in the narrow passage of Tempe, and made a great slaughter of the Asiaticks. This Consul erected a Statue on horseback of pure Gold, which he plac'd in the Temple of Piety, and consecrated to the Memory of his Father, whose Effigies it was. This was the first Sta∣tue of that precious Metal that was ever seen at Rome, from the time of its first foundation. ACINACES, a kind of Cutlass or Scimetre us'd among the Persians. ACNUA, a sort of Measure for Land, among the antient Measures call'd otherwise Actus qua∣dratus, which was a Square, whereof each side was 26 foot long, which contain'd, as Authors tell us, the moiety of a Jugerum, or, of the Acre of the Latines. Vossius says, that it is plainly read Acnua in the Manuscripts, yet he would have it read Acna, to give credit to his own Etymology, which derives it from the word  or , which is a Measure of twelve feet, as he himself tells us; he adds afterwards, that  signifi'd also a Measure of 26 feet, but this he does not prove. ACONITUM, Wolvesbane, an Herb very venomous, whereof there are many kinds; 'tis said that its Name comes from Acona, a City of Bithynia, round about which it grows in great abundance. The Poets feign, that this Herb sprung up from the Froth which the Dog Cerberus cast forth when Hercules drag'd him by force out of Hell; for which reason, great quan∣tities of it are found near to Heraclea of Pontus, where is the Cavern by which Hercules descend∣ed thither. 'Tis said, that all its Venom is in its Root; for there is no hurt in its Leaves or Fruit. The Symptoms of this Poyson are these,
It makes the Eyes water very much, oppresses the Stomach, causes frequent breaking of wind backwards. Nevertheless the Antients us'd it as a Medicin against the biting of a Scorpion, the burning heat whereof, the bare touch of Wolvesbane did presently extinguish. ACONTIUS, a young Man of the Isle of Cea, who coming one day to Delos to the Sacri∣fice of Diana, fell in love with the fair Cydippe; but fearing a Denyal, if he should desire her in Marriage, upon the account of the inequali∣ty of his Birth and Fortune, he contriv'd this Stratagem to win her; he wrote these two Versues upon an Apple, Juro tibi sanè per mystica sacra Dianae, Me tibi venturam comitem sponsamque futuram. and then threw the Apple at the Feet of Cydippe, who taking it up, read these Verses, and bound herself to the Oath which was upon it. Where∣upon every time she had a mind to marry, she was presently taken dangerously sick, which she interpreted to be a just Punishment for the Violation of her Faith, and therefore to appease Diana, she married Acontius. ACRATES, the Genius or Demon of the Bacchantes, whose Mouth only was represented in Figures, as Pausanias tell us. ACRISIUS, the last King of the Argives, and the Brother of Praetus, to whom he succeed∣ed, according to Eusebius. He understanding by the Oracle that he was to be kill'd by a Son of his Daughter Danae, shut her up in a Tower of Brass, to preserve himself from this Mischief. But Jupiter falling in love with this unfortunate Princess, found a way to come at her; for he changing himself into a shower of Gold, unaccountably pass'd through the Tiles of the House, and she was found with child of a Son, who was call'd Perseus. Acri∣sius being inform'd of this, caus'd his Daughter, with her Child, to be shut up in a Chest, and commanded them both to be cast into the Sea: The Chest swimming for some time upon the Water, was at last thrown up upon the Isle of Sriphe, where Polydectes reign'd, who receiv'd them graciously, and fell in love with Danae: But she refusing to agree to his love, and yield herself up to his passion, he resolv'd at last to force her; and the better to cover his Design, he remov'd her Son Perseus a great way off, and sent him to the Garganes, with an Order to bring back to him the Head of Medusa, that he might make a Present of it to his Mistress Hip∣podamia, hoping that Perseus would be kill'd in this Enterprize, and then he should be in a con∣dition to prevail with his Mother to condescend to his Desires. But things fell out quite other∣wise than he imagin'd; for Perseus by good luck return'd safe from this Expedition, brought back the Head of Medusa, and was married in his Voyage to Andromeda, whom he deliver'd from the Sea-Monster, which was just ready to devour her. He returning to Argos with his new-married Spouse, to present her before Acri∣sius, his Grandfather, found him celebrating Funeral-Games; whereupon he having a mind to exercise himself with throwing a Bar of Iron, it happen'd unluckily that the Bar hit against Acrisius's his Leg, and gave him a Wound, whereof he died in some days after; and thus the Oracle was fulfill'd. ACROBATES, a sort of Dancers upon the Rope. We learn from Boulanger, in his Trea∣tise of Dancers on the Rope, that there were Four sorts of 'em: The First were those who vaulted about a Rope, as a Wheel turns about its Axeltree, and hang'd upon it by the Feet or the Neck. Nicephorus Gregora says, that in his time these Dancers vaulting about a Rope were to be seen at Constantinople. The Second sort of them were those who flew from a high place down to the ground upon a Rope, which sup∣ported their Breast, their Arms and Legs be∣ing extended. Of these Manilius Nicetas, and Vopiscus speak in the Life of Carinus. The Third sort were those who are mention'd by the same Manilius, who run upon a sloping Rope, or came down it, from a higher to a lower place. The Fourth sort were those who not only walk'd upon a distended Rope, but jump'd high, and cut Capers upon it as a Dancer would do upon the ground at the sound of a Flute: And of this kind Symposius is to be understood. ACROSTOLIUM, a kind of Ornament for a Ship, made in the form of a Hook, which was plac'd at the end of the Stem or Stern: To these may be compar'd those polish'd and sharp pieces of Iron resembling the Neck of a Duck, which the Venetians use at the Stem of their Gondoles. It may also be that Ornament of a Stern, which they call'd Anserculus, a little Goose, whereof Bayfius gives us the Figure like the Head of a Goose. ACROTERIA, , the extremities of any thing: This word in Greek signifies generally any extreme part; such as are in Ani∣mals, the Nose, the Ears, and the Fingers; and in Buildings, the Turrets or Battlements of Houses, and the little Pedestals on which Statues were plac'd, and which were scituate at the middle, and the two Extremities of a Frontispiece, or the Statues of Earth or Copper, which were plac'd on the top of Temples to adorn 'em; in Ships, this word signifies the Beaks, which are call'd Rostra; they are also Promontories, or high places which are seen afar off at Sea. ACTA, which has in the Genitive Actae. Cicero and Virgil use this word, speaking of a Meadow pleasant for its greenness; and Vossius
thinks that it must only be us'd in speaking of Sicily, as these two Authors did. ACTA PUBLICA, the Records or publick Registers, wherein were written what concern'd publick Affairs, to preserve the Memory of 'em. ACTA DIURNA, a Diurnal, wherein is set down what passes every day. ACTA CONSISTORII, the Edicts, the De∣clarations of the Council of State of the Empe∣rors, which were express'd in these Terms; IMPERAT. DIOCLESIANUS ET MAXI∣MIANUS A. A. IN CONSISTORIO DIXERUNT; DECURIONUM FILII NON DEBENT BESTIIS OBJICI. The August Emperors Dioclesian and Maximian, in Council declar'd; That the Children of the Decurions ought not to be expos'd to wild Beasts in the Amphitheatre. The Senate and Soldiers swore often, either through Flattery or by Compulsion upon the Edicts of the Emperors. Tacitus tells us, that Nero raz'd the Name of Apidius Meru'a out of the Register of the Senators, because he would not swear upon the Acts of the Emperor Au∣gustus. ACTEIUS, one of the six envious and ma∣lign Demons, whom the Greeks call Telchines, who bewitch Men out of their sense, and of whom fabulous Antiquity would make us be∣lieve, that they sprinkle the Earth with the in∣fernal Stygian Water, from whence arose Pe∣stilence, Famin, and other publick Calamities. ACTAEON, the Son of Aristeus, and Autonoe, the Daughter of Cadmus, who was brought up in the School of Chiron the Centaur. He was a great lover of Hunting, and continually fol∣low'd this Sport One day as he was pursuing a Hart, he spy'd Diana bathing her self with her Nymphs: But the Goddess enrag'd to be seen in that condition, threw Water upon him, which chang'd him into a Hart, and afterwards he was torn in pieces by his own Dogs. Pausanias mentions a Fountain of Acteon near Megara, on the side whereof the Hunter was wont often to repose himself when he was tyred with the Chase; and there it was that he saw Diana ba∣thing her self. Plutarch mentions another Acteon, the Son of Mclistus, a Corinthian, who was carryed away by force, and whom his Friends tore in pieces while they endeavour'd to recover him out of the hands of his Kidnappers. ACTIACA VICTORIA, the Actiat Victory which Augustus obtain'd over Mark Antony near the Promontory and City of Actium. This Prince to perpetuate the Memory of that Vi∣ctory to Posterity, built the City Nicopolis, i. e. the City of Victory; he adorn'd with great Magnificence the old Temple of Apollo, where∣in he dedicated the Beaks or Rostra of the Ene∣mies Ships; he increas'd also the Pomp of the solemn Games, call'd Ludi Actiaci, which were celebrated every fifth Year in Honor of this God, after the manner of the Olympic Games: Stephans would have 'em observ'd every Third Year, and thinks they consisted of a Race by Sea and Land, and Wrestling. ACTIUM, a City and Promontory of Epirus, a place famous for the Defeat of Antony and all the Forces of the East, by Caesar-Augustus, who built there a new City, call'd Nicopolis, i. e. the City of Victory. ACTIO, (in the Law) an Action in a Court of Justice, a Process entred either by the Prosecutor or the Defendant. There were many Formali∣ties observ'd in judicial Actions that were com∣menc'd against any Person: First, A Petition must be presented to the Judg, to have leave to bring the Person before him: The Judg an∣swer'd this Petition by writing at the bottom of it, Actionem do, I give leave to bring him: On the contrary, he wrote Actionem non do, when he deny'd the Petition. All Actions, especially Civil and Pecuniary, commenc'd af∣ter the Petition was presented, by a Citation or summoning the Party, which is call'd in Law Vocatio in jus, and in jus vocare. This was an∣tiently done vivâ vote by the Party himself, who meeting him against whom he intended to bring his Action, declared his Intention to him, and commanded him immediately to go before a Magistrate and make his Defence: if he would not go willingly, he might force and drag him along against his will, unless he gave Security to appear at a day agreed upon: but if he fail'd to appear at the day appointed, then the Plaintiff, whensoever he met him, might take him along with him by force, calling any By-standers to bear witness, by asking them, Vis antestari, who presently turn'd their Ear towards him, in token of their Consent to do it. This Horace expresses in these Verses in his Satyr against the Impertinent, lib. 1. Sa∣tyr. 9. —Casu venit obvius illi Adversarius. Et quò tu, turpissimè? magnâ Exclamat voce: Et licet antestari. Ego verò Oppone auriculam: rapit in jus; clamer utrin{que}. By chance, says Horace, he meets his Adversary, and crys to him with a loud voice, Whither art thou flying, thou infamous Fellow? and then addressing himself to me, he prays me to bear witness, where∣upon I turn my Ear to him; and then he seizes upon the Party, and drags him before a Court of Justice, with a great Noise on both sides. The Verses pre∣ceding these discover that he had fail'd to ap∣pear at the day and hour appointed by the Ci∣tation. But because this kind of Proceeding was attended with some sort of Outrage and Violence, therefore Persons of Honour who
were advanced to any Dignity, were not thus to be summoned into Court without desiring express leave of the Magistrate by a Petition, as we have remarked before. Afterwards this manner of proceeding was changed, and that other introduced of summoning the Party by a Sergeant and a Writ, per Libellum, which they call in Law Libellum Conventionis, a Writ of Sum∣mons. This Writ was to contain the Preten∣sions of the Prosecutor, that the other Party being made acquainted with them, might ei∣ther resolve to satisfie them, or else come pre∣par'd to defend himself. And so the Summons was to express the Cause of Action, i. e. to contain the Complaint of the Prosecutor, which they called edere Actionem. ACTOR (upon the Theatre) an Actor; one who acts a Part, and represents some Per∣son in a Tragedy or Comedy. In former times many Regulations were made about their Salary, and for punishing those who indulg'd themselves in too great a Liberty. The chief of them, as Tacitus says, were these, That a Senator could not visit them at their Houses, nor a Roman Knight walk with them in the Street; That they could not act but upon a publick Theatre. The Senate had a mind to give the Praetor a Power of chastising the Actors with Rods: But Haterius Agrippa, the Tribune of the People, oppos'd it, and by his Opposition gain'd the point; because Augustus had declar'd the Actors exempt from whipping, and Tibarius would not violate his Orders. ACTOR, (in the Law) He who has an Action against another, he who prosecutes an∣other in a Court of Judicature. ACTOR, the Name of one of Hercules's Companions in the War against the Amazons. He was married to the Nymph Aegina, the Mistress of Jupiter, by whom he had Menetius, who was the Father of Patroclus, who from thence was call'd Actorides. ACTUARIOLUM and ACTUARIUM NAVIGIUM, a Brigantine, a little Vessel at Sea, very light for sailing or rowing. ACTUARIUS, a Notary or Scribe, who in former times wrote very swiftly at the Bar the Pleadings of the Advocates, and for that end used Cyphers, or single Letters, or certain Abbreviations to signifie a whole word. ACTUARII PALI, Stakes, which were set up in a piece of Ground of twenty six feet, which was the Length of one of the sides of the Measure for Land, which the Latins call'd Actus quadratus. ACTUMEST (a Phrase antiently used in the Comick Poets) 'Tis done, there is no Re∣medy. ACTUMNE AGAS, 'Tis done withal, it cannot be helpt. ACTUM AGIS, 'Tis lost labour, this is to begin a thing after 'tis done withal. ACTUS, a piece of Ground of 120 feet. There were three sorts of this Measure; Actus minimus, the least, which contained 120 feet in Length, and four only in Breadth; the se∣cond which they call Actus quadratus, a Square, had 120 feet every way; and the third was a double Square, being 240 feet long, and 120 broad, which made an Acre of Ground, or as much as a Yoke of Oxen could plough in a day. ACTUS, an Act; the name of certain Divisions which are made in Dramatic Poems, to give some Respite to the Actors and Specta∣tors. Comedies sometimes consisted of three Acts, but generally of five. ADAD, the Worship which was given to Adad, i. e. to the Sun, was easily transfer'd to Adad the King of Syria, and the Founder of many Temples dedicated to the Sun in the City of Damas, as Josephus tells us. Some think that the Prophet Isaiah speaks of this Worship of the Sun under the name of Achad: for the Hebrew word Achad is the same with the Chaldee Adad, and it signifies unicus, i. e. One only, which agrees to the Sun. ADDICERE, (a Term of the Roman Law) to adjudge a piece of Land, or an Inhe∣ritance to any person. Licetur Aebutius, deter∣rentur emptores partim gratiâ, partim pretio, fun∣dus addicitur Aebutio; Aebutius bid money, the Buyers were hindred by Favour and Money, where∣upon the Land was adjudg'd to Aebutius for the Price he had offer'd. The Custom was then, as it is at this day, not to adjudge a piece of Land to any Person upon the first Offers that are made, but to prescribe a certain time for ad∣mitting Buyers to come in, which being ex∣pir'd, the thing was adjudg'd for the Price that was offer'd. And upon this account 'tis com∣monly said at this day, Tis adjudg'd, saving the eighth or fifteenth day, i. e. provided that in eight or fifteen days no more is offer'd. Ille fundus centum{que} esto tibi emptus, si quis intra Calendas Janu∣arias proximas meliorem conditionem non fecerit, quo res à domino abeat; This Land shall be yours for an hundred Crowns, provided another do not give more for it before the first day of January. ADDICERE, (an Augural Term) to approve, to authorize an Enterprize. After the Augurs had consulted the Will of the Gods by the Flying of Birds, if the Signs were fa∣vourable, they answer'd thus, Id addicunt aves, the Gods favour this Enterprize. Cùm omnium Sacellorum exaugurationes admitterent aves, in Ter∣mini fano non addixere; The Birds having approv'd the Prophanation of all the other Temples, did not approve of this Prophanation in the Chappel of the God Terminus.
ADDICTIO, a Judgment for deliver∣ing the Goods of the Debtor into the hands of his Creditor, when he had not satisfied him according to the Sentence of the Praetor, who condemn'd him to pay the Debt: for then the Judg, by a second Sentence, deliver'd over him and all his Family into the hands of his Creditor. ADEONA, an antient Deity, worship'd by the Romans, as St. Austin tells us, she enabled People to walk. ADIGERE ARBITRUM, or Arbitrium, or ad Arbitrum, and ad Arbitrium, (Forms of Speech which were used by the antient Lawyers) to constrain, to force, to oblige one to submit to Arbitrators. They used also to say, Adigere aliquem in sua verba per jusjurandum, to oblige a Person to take his Oath. ADJICIALIS COENA and ADJICIALES EPULAE, a solemn Banquet or Feast which the Romans made at the Consecration of their Pontifices, or on a Day of Publick Rejoicing. ADDIR, Pater Magnificus, this Word is often attributed to God: even the Philistines themselves gave him this Name for smiting Egypt with many Plagues. ADMETUS, a King of Thessaly, who en∣tertain'd Apollo, when he was driven out of Heaven by Jupiter, to take care of his Flocks. In acknowledgment of this Favour, he assisted Admetus in his Amours with Alcestis, Daughter to King Pelias, who resolv'd never to bestow her in marriage but to one who should have a Chariot drawn by two disproportion'd Animals. Apollo therefore furnish'd him with a Lyon and a Bear to draw the Chariot wherein he was to carry off Alcestis. This God obtained also of the Parcae, or three fatal Sisters, that he should die by Proxy, and so, when he fell dange∣rously ill, his Wife died in his stead. But Hercules, going down to Hell, brought her back again, and restor'd her to her Husband: or Proserpina her self restor'd her to Life again, being mov'd by the Complaints of Admetus for losing her. ADMISSIVAE AVES, Birds of a happy Omen, which approv'd of an Enterprize: on the contrary, they were called Arculae Aves, when they discouraged and disapprov'd it. ADOD, Philo Biblos, explaining the Theo∣logy of Sanchoniathin, says, that Adod is the King of Gods, . The Kings of Syria assum'd this Name: for Josephus recites the words of Nicolas of Damascus the Hi∣storian, when he mentions Adad King of Syria and Damascus. Josephus also says, that Adad King of Syria, and Hazael his Son, received Divine Honours for adorning the City of Da∣mascus with magnificent Temples. See Adad. ADOLERE and ADOLERE THURA (a Term belonging to Sacrifices) to burn In∣cense upon the Altars of the Gods, to pay them Divine Honours. ADOLESCENS, and ADULESCENS, a young Man, who is not yet past the age of grow∣ing. They commonly reckon'd this Age from twelve years to twenty five for Boys, and to twenty one for Girls. But if we consider the Use of this word among the Antients, we shall find that they used indifferently the word Ado∣lescens and Juvenis, for such as were not yet forty five years old. Cicero lib. 2. ep. 2. calls Curio adolescens, who was more than thirty years old. In lib. 2. de Oratore, he says, that there were some Works of Lucius Crassus which he wrote in his Youth, & ea ipsa adolescentem scri∣pta reliquisse. Sallust calls Caesar adolescentulum, when he obtained the Pontificate, and he was then at least thirty five years of age. Valerius Maximums calls Scipio Aemilianus admodum adolescen∣tem, who was more than thirty four years old. And lastly, Cicero calls Brutus and Cassius ado∣lescentes, in the year of their Praetorship, i. e. in the fortieth year of their age. All which Pas∣sages plainly prove, that it was not only in Writing that this word was used for one so far advanced in years. ADONIS, the Fair Adonis, born of the in∣cestuous Conjunction of Cinarus King of Cyprus and his own Daughter Myrrha. Venus and Pro∣serpina fell both in love with Adonis, and the former descended often upon Mount Libanus to see him, but Proserpina transported him into Hell: but afterwards, being mov'd by the Tears of Venus, she gave him to her for one half of the Year, and the other half he remain'd in Hell. The Worship of Adonis and Venus his Mother, says Macrobius, was very antient and famous among the Assyrians or Caldeans, who were the first Astrologers in the World, and from them it passed to the Phaenicians. Adonis is the Sun, who during the six superiour Signs of the Summer is with Venus, i. e. in that Hemi∣sphere of the Earth which we inhabit; and, during the other six inferiour Signs of the Winter, is with Proserpina, i. e. in the inferi∣our Hemisphere of the Earth which is inhabi∣ted by our Antipodes. These are the Physical Reasons of the Earth's alternative Sadness and Joy, according as the Sun retires from it in Winter, as if it fell into the hands of Death or Proserpina; or approaches nearer to it during the Summer, as if Proserpina had restored it to Venus. When the Poets feign'd that a wild Boar gave Adonis his Deaths-wound, they design'd by that to represent the Rigor of the Winter. Ammianus Marcellinus says, that the Mysteries of Adonis represented the Corn, which is hid six months under ground, before the time of Harvest approaches; wherein he
does only transfer the Mysteries of the Sun to the Corn, which is a Symbol of it. St. Cyril, Archbishop of Alexandria, relates at large, in his Commentaries upon Isaiah, the History or Fable of the Greek Poets about Adonis; That Ginarus being passionately enamour'd with the Charms of his Daughter Myrrha, had a Son by her of ex∣traordinary Beauty, called Adonis, with whom the lascivious Venus fell in love; but Mars, being jealous of her, transformed himself into a Boar, and kill'd Adonis at a Hunting Chaco. Whereupon Ve∣nus descended into Hell to fetch him back again, but Proserpina would not release him: Yet at last, being mov'd with Compassion for her Tears, they a∣greed together, that each of them should enjoy him alternatively for one half of the Year. This is the occasion of the Grief and Joy that appear at the Fe∣stivals of Adonis. This Father adds, That it was this sort of Uncleanness which the Jews imita∣ted, of which Ezekiel speaks when he says, the Women lamented Thammus, which is Adonis, Expouitur autem Thammus, Adonis; And that the Letters and Messengers mentioned by Isaiah, are nothing else but the Letters and Messengers which the Cities of Egypt sent interchangeably to one another, to give notice that Adonis was found again: Quòd ubi illae faminae Veneris amicae, una cum Epistols vaganisse, perinde ac si repertus fuisset à Venere Adonis, luctum ponebant. ADONIA SACRA, the Mysteries and Sacrifices of Adonis, which were celebrated every year at Byblis, in the great Temple of Venus: for in this Country, says Lucian, in his Dea Syria, he was kill'd by a Boar, and in me∣mory of this Misfortune every year a publick Mourning was observed, at which the People beat themselves, and lamented, (and celebrate his Funerals as if he had been dead, tho on the next day his Resurrection was solemnized, because, they say he flew into Heaven,) they shave their Heads as the Egyptians do at the death of their Ox Apis. The Women, who will not be shav'd, are forc'd to prostitute themselves a whole day to Strangers, and the Money they get by that Debauch is consecrated to the Goddess. There is also another won∣derful thing in this Country, a River, which goes by the Name of Adonis and descends from Libanus into the Sea, changes its colour at cer∣tain times, and dyes the Sea as red as Blood; which is look'd upon as a Miracle, this being the time which is dedicated to the Celebration of the Mysteries of Adonis, because 'tis believ'd that then he was wounded in the Forest of Li∣bamus. ADOPTARE, to Adopt, to take a Stran∣ger, and incorporate him into your Family, to take him for your Son, to design him for your Heir. He who was adopted was enter'd under the Paternal Power of the Adopter, and was taken from that of his own Father. 'Twas a Custom to put the Children who were adopted under a Mantle or Gown, says Furetiere in his Dictionary, as if they would thereby represent that they were the proper Children of those who had adopted them. And from thence came the Custom of putting Natural Children under an Umbrella when they are legitimated at a Marriage. ADOPTIO, Adoption, an act by which any one is adopted. The Custom of Adopting was very common among the Romans, yet it was not practis'd, but for certain Causes express'd in the Laws, and with certain Formalities usual in such Cases. He that would adopt any Per∣son, was to have no Children of his own, or to be past the Age of getting any. In the Infan∣cy of the Republick he was to address himself to the Pontifices, that he might have leave ac∣cording to Law. This Right of the High-Priests lasted but a little while, and after that application made to the People to obtain it, in the presence of his Father who was to be adopt∣ed, to whom the Question was put, Whether he would abandon his Son, together with the full extent of his paternal Authority, and sur∣render up the power of Life and Death over him, which Question was call'd Adrogatio. The usual Form upon such occasions was this; Veli∣tis jubeatis, uti L. Valerius Licio Titio tam lege ju∣reque filius sibi siet, quam si ex eo patre matreque familiar ejus natus esset, utique ei vitae necisque in eum potestas siet uti pariundo filio est. Hoc ita, ut dixi, ita vos, quirites rego. In the last Age of the Republick, when it was just expiring, A∣doptions were made by the Sovereign Autho∣rity of the Emperors, who granted that Privi∣lege even to Women who had no Children, by their Letters of Concession, the words where∣of were these; Quoniam in solatium amissorum tuo∣rum filiorum cupis privignum tuum vicem legitimae so∣bolis obtiuere, annuimus votis tuis, & eum perinde atque ex te progenitum ad vicem naturalis legitimi∣que filii habere permittimus, Imper. Dioclesianus & Maximianus A. A. Since, for your comfort, under the Loss of your Children, you desire to adopt your Son-in-Law, we grant your Request, and permit you to take him for your natural and lawful Son. Adoptions also were practis'd in their last Wills, either as for Name or Goods; In imâ cerâ C. Octavium etiam in fa∣miliam nomenque adoptavit; He adopted into his Family, and to bear his Name C. Octavius in the last page of his Will.Titus Livius, tells us, that Caecilius adopted Atticus when he was dying by his last Will, Gaecilius moriens testamento Atticum adoptavit. Those who were adopted assum'd the Name and Sir-Name of him who adopted them, and to de∣note their Family and Birth, they added only
at the end the Name of the Family from which they were descended; or the Sirname of their private Family, with this difference nevertheless, says Lipsius, that if they us'd this Sirname, they made an Adjective of it: As for instance, M. Junius Brutus being adopted by Q. Servilius Caepio Agalo, he assum'd all these Names, and retain'd only the Sirname of his own Family, calling himself Q. Servilius Caepio Agalo Brutus. Octavius, on the contrary, retain'd the Name of his House, and chang'd it into an Adjective, calling himself C. Julius Caesar Octavianus, which yet did not hinder but they might retain the Sirname which they had assum'd, as Atticus did, who being adopted by Q. Caecilius, was Sir∣nam'd Q. Caecilius Pomponianus Atticus, or acquire a new one by their brave Exploits, as Octavius did, who was afterwards sirnam'd Augustus. 'Tis with reference to this Rule of Adoption, that we must understand what Suetonius says of Tiberius, That be being adopted by M. Gallius, a Senator, took possession of his Goods, but would not assume his Name, because he was a contrary Party to Augustus. Tacitus, Lib. XV. Cap. 8. of his Annals, tells us of the feign'd Adoptions which were condemn'd by the Se∣nate: A pernicious Custom, says he, was intro∣duc'd, of making many feign'd Adoptions, when the time drew near of chusing Magistrates, and dividing the Provinces among them by Lot; for when they had obtain'd their Offices and Employments, they emanci∣pated those whom they had adopted: Whereupon the Persons aggriev'd came and made their complaint to the Senate, alledging the Law of Nature, and the trouble of Education against these short and fraudu∣lent Adoptions: And therefore it was ordain'd, That for the future no regard should be had to these Adop∣tions, either in Offices or in Successions to an Inheritance. ADOR, or ADUS, a kind of Corn which was usually offer'd to the Gods at their Sacrifi∣ces. The word comes from , arista, chang∣ing the  into , as from , comes Deus; or from the word edo, whence it came to pass, that they said formerly Edor for Ador, according to Festus, or lastly from aduro, because it was roasted. ADOREA, the Goods of this World, in Plau∣tus and Varro; Glory, Honour, and Riches, in So∣linus and Apuleius; a Present which was made to Soldiers when they were victorious, according to Pliny; and Victory it self and Triumph, ac∣cording to this Verse of Horace, Lib. 4. Od. 4. Ille dies qui primus alma risit Adorea. a Day celebrated upon the account of the first Victory obtain'd by the Romans over Hannibal. ADORARE, to adore; a kind of Wor∣ship which the Romans gave to their Deities, by putting their Hand to their Mouth and kis∣sing it, as we learn from Pliny, Adorare, manum ad os admovere. The Romans ador'd their Gods both standing and kneeling, with their Heads cover'd; and after they had turn'd to the right hand and gone round about their Statues and Altars, they prostrated themselves before them, and lifted up their Hand to their Mouth and kiss'd it. Saturn was the only God whom they ador'd with an uncover'd Head, that being a Custom which they learned from the Greeks; which gave occasion to Festus to say, Lucem fa∣cere Saturno sacrificantes, i. e. capita detegere, to uncover the Head when they sacrifice to him. And we are inform'd by Apuleius, in his Saturna∣lia, that it was accounted a strange Custom to sacrifice to this God with a bare Head, Hinc est quod ex instituto peregrino, huic deo sacrum aperto capite faciunt: For 'tis certain that the Romans did never sacrifice to their Gods, but with their Head cover'd, and their Face veil'd, for fear lest in this principal Action of Religion, they should either be diverted by the sight of an E∣nemy, or distracted by some Objects, or inter∣rupted by some sinister Omen. This we learn from Virgil, Lib. 3. Aeneid. V. 403. For when your Ships are come into the Harbour, says the Sibyl to him, and you have erected Altars by the River side to sacrifice to the Gods, cover your Head and your Face with a purple Veil, for fear lest in the time of sa∣crificing, you should be interrupted by the the presence of some Enemy: Remember al∣ways to adore the Gods after this manner, and command your Posterity to observe the same way. Quin ubi transmissae steterint trans aequora classes, Et positis aris jam vota in littore solves; Purpureo velare comas adopertus amictu; Ne qua inter sanctos ignes in honore Deorum. Hostilis facies occurrat, & omnia turbet. Hunc socii morem sacrorum, hunc ipse teneto, Hac vestri maneant in religione nepotes. Aurelius Victor also tells us the same in his A∣bridgment of the Roman History, where speak∣ing of Aeneas, he relates, That this Trojan Prince sacrificing by the Sea-side, perceiv'd the Navy of the Grecians approaching, wherein was Ulysses, and fearing lest the sight of his Enemy should disturb him in this Action, he cover'd his Face, and so ended his Sacrifice, without one minutes interruption. In the Second place, The Romans turn'd to the Right Hand round about the Statues of their Gods, and their Altars. Plautus, in his Curculio, makes Phoedromus say, Quo me vertam nescio? I know not to which side to turn me. Palimirus answer'd him, playing upon the word, Si deos salutas, dextro versum censeo, If you mean to adore the Gods, I advise you to turn to the Right;alluding to the Custom of the Romans, of turning to the Right when they worship their Gods. Pliny confirms the
same thing; When we adore the Gods, says he, we carry our Hand to our Mouth, and we turn round about the Altar, In adorando dextram ad osculum referimus, totumque corpus cir∣cumagimus. In the following Times they pro∣strated themselves before their Gods, which is the most humble manner of adoring them. Titus Livius, speaking of the Carthaginian Am∣bassadors, tells us, That when they arriv'd at the Roman Camp, and came into the General's Tent, they prostrated themselves at his Feet, in the posture of those who adore the Gods, More adorantium procubuerunt; from whence come these Latin Phrases, Advolvi aris, Pro∣cumbere ad aras, To prostrate themselves at the feet of the Altars.The proud and haughty Emperors exacted the like Adorations from those who came to make their Reve∣rence to them; but the wise and modest Em∣perors rejected this kind of Adoration, as did the Emperor Alexander, by the relation of Lampridius as well as Maximianus, who said, God forbid that any one should adore me, by prostrating himself before me; Dii pro∣hibeant ut quisquam ingenuorum pedibus meis oscu∣lum figat. ADORATI IMBRES, Sen. Distribu∣tions, The Largesses which the Emperor gave to the People of Rome, which descended like a Shower of Gold, for which they returned Thanks, by Adoration and very submissive bowing before them. ADRIANUS, surnam'd Elius. Adrian whom Trajan adopted, and who was the Son of Elius Adrian his Cousin-German. At his ac∣cession to the Empire, being willing to gain the good Will of the Senate, took a solemn Oath, That he would not punish any of that Body, but by a Sentence of their own. He re∣mieted all the Arrears of Taxes and Revenues which were due from private Persons either to himself or the publick Treasury of the Empire. He burnt publickly the Bonds of some private Men to the value of Two Millions of Gold. He persecuted the Christians outragiously, un∣til Quadratus and Aristides, two Christian Phi∣losophers, allay'd the Fierceness of his Rage, by their Apologies written in Favour of the Christians, which prevail'd so far with him, that he wrote to the Governours, forbidding them to punish the Christians for their Reli∣gion. The Jews, in his time, shook off the Yoak of the Romans, under the Conduct of a notable Impostor, call'd Barchochebas, i. e. the Son of a Star, who call'd himself the Star of Jacob, foretold in the Scriptures, who was to deliver their Nation. The Cause of this Re∣volt was the Temple of Jupiter, which Adrian had caus'd to be built overagainst the Ruins of the Temple of Jerusalem. Adrian having no∣tice of it, sent some Troops to Rufus the Go∣vernour of Syria, where with he defeated the Rebels in many Battels: Those who remain'd after the Defeat, were sold as Slaves at a very mean rate, and were never suffer'd to return again to Jerusalem, whose Name Adrian chang'd, and call'd it Aelia Capitolina. He caus'd also, says Eusebius, to be plac'd in bas relief, upon the Gate of Bethlehem, the Figure of a Swine, which was an Animal that was most abhorr'd by that Nation, either to signifie the Impurity of this People, or to denote that they were now subject to the Yoak of the Romans, who had a Swine for one of their military Signs; or lastly, to shew the Contempt he had for their Religion. The Emperor being not yet satisfied with this mark of Slavery, built also a Temple in Honour of Venus on Mount Calvary, and another to Jupiter in the place from whence our Saviour ascended, and a Third to Adonis in Bethlehem, where the Son of God was born, which continu'd there until the time of the Emperor Constantine. Adrian was seiz'd with a Bloody-Flux, whereof he dyed with intolera∣ble Pain, after he had reign'd Twenty Years and Eleven Months. He was a Prince endow'd with excellent Qualities both of Mind and Bo∣dy; he affected much the Reputation of being learned, and Writing well. The Books of his Life which he publish'd under the Name of Phlegon his freed Man, do plainly prove this. Photius says, that he had seen Declamations of his making, whose style was easie and agreea∣ble. A little before he gave up the Ghost, he compos'd some Verses, wherein he address'd himself to his Soul, and speaks of its Departure: He wrote also a long Letter against the Physi∣cians, whom he accuses of having hasten'd his Death. By the knowledg he had of Astrology, he has left us a Journal of all things which were to happen unto him, being besides mightily ad∣dicted to the Superstitions of Magick. The Se∣nate were upon the point of abrogating all that he had done, and hindering him to be rank'd among the Gods; but Antoninus, his Successor, prevented it, and built him a Temple at Puteoli, founded a College of Priests to sacrifice to him, and appointed Games to be observ'd every Fifth Year in Honour of him. ADROGATIO, and ADROGARE, (Terms of the Roman Law) Interrogation, a De∣mand made in the presence of the People for Adoptions. It was ask'd of the Father of him who was to be adopted, Whether he consented that his Son should pass under the Power of another to be his Son, and of him who was to adopt him? Whether he consented to do it? An vellet eum quem adoptaturus esset, justum sibi fi∣lium esse? And of the Son, An id fieri pateretur? Whether he would submit to it? See Arroga∣tio and Arregare.
ADSERERE aliquem manu, To set one at liberty, To give him his liberty. It was one of the antient ways of granting liberty to Slaves, To take him by the hand and say, Hunc manu assero, or Liberali causâ manu assere, & as∣sero manu in libertatem, I declare him free. ADTESTATA fulgura, Redoubled Thunder, which seems by the redoubling of the noise, to confirm the good or bad Presages that were made from it. ADVELITATIO, (in a Fight) a Skir∣mish, the action of shooting off an Arrow, or throwing a Javelin to begin a Battel. ADVENTITIA bona, Windfals, Goods that come to us besides our expectation, Fructus praediorum adventitii, Fines, Leases, or two Fifths of an Estate paid by the Tenants. ADVERSARIA, Papers, or Table-Books, in which a thing was hastily set down for a help to the Memory, which was afterwards to be written fairly. A Memorandum, or Stone-Book, a Paper-Journal. This word was deriv'd from adverto, because things are noted down in it, to put us in mind of 'em; or rather, ab adversa pagina, wherein were written the Dis∣bursments, as the Receipts were written on the backside. But if the Disbursments and Re∣ceipts were found to be equal, this was call'd Utramque paginam facere, or perjure among the Romans; the contrary was call'd Reliquari, to be behind-hand. ADULTERIUM, the Crime of Adul∣tery, which was always detested by the gene∣rality of Mankind, and even by those People that were most barbarous. The Greeks, as well as the Romans, enacted severe Penalties against those who were guilty of it, as Horace informs us in his Book De Arte Poetica, v. 400. —fuit haec sapientia quondam Concubitu prohibere vago, dare jura maritis, Oppida moliri, leges incidere ligno, Ne quis fur esset, neu latro, ne quis adulter. Solon, the wise Law-giver of the Lacedemonians, would have a Woman taken in Adultery to be punish'd, by stripping her of all the Ornaments that belong to her Quality, by banishing her from all religious Assemblies, and from the So∣ciety of Ladies of Honour. The Thurians or∣dain'd, by an express Law, That the Persons who should be found guilty of this Vice, shou'd be personated upon the Theatre, that so they might be expos'd to publick Infamy. We have a famous Law among the Roman Laws, call'd the Lex Julia, which was made by Augustus, and not by Julius Caesar, as some have imagin'd, being deceiv'd by the word Julia; since 'tis evident, that Octavius, who was sur∣nam'd Augustus, having been adopted by the testament of his Great Uncle, was afterwards call'd Julius Caesar, according to the custom of Adoptions, to assume the Name of the Fami∣lies of the adoptive Fathers. This Law ena∣cted very severe Penalties against Adulterers, condemning 'em to be fin'd, and to be banish'd into some desart Island; to be scourg'd, and to be made Eunuchs, as we may perceive by these Verses of Horace, Sat. 2. lib. 1. His se praecipitem tecto dedit: ille flagellis Ad mortem caesus; fugiens hic decidit acrem Praedonum in turbam: dedit hic pro corpore num∣mos; Hunc perminxerunt Calenes: quin etiam illud Accidit, ut cuidam testes, caudamque salacem Demeteret ferrum.— One, finding himself surpriz'd in the Act of Adul∣tery, threw himself headlong from the House-top; another was whipt to death; another bought his Par∣don; the other was piss'd upon by the most bject Slaves; and lastly one was made an Eunuch. Lucian, in the Death of Peregrinus, tells us, That this Philosopher, being taken in Adulte∣ry, was forc'd to throw himself from the Top of a House down to the Ground, with a Ra∣dish at his back, after he had been severely beaten. The Laws declare Adulterers infa∣mous, and incapable of giving any Testimony in a Court of Judicature. The Athenian Laws allow'd the Father of the Woman, the Hus∣band, and even the Brother, to kill a Man ta∣ken in Adultery, with Impunity. Upon this Subject we have a very eloquent Discourse of Lysias, which is extant. Tacitus gives us an Ac∣count, that Aemilia Lepida, being accus'd of Adultery, was condemned to the Punishment of being interdicted Fire and Water, which was a kind of Banishment. The same Author informs us also, that Augustus called the Adul∣teries of Princesses trayterous and sacrilegious Crimes. Tacitus further tells us, that Adultery was very rare among the Germans, and when it was discover'd, it wasimmediately punish'd: The Husband shav'd his Wife, and having stript her in presence of his Neighbours, he drove her out of his House, beating her with a Stick, and thus led her about in Disgrace through the whole City. By the Law of God, a Woman taken in Adultery was to be ston'd to death, as we learn from holy Writ. The Roman Laws did not grant any one Liberty to kill an Adulterer, but only the Father of the Woman: But if the Husband was so far transpor∣ted by his just Resentment to revenge the Disgrace by killing him who had debauch'd his Wife, or even his Wife her self, the Fault was pardon'd, and neither he nor his Slaves were punish'd as Murtherers: Si Maritus in adulterio deprehensam uxorem ocidat, quia ignoscitur ei, non tantum mariti, sed etiam uxoris servos poena liberari, si justum dolorem exe∣quenti domino non resisterunt.
ADVOCATI, those who in antient times petitioned at Rome, that they might assist at Trials with their Presence and Authority, and provide the Expences of the Law for those who were to plead a Cause, which were called Ora∣tores. ADVOCATI, are also the Witnesses which are fetch'd to be Spectators of a thing. Ebutium cum armatis fuisse pluribus, cum Advoca∣tis perpaucis eo venisse Caecinnam, says Cicero, E∣butius came thither with many armed Men, and Caecinna appear'd with a small number of Wit∣nesses. ADVOCATUS, in Quintilian and Tacitus is an Advocate who pleads Causes, and defends the Widow and Fatherless. Let us see what Tacitus says of Advocates, in the eleventh Book of his Annals, Of all the Villanies which were committed with Impunity, there was none more common than that of Advocates, who betray their Clients for Money: for an illustrious Roman Knight named Samius, after he had given ten thousand Crowns to Suillius to undertake his Defence, run himself through the Body with a Sword, in his pre∣sence and at his House, after he understood that he had betray'd him: which occasioned all the Senators unanimously to demand, That the Lex Cynica might be restor'd, and that the Advocates for the future should be forbidden to take Presents or Money. But Suillius and others being concern'd in point of Interest, oppos'd this Advice; against whom Silius main∣tain'd it, and shew'd, by the Example of antient Orators, that they propos'd to themselves no other end of their Labour and Study but Honour and Reputation: He alleg'd, that we must not defile the most noble of all Professions with filthy Lucre, nor make a Trade of Eloquence; that, Fidelity was always to be suspected when it was bought; and that this would foment Discord and prolong Suits, if they were made gainful to Advocates, as Diseases are to Physicians; that they should set before themselves, for a Pattern, Asinius and Messala, and these later Orators Arruntius and Eseruinus, who arriv'd at the greatest Dignities without takiag any Fee for their Eloquence. This Advice was unanimously received, and the Senators were just ready to condemn all those of Bribery, who should be convicted of taking any Money, when Suil∣lius, Cossutianus, and others encompass'd the Em∣perour to bag his Pardon; and after he had signify'd the Grant of it, they prosecuted their Defence after this manner; They represented, that there was no Advocate so vain as to promise himself eternal Fame, as the Reward of his Labours; that they sought by this means only to maintain their Credit and their Family; and that it was the Interest of the Publick, that Men should have some to defend them; that, after all, their Eloquence had cost them something, and while they took pains about the Affairs of ano∣ther they could not mind their own; that no body proposed to himself an unprofitable Employment, and a fruitless Profession; that it was easy for Asinius and Messala, being enrich'd with the Spoils of the Civil Wars, and for Eseruinus and Arruntius, being Heirs to great Families, to make Honour and Glory the end of all their Pains and Study; but withal, there wanted not Examples of Orators who had received Benefit by their Studies, and that all the World knew that Curio and Claudius took great Sums for pleading; that, after all, there was no other Gate but this by which the People could enter into Dignities, and that by taking away the Reward of Learning, it would in time be wholly neglected. The Emperour being moved by these Reasons, altho they were rather profitable than honourable, permit∣ted Advocates to take Money in a Cause, as far as the Sum of two hundred and fifty Crowns; and or∣der'd that those who took more should be punish'd as guilty of Bribery. ADVOCARE, (in the Law) to pray any one of his Kinfolks and Friends to assist him in his Affairs with their Presence, Advice and Credit, and to furnish him with means to de∣fend himself. The Person thus requested waited upon the Judges at their Houses, to so∣licite them, and was present at the Tryal. ADYTUM, , a Secret Place, a Re∣tirement in the Temples of the Pagans, where Oracles were given, into which none but the Priests were admitted. It was the Sanctuary of the Temples, Isque adytis haec Tristia dicta reportat.Virgil. Aeneid. 11. v. 115. Ae, was in old times written and pronounc'd as A and E separately, and sometimes as A and D, and at this day is pronounc'd as a single E. It was also written AI, and afterwards Ae; Musai for Musae, Kaisar for Casar, Juliai for Julia, and in other the like Instances: from whence it came to pass that in some words the A re∣main'd alone; as Aqua ab Aequando, says St. Isi∣dore. It cannot be deny'd but upon the Cor∣ruption of the Language Ae was pronounced as a single E, whence an E was often put for an Ae, as Eger for Aeger, Etas for Aetas, Es alienum for Aes alienum: and sometimes, on the con∣trary, an Ae was put for a single E, as Aevoca∣tus for Evocatus, and the like, whereof the old Glosses are full: and for this Reason Bede in his Orthography puts Aequor among the Words that were written with a single E. AEACUS, the Son of Jupiter and Egina, the Daughter of the River Asopus. Jupiter fearing lest Juno should discover his Passion for Egina, transported her into the Isle of Delos, and had by her this Son called Aeacus: But Juno having discover'd the Intrigue, convey'd a Serpent into a Fountain of which the People drank, which so poisoned it, that all who drank of it died instantly. Aeacus seeing him∣self
depriv'd of Inhabitants, pray'd to Jupiter, that he would turn an heap of Ants into so many Men; which Jupiter granted him, and these Men were called Myrmidons, because  signifies an Ant; and the Isle was call'd Egina, as we learn from Pausanias in his Corin∣thiaca. Aeacus had for his Sons Peleus who was the Father of Achilles, and Telamon the Father of Ajax. Lucian, in his Dialogue Of Mourning, speaking of Hell, At first after your Descent, you meet with a Gate of Adamant, which is kept by Aeacus, the Cousin-german' of Pluto. And in an∣other place he brings him in saying, That he return'd from thence for fear lest some Death should escape him. This is certain, that he makes him one of the Porters of Hell, in company with Cerberus, who was a Dog with three Heads. Yet Ovid, lib. 13. Metamorph. makes him one of the Judges of Hell, together with Minos and Rha∣damanthus, upon the account of his Wisdom and Integrity, Aeacus huic pater est, qui Jura silentibus illic Reddit. AEDEPOL, See Aedes. AEDES in the singular, or AEDES in the plural number. Varro thinks that it was used for Ades, quòd eas plano pede adirent; but since it was formerly written Aides, it seems rather to come from the Greek , an old Word, which is to be met with in Pindar and Eustathi∣us, and signifies the same with Aedes. AEDES, in the singular number, is com∣monly taken for an Holy Place, a Temple; and Aedes, in the plural number, for an House, al∣tho this Rule is not without Exception. When the word is used for an Holy Place, 'tis com∣monly join'd with some other word which determines it to that Sense, as Aedes Sacra, Ae∣des Sacrae, Aedes Jovis, Aedes Pacis, Aedes Deo∣rum, the Temple of Jupiter, the Temple of Peace, the Temple of the Gods. If no such word be join'd to it, 'tis commonly to be understood of a Prophane Place, altho in strictness of Language, Aedes Sacra and Templum were two different things, for Templum was a place dedicated by the Augurs, and designed by them for some private Use, but not consecrated; whereas Aedes Sacra was an Holy Place, and consecrated to some Deity, but not founded by the Au∣gurs. But if this Place was dedicated by the Augurs, and consecrated to some Deity, it was called Templum and Aedes Sacra. And for this Reason doubtless we find these words con∣founded by Cicero and others, and used one for the other: for the Temple of Vertue and Ho∣nour, which Cicero called Templum, was called by Aurelius Victor Aedicula, by Titus Livius Aedes and Cella, and Pliny only Aedes; unless they meant hereby to shew that the Romans us'd these words indifferently. Another remarkable Dif∣ference betwixt Aedes and Templum is this, that Templum was built upon an high Place to which Men ascended by many Steps, having a large compass of Ground about it, which afforded an unbounded Prospect; Aedes, on the contrary, was built in a low Place, the Entrance was without any Ascent, and it was encompassed with Houses. AEDES, in the singular number, is a House in general, whether publick or private, in the City or the Country: yet according to exact Propriety of Speech, Aedes was used for Houses in the City, and Villa for those in the Coun∣try. Nevertheless, in the Numbring of the People made by the Censors, Villae were called Aedes. The Romans, till the time of Pyrrhus, i. e. for more than four hundred Years, had their Houses built after a very plain fashion. They were made like a Terras, cover'd with Slates and Straw, according to the Testimony of Varro, scandulis robusteis & stramento tectae. But in af∣ter-ages the Magnificence of their Buildings grew to such an Excess, that the Author of the Preface to Vitruvius says, the House of a private Person was found to amount to near fifty Millions; and an Aedile caused to be built, in less than a year's time, a Theatre, which had three hundred and sixty-Pillars, whereof the lowermost, which were of Mar∣ble, were forty feet high; those in the middle were of Brass, and those in the third rank were of Crystal: 'tis said also that this Theatre was adorn'd with three thousand Statues of Brass; and, after all, that this so magnificent Building was to serve only for six Weeks. We shall elsewhere give an account of the Magnificence of their publick Building. The Pomp and Accommodations of the Ro∣man Houses were remarkable for their Height, the great number of Apartments they had for Summer and Winter, for divers Ornaments of Atchitecture used about them, as well as for the Beauty and scarceness of the Materials of which the Bulk of the Building consisted. They raised their Houses to such a monstrous Height, that to prevent the Ruine of many Houses, Augustus confin'd their Height to se∣venty feet, and Nero to sixty only. The Ora∣tor Aristides considering this excessive Height, says, That if one should take asunder all the Raf∣ters of their Houses, and range them in order one beside another, they would cover all Italy from Ti∣ber as far as the Ionian Sea. These Houses had many Partitions consisting of several Apart∣ments, which made them to be taken for so many Towns. 'Tis a strange thing, says Valerius Maximus upon this occasion, that the Grandees of Rome thought their Houses were confin'd within too narrow bounds, tho they were of as large extent as the Inheritance of Cincinnatus; Angustè se habi∣tare
credunt, quorum domus tantum patet, quantum Cincinnati rura patuerunt. Seneca adds, That they built Courts as large as Towns, and Houses as high as Mountains. Ovid informs us, That Vedeius Pollio having left, as a Legacy by his Last Will, to Augustus, a very magnificent and sumptuous House; this wise Prince, who then discharg'd the Office of Censor, thought that the excessive Magnifi∣cence of this stately House was a bad Example, and therefore caus'd it to be demolished. After this Livia built in the same place a Temple, which she dedicated to Conjugal Concord. We scarce read any thing else in the Historians and Poets but Invectives against the Houses of the Grandees of Rome, which had coop'd up the Country Farmers within a very narrow com∣pass, which took up whole Countries, and en∣closed Canals of Water, round and four-squa∣red, of very large extent upon the great Lakes of Italy; whereas in former times, the Houses of private Men were small, and the Republick great, all sumptuous Buildings were reserv'd for the publick Conveniencies of Cities, or the Adorning of Temples. This is what Horace tells us in these Verses, Iam pauca aratro jugera regia Males relinquunt: undique latins Extenta visentur Lucrino Stagna lacu, platanusque coelebs Evincet ulmos.—Non it a Romuli Praescriptum, & intensi Catonis Auspiciis, veterumque norma. Privatus illis census erat brevis: Commune magnum—oppida publico Sumtu jubentes, & Deorum Templa nove decorare saxo. Od. 15. lib. 11. This Poet elsewhere blames one of his Friends, who had reason to apprehend the approach of Death, and yet was still projecting to build Works of Marble; The his whole Thoughts ought to be employ'd upon Death and the Grave, yet the Earth was not large enough for his Designs, and he undertook to turn back the Sea, to make may for his Buildings; he drove away his Neighbours, whose Lands were added to his own, instead of thinking in how few days he himself should be laid in a Grave, which would take up no more room than those he had driven away from their Possessions. The same Com∣plaints we may make at this day, of the great∣est part of the Grandees, who enlarge their own Lands at the expence of private Men: Non ebur, neque aureum Meâ renides in domo lacunar— Tu secanda marmora Lacas sub ipsum funus: & sepulcri Immemor struis domos: Marisque Baiis obstrepentis urges Summovere littora, Parúen locuples centinente ripa. Quid quod usque proximos Revellis agri terminos? & ultra Limites clientium Salis avarus?— —Quid ultrà tendis? Aequa tellas Pauperi recluditur, Regumque pueris, &c. Od. 18. lib. 11. AEDEPOL, as if one should say, per Ae∣dem Pollucis, By the Temple and Deity of Pollux: an Oath of the antient Romans, common both to Men and Women. This God was the Pro∣tector of the Romans, who built him a Temple at Rome. AEDICULA RIDICULI, the Chap∣pel of the God of Joy and Laughter, built at two miles distance from Rome, without the Gate Capena. The Occasion of the Building of it was this; Hannibal, after the Battel of Canna, came and besieged Rome, on that side where was the Gate Capena; but being forced to raise the Siege with great Disgrace, because of the Inundations and Storms which happen'd at that time; the Romans, upon this Occasion, rais'd a very loud Laughter, and therefore they built a little Oratory, under the Name of the God of Joy and Laughter. 'Tis true they were not the first who built a Temple to him: for Plutarch tells us, in the Life of Lycurgus, the Lacedemonians rear'd up a Statue to this Deity, and the Inhabitants of Hypata in Thessaly sacri∣ficed to him every year. Pansanias also makes mention of a God called , the God of Laughter. The Romans kept a Feast to him every year, during which they did no∣thing but laugh and play childish Tricks. AEDILES, Roman Magistrates, who had the over-seeing of Buildings, both holy and prophane, and of Baths and Aquaeducts. There were three sorts of Aediles; the Aediles of the People, who were called Aediles Plebeii, or Mi∣nores Aediles; the Aediles Curules, or Majores Ae∣diles; and the Aediles of the Corn, call'd Aedi∣les Cereales. The Aediles of the Commonalty, or such as were taken from among the People, were two in number, and officiated the same time with the Tribunes of the People: for these latter Ma∣gistrates foreseeing that they should be embar∣rass'd with the multitude of Affairs, desired of the Senate that they would allow them some Officers, with whom they might intrust mat∣ters of lesser moment, for which they should be accountable to them. This the Senate was forc'd to grant them, and they were chosen every year, in the same Assembly, with the Tribunes. This Office of the Aediles included several Functions, which render'd it conside∣rable in process of time. Besides the Care of Buildings, both publick and private, sacred and prophane, they took care also that they
should be built in due proportion, and in a streight Line, without suffering any of them to jet forth beyond the work, into the Streets and publick Places. And it was chiefly upon the account of this part of their Office that they were called Aediles, according to the Opi∣nion of Varro, Aedilis qui sacras Aedes & priva∣tas procuraret, dictus. In the second place, they took care of the Streets, the High-ways and publick places, of keeping up the Bridges and Banks, of cleansing the Streets and Sinks, and lastly, of providing for Aquaeducts and publick Works, about which they made Edicts called Aeditiones, Aedilitia. Thirdly, the taking care of Weights and Measures was part also of their Duty; they destroy'd false Weights and Mea∣sures, and laid great Fines on those that used them; they confiscated Commodities which were found to be decay'd, and threw such as were naught into the River Tiber: which made Plautus say in his Rudens, It's solet Neptunus, quamvis fastidiosus Aedi∣lis est, Si quae improbae sunt merces, jactat omens. Alluding, without doubt, to this part of the Aediles Office. In the fourth place, they had the Oversight of the Victuals for the City and Provisions for the Army: they set a price up∣on them, and took care that no Monopoly should be made to burden the Publick: they permitted no Usury in Commerce, and when they discover'd any Usurers, they summoned them to appear before the Tribunes, that they might be punished, as Titus Livius informs us, They took cognizance of Debauches that were usual in Taverns, and forbad the selling of any extravagant Delicacies, according to the Testi∣mony of Suetonius, in the Life of Tiberius, l. 34. They punish'd debaucht Women, and such as play'd in Gaming Houses. They kept the Orders of the People, which were lock'd up in the Temple of Ceres. And Polybius relates, that the Treaty of Peace between the Carthagi∣nias and the Romans was intrusted with the Aediles, who plac'd it in the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus. Twas one part of their Office to review Comedies and other pieces of Wit, they also were obliged to grant to the Peo∣ple, at their own Expence, magnificent Sports, such as those of the Circus, and of the Goddess Flora; and because they were once excused from doing it, this gave occasion to the Crea∣tion of the Aediles Curules, of whom I shall next speak. The Aediles of the People being arrived to so high a pitch of Honour, by so many consi∣derable Offices; the Patricians or Sons of the Senators, had a mind to have a share in them, and to this purpose a favourable Occasion pre∣sented it self: for the Tribunes having obtain'd a Consulship for the People, and the Patricians a Praetor of their own Order, the Senate thought fit, for appeasing all Differences on both sides, that publick Thanks should be given to the Gods by Sacrifices and magnifi∣cent Games, which they order'd the Aediles to grant: But they excusing themselves upon the account of the great Expence they were forced to be at; the Patricians said, they were ready, for the Honour and Service of the Gods, to be at the Expence, if they would admit them to the Office of the Aediles. Whereupon their Offers were received, and M. Furius Camillus, being then Dictator, nam'd to the People, by order of the Senate, two Patricians who were created Aediles Curules, in the year 385, or 388 from the Building of Rome. The two first Patrician Aediles were Cornelius Quintus Capitolinus and P. Cornelius Scipio, according to the relation of Titus Livius, in the beginning of his seventh Book. These Aediles were called Majores and Curules, because they had the Privelege to be carried in a Chair of State which was adorn'd with Ivory, and to sit upon it in a Chariot, when they gave Audience; whereas the other Aediles sat only upon Benches, as the Tribunes and Questors did. They had also the Privilege, according to Asconius Pediaenus, of wearing the Garment called Praetexta adorn'd with Purple, and of having Lictors walk before them with Bundles of Rods, as Apuleius says; but Aulus Gellius seems to contradict him, when he re∣marks, that the Aediles never punish'd any Person, nor beat him with Rods; which may be understood of the Aediles of the People and not of these superiour ones. The chief Office of the Aediles Curules was to look after the Ce∣lebration of the great Roman Sports, to be at the charge of Plays, and the Shows of Gladia∣tors to the People; the publick Farms and Fines, which were allow'd to defray the Ex∣pence of them, being but a small matter, they chose many times to make no use of them, to the end they might the more insinuate them∣selves into the Favour of the People by this Disinterestedness and Liberality, and by that means be the more easily promoted to other Offices of the Republick. They had a share in all the other Offices of the Plebeian Aediles, whereof we have already spoken. Above all, they took care that no new Religious Worship should be introduc'd either into publick or pri∣vate Assemblies, nor any new Doctrine taught without the Order of the Pontifices, and of this they were bound to inform the Senate. They were careful also, at least under the Emperors, to prevent the publishing of any ill Book, and when any such appear'd, they order'd it to be burnt, after they had examin'd it, and con∣demn'd it as pernicious to the State. Labienus
publish'd some Books of this sort, according to the Relation of Seneca, Libros Labieni per Ae∣diles cremandos censuere Patres. Aediles Cereales, the Aediles that presided over the Corn, were also appointed and taken out of the Order of the Patricions by Julius Caesar, to supervise the Corn. 'Tis probable that these two last were created only to ease the four former, who were oppress'd with a multitude of Business. There were also Aediles in muni∣cipal Cities, like those at Rome. AEDILITAS, Aedility, the Magistracy of the Aediles, which lasted a year. It included many Magistrates and their different Offices, such as these, of the Consul, the Chief Justice, Surveyor of the High-ways, and the High Treasurer. This Office continued in the Empire, accor∣ding to Justus Lipsius, till Constantines's time, who suppress'd it, together with other Ma∣gistracies of the Empire. AEDITUUS or AEDITIMUS, a Sa∣crist, or Sexton, a Treasurer to the Temples of the False Gods, who took care of the Offer∣ings and other Ornaments of the Gods. AEDITUA, a Sucrist of the Female Deities. with whom was intrusted the keeping of the Treasures of the Temple. AEDON, the Wife of King Zethus, the Brother of Amphiron; she by mistake kill'd her own Son Itylus, instead of the Son of her Bro∣ther-in-law, whom she hated. She designed to have kill'd her self when she found her mi∣stake; but the Gods in compassion chang'd her into a Linnet, who is always complaining of this Misfortune in her Song. AEGEON, a Giant. See Briarens. AEGEUS, the Son of Pandion King of A∣thens, who begot Theseus upon the Nymph Ae∣thra. Minos King of Candia declar'd War a∣gainst him, to revenge the Death of his Son Androgeus, whom some of the Athenians had kill'd. In this War the Athenians had conside∣rable Losses, which forc'd them to desire a Peace, and it was granted them, on condition that they should send every year six young Men, of the better sort of Families, to be ex∣pos'd to the Minotaure, for appeasing the Ghost of his Son. The Lot fell upon Theseus, the Son of King Aegeus, who escap'd the Fury of this Monster: But Aegeus seeing the Ship re∣turn, which had carry'd this cruel Oblation, and not percieving the white Flag set up, (as had been agreed between them) he suppos'd his Son was dead, which put him into such a Fit of Despair, that he threw himself head-long into the Sea. The Athenians institu∣ted Feasts to his Honour, and sacrific'd to him as a Sea-God, and an Adopted Son of Ne∣ptune. AEGEUM MARE, the Aegean Sea, o∣therwise call'd Archipelago, or the White-Sea. 'Tis a part of the Gulph of the Mediterranean Sea, which begins at the Eastern part of the Isthmus of Corinth, or the Promontory Suniam, and reaches as far as the Hellespont, dividing Greece and Europe from Asia. Suidas would have this Sea call'd the Aegean, upon account of Aegeus, who threw himself headlong into it, supposing his Son Theseus, who went to fight the Minotaure, had been slain. Others give it this Name upon the account of a Rock, which lies between the two Isles of Tenedos and Chio, having the shape of a Goat. The Isles of this Sea were divided by the Antients into Cyclades and Sporades: they reckon'd fifty of the Cyclades, which encompass'd the Isle of Delos like a Circle; but the Sporades were scatter'd here and there towards the Isle of Crete or Candia. AEGERIA, a Nymph, or Deity that was worship'd in the Forest Aricina, which Titus Livius places seven miles from Rome, but Festus says it lay only a little way without the Gate Collina. Numa Pompilius, the second King of Rome, feign'd that he had frequent Conversa∣tion with this Deity, that he might add greater Weight and Authority to his Laws and Ordi∣nances, and root them deeper in the Minds of the Romans, making them believe that this Nymph Aegeria dictated them to him. Ovid makes her the Wife of Numa, who was chan∣ged into a Fountain by Diana. Fast. lib. 3. ver. 275. Aegeria est quae praebet aquas, Dea grata Ca∣moenis: Illa Numae conjux, consiliumque fuit. She was reverenc'd by the Romans as a Deity; and the Women with child pray'd to her, in the time of their Travel, that by her Aid they might be safely deliver'd of their Children, as we learn from Festus: Aegeria nymphae sacrifica∣bant praegnantes, quod eam putabant facile concep∣tum alvo egerere. She was also call'd Fluonia, because she stop'd the Bloody-flux in Wo∣men. AEGIALA, the Wife of Diomedes, whom Venus inspir'd with so brutish a Passion, that she prostituted her self to all Commers, in re∣venge for the Wound she had receiv'd from her Husband at the War of Troy. Diomedes not being able to endure the Whoredoms of his Wife, abandon'd her, and retir'd into Italy, where he agreed with Danaus for one part of his Kingdom, which was call'd Graecia Magna: He built there a City call'd Argos Hippium, and in after times Argyrippa, as Servius says upon the eleventh of the Aeneids. AEGINA, an Island with a City of the same Name, near to Peloponnesus and Attica, which was distant only four Leagues from the famous Port Pynaeum, in the lower part of Athens.
It was also so call'd from Aegina the Daughter of Asopus, King of Baeotia, by whom Jupiter, in a Disguise of Fire, had two Sons call'd Aeacus and Rhadamanthus. AEGIOCHUS, a Surname given to Jupi∣ter, from a Goat, which the Greeks call , Gen. , upon the account of the Milk with which he was nourish'd in his Infancy, by the Nymphs Amalthaea and Melissa. The Poets tell us, that when this Goat died Jupiter cover'd his Shield with its Skin; but afterwards he brought it to life again, and plac'd it among the Celestial Signs. AEGIS, the Goat-skin of Jupiter; a Buckler cover'd with the Skin of the Goat of Amalthaea the Nurse of Jupiter. This Buckler he gave to Pallas, who painted the Head of Medusa upon it, the bare Sight whereof petrifi'd both Men and Beasts. Jupiter took upon him the Name of Aegiochus, i. e. the Goat-skin-Bearer. AEGIS, a frightful Monster, born of the Earth, which vomited Fire, wherewith all the Forests of Phrygia were consum'd, from Mount Taurus as far as the Indies. This forc'd the In∣habitants to abandon the Country: But Miner∣va kill'd this Monster and cover'd her Buckler with its Skin, that it might serve not only for Defence, but also for a Mark of her Victory. Thus Natalis Comes relates the Fable, lib. 4. cap. 5. & Aegidem feram vocam monstrum prope inex∣pugnahile obtruncit, &c. AEGISTHUS, born of the incestuous mix∣ture of Thyestes with his own Daughter Pelopia. He was expos'd to Beasts by his Father, in order to conceal his Crime; but the Shep∣herds sav'd him, and fed him with the Milk of a Goat, from whence he was call'd Aegysthus. When he came to age, he kill'd his Uncle A∣treus, the Father of Agamemnon, and afterwards Agamemnon also at a Feast, by the help of his own Wife Clytemnestra whom he had abus'd. But Orestes the Son of Agamemnon reveng'd the Death of his Father, by killing Aegysthus and the faithless Clytemnestra. AEGIOCHUS, , the Surname of Jupiter, the same with Aegiochus. There are several Medals of the Emperours Philip and Valerian, upon the Reverse whereof is repre∣sented a Goat, with this Inscription, Jovi Con∣servatori Augusti, and on the other side a Goat carrying Jupiter an Infant on his back, with these Words, Jovi crescenti. AEGLE, the Daughter of Hesporus King of Italy, and one of the Hasperides, who had a Gar∣den near to Lixa, a City of Mauritania towards the Frontiers of Aethiopia, where there were Trees laden with Apples of Gold, which were guarded by a Dragon; but Hercules kill'd it and carry'd off the Fruit. There is also ano∣ther Aegle, the Daughter of the Sun and Near, mention'd by Virgil in his sixth Eclogue. This is a Greek word, which signifieth Light or Splen∣dor. AEGOBOLUS, an Epither given to Bac∣chus, upon the account of a Goat which the Potnians sacrific'd to him instead of an Infant, to expiate the Murder they had committed on one of the Priests of his Temple. For Pauso∣nias relates, That one day when the Potnians were sacrificing to him in his Temple, they got drunk, and in that drunken Fit kill'd one of his Priests, who in revenge sent a Plague among 'em, which made their Country desolate: To put a stop to this Mischief, they had recourse to the Oracle, who order'd to sacrifice to him every year a young Boy, to appease him; but some time after the God was contented with the Sacri∣fice of a Goat instead of a Boy. AEGYPTUS, the Son of the antient Belus. He had fifty Sons which he marry'd to the fifty Daughters of his Brother Danous, who all cut their Husbands Throats the first Night of their Marriage, Hypermnestra only excepted, who follow'd not this cruel and barbarous Direction, but preserv'd her Husband Lynceus alive, who drove Danous away from the Kingdom of the Argives. Aegyptus, according to Ensebius, gave name to Egypt, which was formerly call'd Oce∣ana, Aerea and Osirina. AEGYPTUS, Egypt, a large Country of Africa, water'd by the River Nile, which ren∣ders it very fruitful. It was at first inhabited by Misraim, the second Son of Cham, which signifies Egypt. 'Tis divided into two parts, the Upper and the Lower. The Upper con∣tains Thebais, which the Prophets Esay and Je∣remy call Phetros: The Greeks call the Lower Egypt, Delta, upon the account of the linkeness of its figure to that of their Letter Δ. The Original of the founding a Kingdom in this vast Country is uncertain and fabulous: only we know that it had Kings from Abraham's time. Misraim was the Father of Ludim, from whom the Ethiopians are descended, who dis∣pute the Antiquity of their Original with the Egyptians; but this they did out of vanity only, and upon very bad grounds. The first Kings were called Pharaohs, and the latter Ptolemy's-Egypt was represented in the antient Medals by the Goddess Isis, the great Deity of the Egypti∣ans; she held in one hand a Sphere, as being the Mother of Arts and Sciences, and in the other a Vessel or Amphora fill'd with Ears of Corn, to shew its Fertility, which proceeds from the Overflowing of the Nile hat waters it, and fattens it with the slim  be∣hind when it retires into its  Egypt was reduc'd into a Province by Aug Caesar, after the Defeat of Cleopatra, who was the last Queen of it, in the year of the World 4015, according to Petavius, or in 3915, acccording
to Calvisius, and in the year 717. from the Building of Rome. AEGYPTII, the Egyptians. Who were the first of all the Nations that we know of (says Lucian in his Syrian Goddess) that had any knowledge in Divine matters, and who founded Temples, and in∣stituted Mysteries and Ceremonies; for the Assyrians learn'd these things of them some time after, and added to the Worship of the Gods, the Adoration of Idols, because there was none of them at first amongst the Egyptians. These are they (says the same Lu∣cian in his Judicial Astrology) who have cultivated Astrology, measur'd the Course of each Star, and distinguish'd the Year into Months and Seasons, regu∣lating the Year by the Course of the Sun, and the Months by that of the Moon: They divided then Hea∣vens into twelve parts, and represented each Constel∣lation by the Figure of some Animal, from whence comes the Diversity in their Religion; for all the Egy∣ptians did not make use of all the parts of the Hea∣vens for their Gods: Those who observ'd the Proper∣ties of Aries ador'd a Ram, and so of the rest. 'Tis said also that they worship'd the Ox Apis, in memory of the celestial Bull; and in the Oracle, which is consecrated to him, Predictions are taken from the nature of this Sign; as the Africans do from Aries in memory of Jupiter Hammon, whom they ador'd under that figure. The Egyptians worship'd Water in publick, but they had other Gods whom they ador'd in private: Some worship'd a Bull or an Ape; others a Stork or a Crocodile; some worship'd Onions, others a Cat, or a Monster with a Dog's Head; some ador'd the Right Shoulder, others the Left, or half of the Head; and some an Earthen Platter or a Cup. Last∣ly, Diodorus tells us, That they ador'd the Privy Parts; and even the very Excrements, according to Clement, in his fifth Book of Recognitions. Their Custom was to salute their Gods in the Morning, which they call'd Adoration. They sang Hymns to their honour, which were describ'd in Hieroglyphic Cha∣racters upon sacred Parchments, and none but those who were initiated into their Mysteries could read or decy∣pher'em, as being Figures of different Animals, whereof each had its proper Signification, which none else could penetrate into, at least not till they were explain'd. AELIUS, a Name common to many il∣lustrious Romans of the Aelian Family; as to Aelius Gallus, a Roman Knight, who carryed the Roman Arms into Arabia; to Aelius Paetus, a Consul, who having a mind to raise the siege before Aretium in Tuscany, lost there his Army and his Life in the view of the besieged; to Aelius Pertinax, who succeeded the Emperor Commodus, and enjoy'd the Empire only Three Months, to Aelius Adrianus and Aelius Verus, who were likewise Emperors. See Adrianus and Verus. AELIA CAPITOLINA, the City of Jerusalem was thus call'd by Aelius Adrianus, who caus'd it to be rebuilt, after he drove all the Jews from thence who had rebell'd against the Romans. AELIANUM JUS, the Aelian Code, which contain'd a Treatise of Personal Actions: It was compos'd by Sextus Aelius, a Lawyer and Philosopher. AELLO, one of the Harpies to whom this Name agrees, because it signifies One that carries all away by force. AEMILIUS, the Name of a Roman Fa∣mily, from which many great Men were de∣scended, and among the rest Paulus Aemilius the Consul. Tacitus relates of him this piece of History; The dissolute Life of the Priests of Isis, who were call'd Galli, oblig'd the Senate to order, That the Temple of this Goddess, and of Serapis, should be raz'd to the ground. There was no person found so bold as to execute this Order, because every one scrupled its Lawfulness in point of Religion. Paulus Aemilius seeing this, put off his magistratical Robe, and was the first who, with an Ax, begun to demo∣lish this Temple, which had serv'd for a Retreat to the most infamous People, and by his own Example he encourag'd the Workmen. When he was Pro-Consul, finding himself besieg'd in his Camp by the Ligurians, who had amus'd him in vain, he try'd all ways possible to disintangle him∣self; but being very much press'd, without any hopes of receiving Succours, he forc'd his way through the Enemies, and then defeated 'em, reduc'd 'em to beg a Peace, and to deli∣ver him Hostages. Perseus, King of the Mace∣donians, having pitch'd his Camp advantagious∣ly upon Mount Olympus, Paul Aemilius endea∣vour'd by all means to dislodg him from thence, and having discover'd a Path which led to a Hill, whereon was built the Temple of Apollo Pythius, he sent his Two adopted Sons, Scipio Africanus, and Fabius Maximus, to seize upon it. Perseus having notice of it, stopt up their Pas∣sage, but was forc'd to decamp, and give him battel, which Paul Aemilius joyfully accepted: The Fight was well maintain'd on both sides, but at last the Victory fell to the Romans, who left 20000 Macedonians dead upon the place. Perseus escap'd with the Cavalry, but distrust∣ing their Fidelity, he came and surrender'd himself to the Proconsul, who led him in tri∣umph to Rome, with Three of his Children; The youngest, call'd Alexander, became very skilful in the Art of Turning, and Joyners Work. Such was the Fate of the last Succes∣sor to Alexander the Great, and by his Defeat, Macedonia was reduc'd into a Province, and made tributary to the Romans, after it had been govern'd by Thirty Kings, during the space of 923 Years. AENEAS, a Phrygian by Nation, descend∣from the Kings of Troy in this order: Dardanus was the Father of Erichtonius, and he was the Father of Tros, who had Three Children, Ilus, Assaracus and Ganimedes. From Ilus descended
Laomedon, and from Laomedon, Priam, the last King of Troy. Assaracus married his Grand-Daughter Clytidora, the Daughter of Laomedon, by whom he had Capys, and Capys had Anchises, the Father of Aeneas by the Nymph Nais; and Anchises had Aeneas by the Goddess Venus. Whe∣ther it were that the Perfections of the Mother of Aeneas caus'd the Name of the Goddess of the Graces to be given unto her, or that Anchises had a mind to conceal her true Name, and in∣vented this Fable to render his Son the more venerable, or that he thought thereby to raise the Value of his own Merits; I say, whatever was the cause of it, this is certain, that no o∣ther Name of the Mother of Aeneas is to be met with, but that of Venus. From hence it appears, that Virgil had reason to call Aeneas a Dardanian; for besides that he descended from Dardanus, there was also occasion to call him so, because his Fathers ordinary abode was in Dardania. Upon the first noise of the Descent upon the Greeks, Aeneas threw himself into Troy to defend it. Dyctis Cretensis expresly accuses him of giving the Palladium to Diomedes, and betraying the City. Titus Livius does not accūse him of Treachery, but he is of opinion, that the Greeks treated him favourably, as well as Ante∣nor, because these two Princes were for Peace, and for restoring Helena, who was the cause of that War to her Husband Menelaus. Sabellicus having re∣jected the Opinion of Dio, advances another of his own: Aeneas, says he, not being able to perswade the Trojans to Peace, and being otherwise discontented, treated secretly with the Greeks, and let them in by one of the Gates of the City, upon which was the figure of a Horse. This gave occa∣sion to the Fiction of a Wooden Horse, which is mention'd by Homer, and after him by Virgil. Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, on the contrary, af∣firms, That Aeneas made extraordinary Efforts to defend Troy and the Palace of King Priam; that he seeing himself abandon'd, the Citadel forc'd, and Priam kill'd, retir'd, with all his Family, and those who escap'd death at the sacking of the City, to Mount Ida, by the favour of the Night, while the Enemy was busie in taking the Spoil; that then he built many Ships with the Trees he found upon that Mountain, and after he had equip'd 'em with Ne∣cessaries, he embarqu'd with the rest of the Trojans upon the Hellespont, and made his first Descent into a Peninsula of Thracia, call'd Pellena, where he built a City of his own Name. From thence he sail'd to Delos, and from Delos to Cythera, from Cy∣thera to Zacintha, from Zacintha to Leucada, from Leucada to Ictium, from Ictium to Ambra∣cia. After this he coasted along the Sea-side, and cast Anchor at Buthrota, from whence he transported himself to Dodona, and there having consulted the Oracle, he was confirm'd in his design of going into Italy; whereupon he reimbarqu'd, and steer'd his course towards Sicily, and made a Descent upon Laurentum, after he had pass'd through many Dangers at Sea, which proceeded from the Hatred of the implacable Juno. After he landed in the Coun∣try, he discover'd in it many Springs of Water, and perceiv'd a Sow in a Wood, with Thirty small Boar-Pigs, as the Oracle of Dodona had foretold to him: Littoreis ingens inventa sub Ilicibus sus Triginta capitum foetus enixa jacebit, Alba solo recubant, albi circum ubera nati: Is locus urbis erit.— Aen. l. 3. v. 390. & seq. King Latinus and the Rutuli being alarm'd at the arrival of these new Guests, came forth to fight 'em, and drive 'em out of their Country: But the Latines having suffer'd many Losses, and Turnus being overcome by Aeneas in a Duel, at last a Peace was concluded, by the Marriage of Lavinia to Aeneas, who built a City call'd Lavinium, from the Name of his Wife. This for the present united the Aborigines and Trojans under the common Name of Latines, in Ho∣nour of his Father-in-Law Latinus. (This has no relation at all to the Etymology of Latium, à latendo, in which there is some reference to the Prophecies of Numbers of Daniel, which are justifi'd by the Event.) Aeneas was kill'd in a Battel against the Rutuli, on the Banks of the River Numicus; and because he did not ap∣pear again after this Fight, this gave occasion to the common Report that he was carried up into Heaven, tho' 'tis much more probable, that he fell into the River when he was fighting, and was detain'd at the bottom by the weight of his Armour: Nevertheless, a little Temple was built to him with this Inscription, Patri Dei indigeti, qui; Numici amnis undas temperat. And here it may be observ'd, that the King∣dom of Latium seems rather to have given Name to Latinus, than that this King should give his Name to this Kingdom; for Latium was before Latinus, who reign'd 43 Years over the Latines. S. Austin has abridg'd the History of Aeneas, Lib. 8. De Civ. Dei, cap. 19. After the sacking of Troy, Aeneas came into Italy with Twenty Ships, which carried thither the surviving Trojans. Latinus was then King of it, but after his death Aeneas reign'd Three Years in Italy: Because his Body did not appear after his death, the Latins made a God of him. Homer makes Aeneas appear very glorious among the great Heroes of his Iliads, and says, That the Trojans reverenc'd him as a God. The younger Philostratus, in his Heroicks, equals him with Hector for his size and Mien, but says, that he surpass'd him in Virtue and good Sense; and that the Trojans call'd Hector their Arm, and Aeneas their Head. 'Tis agreed among all these Authors, that Ae∣neas came into Italy under the Reign of Latinus
the Son of Faunus; but the difficulty is, to know what Year he came, of which Titus Li∣vius, and many others say nothing. Dionysius Halicarnassaus thinks, that it was in the Forty Fifth Olympaid; Cassiodorus in the Twenty Fifth; and Vigenere in the Twentieth; inso∣much that 'tis difficult to determin in a matter so much contested; yet there is some reason to believe, that Aeneas landed in Italy in the Thirty Fourth Year of the Reign of Latinus. AENEAS Secundus, or Latinus Sylvius, as Sextus Victor calls him, or Silius and Posthumius, as Messala calls him, was the posthumous Son of Aeneas and Lavinia. The Name of Silvius was given him because he was brought up in the Woods, whither his Mother retired for fear of Ascanius her Son-in-Law. He had a great Contest with Julus, his Nephew, the Son of Ascanius; but the Aborigines favour'd in his Per∣son the Blood of their antient Kings, and ad∣vanc'd him to the Throne, and pacifi'd Julus by promoting him to the chief Honours and Employments of the State. The Caesars glory in their descent from him. Silvius reign'd 29 Years. AENEAS Tertius Silvius reign'd 31 Years. AEOLUS, the Son of Jupiter and Acesta, or Sergesta, the Daughter of Hippotas, a Trajan, who is thought to have liv'd at the time of the Trajan War. He commanded the little Isles, call'd Aeolionae, and was by the Poets made King of the Winds. Virgil speaks of him as such, Aeneid. Lib. 1. v. 6. —Hic vasto rex Aeolus antro Luctantes ventos, tempestotesque soner as Imperio premit, ac vinclis & carere frenat. But the Worship of the Winds was more an∣tient than the Reign of Aealus. The Persians and Scythians ador'd them, according to Strabo and Lucian, and yet they never heard a word of the King of these little sles. All the Eastern Idolaters gave Honour to the Winds, before ever the Fable of Aeolus was forg'd. 'Tis pro∣bable that the Sicilians and Italians took occa∣sion, from the nature of these Isles, to make them the Dominion of the Winds, because they frequently saw storms of Smoke, Wind, and Fire issued out of them. Diodorus Sicedus, and Varro, suppos'd that the Poets attributed the Government of the Winds to Aeolus, be∣cause he perfectly understood the Nature of them, and was the first that invented Sails for Ships. Velorum usum docuit, nauticae rai studiosus:  ignis quoque prodigiis diligenter observatis, qui anti ingruituri essent indigenis certo praedixit. Un∣de ventorum praeses & disponsater à fabula declara∣tus est. Servius said that there are Nine Isles in the Sicilian-Sea, whereof Varro tells us Aeolus was King: And from hence came the Fiction, That the Winds were under his Government, because he foretold Storms that should happen, by observing the Vapors and Smoke which proceeded from these Isles, and ehiefly from that which takes its Name from Vulcan. But this learned Grammarian, after he has related this Fable, confesses it was founded upon Rea∣son. Pliny says, That the Isle Strongyle was one of these burning and smoking Isles; that the Inhabitants, by its Smoke, foretold the Winds Three Days before, and that upon this account it was feign'd, that Aeolus was Lord of the Winds. Btrabo remarks out of Polybius, con∣cerning the Isle of Lippara, which is the great∣est of the Seven Aeolian Isles, that before the South-Wind blew, it was cover'd with so thick a Cloud, that it hindred the near Neighbours of the sight of Sicily; but before the North-Wind blew, that then this great Isle vomited up clear Flame, and made an exceeding great noise and roaring; upon which account, the King of these Isles was called the King of the Winds. AEOLIAE INSULAE, the Aeolian or Vulcanian Isles, near the Promontory of Pelorus in Sicily, where Aeolus reigns. They are Seven, of which, the most considerable is that of Li∣para, from whence proceed Winds, and storms of Fire and Flames, together with terrible Earthquakes, which occasioned the Poets to say, That it was the Habitation of the Winds, and the Forge of Vulcans, who, with his Cyclops, were the Smiths of the Gods. AEQUIMELIUM, a great place in Rome before the Temple of the Goddess Tellus, at one end of the Street call'd Execrable. This place was so call'd from Saptimus Melius, a Ro∣man Knight, who had a House there which was raz'd to the ground by the Sentence of the Dictator L. Quintius Cincinnatus, because he aim'd at usurping the Sovereign Power, by be∣stowing Largesses on the People. L. Minutius, Commissary General of the Provisions, disco∣vering the secret Intrigues of Melius, gave no∣tice of 'em to the Senate, who judg'd it an Af∣fair of so great consequence, that immediately they created a Dictator, call'd Cincinnatus. The next day after Melius was cited to answer the Accusation, but he refus'd to appear, and endeavour'd to make his escape, but was pur∣su'd and kill'd by Serviius. The Dictator or∣der'd that his House should be raz'd to the ground, and that no person for the future should build-upon the place where it stood: And to perpetuate the memory of this Perfi∣diousness of Melius and of his Punishment, the place was call'd ever after Aequimelium, quasi ab aquata domo Malii, pro domo sua. Cicero, in his Oration, relates the Story thus; Melii regnu appetentis domus est complanata, & quid aliud aquum accidisse Meli P. R. judicaret? Nomine ipso
Aequtmelil stultitiae pirna comprobata est. Titus Livius relates the Story at large, Book IV. Dec. 1. AER, See it after Aerarius. AERA, a Number stampt upon Money, to signifie the current Value of it, according to Lutilius; it signifies also the same with Epoch, i. e. A certain Time from whence to compute or begin the new Year, or some particular way of reckoning Time and Years. And in this last sense the word is thought to be corrupted, and to come from the custom of the Spaniards, who reckon'd their Years by the Reign of Augustus, who, for shortness sake, they commonly set down thus, A. E. R. A. to signi∣fie Annus erat regni Augusti. The Transcriber not understanding this sufficiently, in process of time, made of these Letters the word Aera; in the first sense the word comes from Aes, and Aera in the Plural Number, from whence was made the Aera of the Feminine Gender, either because in their Accompts to every par∣ticular Sum, they prefix'd the Word Aera, as we do now Item, or because the Number of Years was mark'd down in Tables with little Brass Nails. AERA MILITUM, in Suetonius, the Soldiers Pay, because that Money was antiently made of Brass. AERARIUM, the publick Treasury, the Revenues of the Roman Common-wealth, for defraying their necessary Expences both in time of Peace and War. AERARIUM MILITARE, the Funds settled by Caesar-Augustus, for maintain∣ing the Roman Armies, which were manag'd by Three Treasurers. AERARIUM VICESIMARUM, a Treasury or Fund which arose from the Twentieth part, and was kept as a Reserve for the extreme Necessities of the Common-wealth. As soon as the People of Rome became power∣ful enough to enlarge the Bounds of their Em∣pire, and conquer almost all the World, they held it their utmost Policy to make themselves absolute Masters of the Conquer'd and their Possessions; and therefore all the Gold and Silver, and even the precious Moveables which could be carried away, after some part of 'em had been distributed among the Soldiers, were carried away to Rome, where they serv'd, first to make up the Pomp of their Triumph, and then were lock'd up in the publick Treasury, to be kept as an eternal Monument to Posteri∣ty of the Glory of the Conquerors, and the Shame of the Conquered. The Victors re∣serv'd to themselves the entire Propriety of the Lands and Immoveables, permitting the Van∣quish'd to be Usu fructuarii, which was only to enjoy the Products of the Earth, on condi∣tion that they cultivated it, and paid them an∣nually a part of the Produce. These Lands were call'd Agri vectigales, or Praedia tributaria & stipendiaria, because they paid a sort of Tri∣bute or annual Acknowledgment. The Inha∣bitants, but especially those who refus'd to ca∣pitulate or surrender themselves, were made Slaves, and sold; but because there was not always a quick Market for them, and it was thought disadvantagious to the Republick to depopulate whole Countries, they often left a part of them free in the enjoyment of their Estates, charging them with a Tax and annual Acknowledgment, besides a Poll, and Service and Homages, which they were obliged to ren∣der to the Romans as their Masters: This Capi∣tation was indifferently levyed upon all sorts of persons, without respect to Sex or Condition, the Males from Fourteen, the Females from Twelve to Sixty Five Years; the Fathers were oblig'd to pay for all their Children. The Peo∣ple of Rome, as Pliny informs us, were not de∣liver'd from this Tribute till after Paulus Aemi∣lius had conquer'd Macedonia, and led Persius, its King, Captive to Rome, Ann. Rom. 586. Paulus Aemilius Perseo rege Macedonico devicto, &c.—à quo tempore Pepulus Romanus tributum pen∣dere defiit. This Poll-Tax was only paid upon account of each particular Persons Estate, and therefore, every Fourth Year, a strict account was taken of all the Subjects of the Empire, and their Estate, by certain Officers, who were call'd at first Censores, and afterwards, under the change of the Government, Censitores, Per∣aequitores, & Inspectores, because they numbred the Citizens, and valu'd their Estates, in order to tax 'em the Hundreth part annually. Hence it was, in the Roman Common-wealth, there were Two sorts of Taxes, one that was paid for their Goods or Lands: Census five tributum aliud praedii, aliud capitis. There was also ano∣ther Tax paid for every Head of Cattel. 'Tis not easie to tell exactly what these Five sorts of settled Taxes amounted to yearly, which made up the Revenue of the Common-wealth; but we may easily judg, that these Taxes amount∣ed to vast Sums, since they contain'd the Eighth or Tenth part of the whole Revenue of those vast Provinces, which reach'd from Hercules Pil∣lars as far as the River Euphrates, without rec∣koning the Money they made of their Pastures. Many have endeavour'd to make a Calculation of it, but they have not done it with any Exactness. To this common Revenue a Fourth was added, which accru'd by the Impositions on the importing and exporting of Commodi∣ties, not only on the Frontiers of the Empire, but at Havens, Sea-Ports, Gates of Cities, Bridges, High-ways, and Rivers; but this was not so certain as the former, being very uncertain
on the account of the Diversity of places and Alteration of Trade: Yet the most common way was to pay the Twentieth, sometimes the Fortieth or the Fiftieth part, the least that ever was paid was the Hundreth, and the highest was the Eighth part. Foreign Commodities, which serv'd only for Luxury and Delicacy, paid the greatest Tax: But we must distinguish betwixt this Duty and what was paid as Tol-Money at Bridges and Gates, since they were Two different things. The Officers and Ma∣gistrates of the Common-wealth paid nothing for the Carriage of Goods which were for their own use. There was also, another Revenue, which was no less considerable than the former, which was rais'd from Mines of Gold and Sil∣ver, and other Metals, as also from Marshes and Salt-pits. All this may give us a general view, wherein the Revenues of the Roman Common-wealth con∣sisted, which serv'd to maintain all publick Of∣fices and Expences under the popular State, and whereof a great part was return'd into the pub∣lick Treasury: But when the Government was chang'd by Civil Wars, which consum'd the Revenues and exhausted the Treasury, and the Supreme Power was vested in the Caesars, this was the occasion of a new Expence for main∣taining the Princes Family and his Officers; and therefore Augustus made a Partition of all the Revenues we have now mention'd, allow∣ing one part of it to the People, and reserving the other to himself: From whence there arose Two sorts of Treasuries, one for the People, which was call'd Aerarium publicum, and ano∣ther for the Prince, which was call'd Fiscus, the Exchequer, whereof we shall speak in its proper place. And so Authors do commonly put a difference between Aerarium and Fiscus; as Suetonius, who in the Life of Vespasian, says of that Prince, Necessitate compulsus, summâ aera∣rii fiscique inopiâ: Yet there are some who con∣found these two words, because the Prince did equally dispose of 'em both, although they were divided for preserving some Memory of their antient Liberty. At the beginning of their Conquests under a popular State, there was no other Method for raising them but this; the People of Rome ha∣ving made both the Persons and Estates of the Conquer'd tributary to 'em, after the manner we have already declar'd, sent into each Pro∣vince a Governour, who was call'd Proconsul, Praetor, or Pro-Praetor, because he exercis'd in that Province the Office und Authority of a Roman Consul and Praetor, with whom was joyn'd another Magistrate, who was a kind of Treasurer, whom they call'd Quaestor, who levy'd the publick Revenues: These Two Magistrates having under 'em a Company of Archers and Guards, made use of 'em as Mi∣nisters for executing Justice and levying of Taxes, which were laid up in a Chest, out of which they took what was necessary for the Governors and military Men, and for all pub∣lick Affairs, and then sent the remainder to Rome, to be kept in the publick Treasury, which was in the Temple of Saturn under the Care of a Quaestor, whom they call'd Praefectus aerarii, the Treasurer; and out of this Treasury was taken whatever was necessary for the publick Buildings, for Games and Shows, for the Maintenance of their Armies by Sea and Land, and for the Reception of Ambassadors from foreign Nations. This first Custom of gathering Taxes by the Quaestors did not last always: for a new way was introduc'd of Letting out all the publick Revenues in each Province to private Men, who farm'd them commonly for five years at a certain Sum, payable every four Months, for which they gave good and sufficient Security. Nevertheless the Governors and Quaestors of Pro∣vinces were not changed; they still gave Au∣thority to these Farmers, had the Oversight of them in levying the Taxes, and determin'd all Differences that arose about them; they took care also that the Farmers should pay the full Value of their Leases, notwithstanding any Deficiencies that might happen, which they run the risque of. Of these Farmers Compa∣nies were made, whereof some were Farmers for one kind of Tribute; and others for ano∣ther; some were Farmers of the twentieth, the tenth, the eighth, some of the hundredth part, and of the other Taxes before-mention'd, and were therefore call'd Octavarii, Decimarii, Vigesimarii, &c. Those who farm'd the Ga∣thering of the Tribute were call'd Manicipes, Redemptores vectigalium, and Publicani; this last Name, which at first was honourable, accor∣ding to the testimony of Cicero, in his Oration for Manlius, became afterwards very odious, for their Harshness and Injustice in exacting upon the People; insomuch that Nero was ful∣ly resolv'd to abolish them, and had done it, if he had not been hindred by the Remon∣strances of the Senate; but he oblig'd them to set up Writing-Tables in their Places of meet∣ing, to specifie what Tribute was to be paid for each thing. This way of Farming the Publick Revenues lasted a long while under the Emperours, and from hence it comes to pass, that in the Law-Books and chiefly in Pandects, there is a Title De Publicanis, or Of Men of Business. But after the Seat of the Empire was translated to Constan∣tinople, this Method of collecting the Tribute was wholly chang'd for that which follows, viz. Every year towards the End of Summer,
those who had the supreme Administration of Affairs under the Prince, drew up a general Accompt of all that was to be impos'd and le∣vy'd upon the People, and after they had sha∣red this among the Praefectures or Provinces, and stated the particular Sum which each Pro∣vince was to pay, they sent Commissions, which they call'd Delegationes, to the four Lieu∣tenant-Generals of the Empire, who were cal∣led Praefecti Praetorio, among whom it was di∣vided; but they had under them many Pro∣vinces, and each Province had its own peculiar Governour. These Lieutenant-Generals ha∣ving received that Accompt which belonged to their share of the Empire, sent particular Commissions to each Governour of a Province, and he sent them to the Municipal Magistrates in each City, call'd Decuriones, who in each City made a kind of Corporation, or Municipal Senate, and took care of the Affairs of that City. These Magistrates, whom we may after a sort compare to our Mayors, Sheriffs, Aldermen, Common-councilmen and Judges of the City, were bound, upon receiving the Tax which was to be imposed, to name some Persons of their Corporation, who were to lay it equally upon each particular Person, upon which ac∣count they were call'd Peraequatores or Discus∣sores; and after this was done, the Publick No∣tary or Town-Clerk enter'd down every Man's Name in a Roll, and the particular Sum he was to pay; which was afterward's publish'd, that every one might know what he was rated at, and what he must pay to the Collectors, who were call'd Susceptores. The Sums of Money which were rais'd by these Taxes, were first employ'd to pay off those who bore any Office in the Province, and the Remainder was sent to Rome, to be kept in the publick Treasury, which was under the Care of a Treasurer, who in the times of the first Emperours was call'd Praefectus Aerarii, and after Constantine's time, Comes sacrarum largitionum; or else it was put into the Prince's Privy-Purse, and intrusted in his hands, who took care of it, and was call'd Comes Rei Privatae. The Treasurer sent into the Provinces one of his Officers, who was to press the sending of the Money, and a month after another Officer, who was call'd Compulsor; and both of these were maintain'd at the Expence of the Governour. These were the ordinary ways that were us'd in the Roman Empire for leavying the Taxes which were laid upon Persons and Lands into conquer'd Provinces: But as for the Customs upom Goods imported or exported, these were collected, by those that farm'd them, at the Sea Ports, or the Gates by which they enter'd into or went out of a City, according to the Tax which was laid on them. AERARIUS, he who was liable to be tax'd, from whence comes the Phrase Aerarium fieri, to be made subject to Taxes, to want the Right of voting in his Tribe, to be depriv'd of the Privileges and Immunities of a City, and forc'd to be oblig'd to contribute to the publick Expences. Ex aerariis aliquem eximere, to restore one to his Rights and the Privileges of a Citi∣zen, to exempt one from Taxes. AER, the Air, which by the Antients was taken for a Diety. Anaximenes the Milesian, and Diogenes Apolloniates affirm'd the Air to be their God; but Cicero and St. Austin confute them by very strong Arguments. This Holy Doctor informs us, that these two Philosophers did no otherwise attribute Divinity to the Air, but as they believ'd it was fill'd with an Infinite In∣telligence, and an infinite number of particular Spirits who made their abode in it; and so their Opinion is co-incident with that Idea of the Platonists, who thought that God was the Soul of the World, and that all the Parts of the World were full of Spirits and living Substances. The Assyrians and Africans gave the Air the Name of Juno, or Venus Urania and Virgo, as we learn from Julius Firmicus, de Err. Prof. Rel. The E∣gyptians gave the Air the Name and Worship of Minerva, as Eusebius testifies, Aera verò aiunt ab iis Minervam vocari. But Diodorus Sieulus has better unveil'd the Mystery of this Doctrine, speaking of the Egyptians, he says, Aeri porrò A∣thenae, seu Minervae nomen quadam voics interpre∣tatione tribuisse, Jovisque filiam hanc & virginem putari; eo quòd Aer naturâ corruptioni non obnoxius sit, & summum mundi locum obtineat. Unde etiam fabula è Jovis vertice illam enatam. Vocari autem tritogeniam, quòd ter in anno naturam mutet, vere, aestate, hieme; & glaucam dici, non quòd glaucos, id est, caesios habet oculos, insulsum enim hoc esset; sed quòd Aer glauco sit colore: To the Air was given the Name of Athena or Minerva, who was thought to be the Daughter of Jupiter, and a Virgin, be∣cause the Air by its nature is not liable to corruption, and it possesses the highest place of the World: from whence arose the Fable, that Minerva came out of Jupiter's Brain; and she is said to be begotten thrice, because the Air changes three times in a year, viz. at Spring, Summer and Winter; her Eyes were said to be blue, because the Air appears to be of that colour. The Greeks and Romans did most readily call the Air by the Names of Jupiter and Juno; and thus they distinguish'd two Vertues in the Air, the one Active and Masculine, the other Pas∣sive and Feminine, as we learn from Seneca in his Natural Questions; Aera marem judicant, qud ventus est: feminam, quâ nebulosus & iners. Yet it must be confess'd, that Juno was most com∣monly taken for the Air; and so the Greek Name of Juno , is said to be nothing else but a
transposition of . After this manner Cicero explains the Fable of Juno; Aer, ut Stoici dispu∣tant, interjectus inter mare & caelum, Junonis no∣mine consecratur, quae est soror & conjux Jovis, quod ei similitudo est aetheris, & cum eo summa con∣junctio. From whence we may see the reason of the Affinity and Marriage between Jupiter and Juno, i. e. between the Heaven and the Air, and also plainly understand that other Fa∣ble of Homer, That Jupiter hang'd Juno in a Chain, having Two-Anvils which were fa∣sten'd to his Feet, which signifies nothing but the dependance that the Air has upon the Hea∣ven, and which the Sea and Land have upon the Air. AES. See after Aesculapius. AESCULANUS, the Aesculan God, who was the God of Riches, according to S. Austin in the City of God, because Brass in former times was us'd for Money. AESCULAPIUS, the God of Physick, whom Sanchoniathon makes the Son of Jupiter, and Brother of Mercury; and Clemens Alexan∣drinus affirms to have reign'd at Memphis. La∣ctantius, in his short History of the Greek Aescu∣lapius, affirms, that he was born at Messina of uncertain Parents, and nurs'd at Epidaurus by a Bitch, and educated by Chiro, of whom he learned Medicine. Pausanius, upon the Pi∣cture of the Phlegyans, relates, that a Shepherd having found the Infant Aesculapius, when he was just born, nurs'd him by a Goat of his Flock, and guarded him by his Dog. Festus con∣tradicts him, and says that Aesculapius was nurs'd by a Bitch, and that in Memory thereof, Dogs were kept in the Temple of Aesculapius. Ho∣mer and Ovid following him, say, Apollo was his Father, and Coronis the Daughter of King Phlegyas, his Mother, who, when she was big with Child with this Aesculapius, of whom Apollo was Father, prostituted herself to a Fel∣low call'd Ilchys, the Son of Elatus. But Diana, Apollo's Sister, resenting the Affront put upon her Brother, kill'd Ceronis with an Arrow she shot at her; and as she was ready to be laid upon the Funeral-Pile, Mercury came and took the Child out of her Womb, who was call'd Aesculapius from the Egyptian word Esch, which signifies a Goat, and Cheleph, which signifies a Dog, because he was nurs'd by a Goat and guarded by a Dog. Pindar, in his Third Ode of his Pythiae, says, That Apollo himself took the Child out of its Mothers Womb. There are some Authors would have him to be the Son of Arsinoe, the Daughter of Leucippa the Messinian: But that was contradicted by the Oracle of Delphos, which Apollophanes of Arca∣dia consulted; for that Oracle answer'd him, That Aesculapius was born at Epidaurus of the Nymph Coronis, the Daughter of Phlegyas. In∣deed the Epidaurians were the first who ap∣pointed a Festival to be kept in Honour of him, wherein they were follow'd by the Athe∣nians, who call'd these Festivals Epidaureanae, and plac'd Aesculapius among the number of their Gods, as did likewise the Inhabitants of Pergamus and Smyrna, who built him a Temple by the Sea-side. He had also a Temple at Cy∣rene, under the Name of the Physician, by way of Excellency; and the same Worship was paid, and the same Sacrifices offer'd to him there as at Epidaurus, except that Goats were offer'd to him only in the Temple at Cyrene. The Statue of this God, which was plac'd in the Temple of Epidaurus, was of Gold and Ivo∣ry, made by Thrasymedes the Son of Arignotus of the Isle of Paros; it was seated upon a Throne of the same matter, holding in one hand a knotted Battoon, and the other leaning on the Head of a Serpent, with a Dog at his feet. There were many Pictures to be seen in that Temple, on the Walls and Pillars of it, wherein divers Diseases that had been cur'd, were represented, and the Medicines that had been us'd for that end. Sanchoniathon asserts, that the first who was nam'd Aesculapius was an Egyptian, and he ranks him among the Gods, call'd Cabires, or The potent Gods, together with Mercury; and therefore Pliny had reason to say, That the Egyptians boasted themselves to be the first In∣ventors of Physick. There is no doubt but there were many of that Name, and that the most antient was he who was the Egyptian; whence it came to pass, that Antoninus the Se∣nator, built a Temple at Epidaurus to Health, Apollo, and Aesculapius, Surnam'd Egyptian. But Aesculapius of Epidaurus was the most famous in all Greece. Cicero reckons up Three Aesculapius's in Greece; the First was the Son of Apollo, wor∣ship'd by the Arcadians, who first found out the Ligatures and Bandages of Wounds; the Second was the Brother of the second Mercury, who was kill'd by Thunder, and interr'd at Cynosura; the Third was the Son of Arsippus and Arsinoe, who taught first how to purge and draw Teeth, whose Sepulchre is to be seen, with a little Grove which was consecrated to him in Arcadia. Aesculapiorum primus, Apollinis, quem Arcades colunt, qui specillum invenisse, pri∣musque vulnus obligavisse dicitur. Secundus, se∣cundi Mercurii frater; is fuine percussus, dicitur humatus esse Cynosuris. Tertius, Arsippi & Arsi∣noae, qui primus purgationem alvi, dentisque evul∣sionem, ut ferunt invenit; cujus in Arcadia sepul∣chrum & lucus ostenditur. By which we may plainly observe, that when once the Name of Aesculapius was brought from Egypt into Greece, it was given to many others who invented any new way of Dressing Wounds or Curing
Diseases. The most antient Aesculapius a∣mongst the Greeks was not born till a thousand Years after him of the Egyptians. S. Clemens Alexandrinus reckons his Apotheosis, as well as Hercules's to be Fifty Three Years after the ta∣king of Troy, which agrees very well with Homer, who speaks of Machaon, the Son of Aesculapius, among those who were at the Siege of Troy: And to him Diodorus Siculus refers what Cicero said, That he was Thunder-struck. This Historian, to set forth the admirable Knowledg of this excellent Physician, relates, as History what probably is nothing but an ingenious Fable, viz. That he rais'd Hippolytus from the dead by his Medicines. Pluto com∣plain'd of this to Jupiter, who struck Aescula∣pius with a Thunder-bolt: Apollo reveng'd his Death upon the Cyclopes, who made his Thunder-bolts, and kill'd them with his Arrows: Jupi∣ter punish'd Apollo by condemning him to feed Admetus's Flocks. Pliny affirms, that there was no other knowledg of Physick at the Siege of Troy, but only to cure Wounds, and after that; it was neglected until the Peloponnesian War; for then it was that Hippocrates, as 'tis said, compos'd his Treatises of Physick from the In∣scriptions in the Temple of Aesculapius, where Persons were oblig'd by a Law to set down all the Remedies which the sick had us'd with suc∣cess for their Cure. He adds, That the an∣tient Romans rejected all Physicians, and there∣fore the Temple of Aesculapius was plac'd with∣out the City; tho 'tis more probable to think, that it was rather done to signifie, that the Country-Air is purer and better for recovery of Health. The reason why the Romans built a Temple to Aesculapius, in an Island of the Tiber, near to Rome, as it is related by Aurelius Victor, in his Book of Illustrious Men, was, The Romans, says he, at a time when the Plague rag'd at Rome, and the places round about it, consulted the Oracle, which gave them this Answer, That if they would be freed from it, they should fetch the God Aes∣culapius from Epidaurus: Whereupon they sent thi∣ther Ten Deputies, the chief whereof was Quintus Ogulnius, who arriving at the City, went imme∣diately to pay their Respects and Adorations to Aes∣culapius; but at the same time, while they were admiring his Statue, which was of extraordinary bigness, they saw a great Serpent come out of a Vault near the Idol, which imprinted upon the minds of all Men a profound Veneration, rather than any Terror: It pass'd through the midst of the City across the Streets, and went directly to the Ship that waited for the Romans, where it posted it self in the Cabin of Ogulnius. The Romans being astonish'd at this sudden and happy success of their Voyage, sail'd away presently to carry off the God, and arriv'd safe at the Port of Antium, where they made some stay, during which time the Serpent crawl'd a-shoar, and went into a neighbouring Temple dedicated to Aesculapius: Some days after it return'd to the Ship again, and continu'd there till the Ship in its course arriv'd at the Tiber: But when they were come overagainst Rome, this sacred Serpent quitted the Ship, and retir'd into a neighbouring Island, where the Romans took care to build a Temple for it; and then immediately the Plague ceased. Pausanias relates a Story something like this in his Corinthiaca, where he tells us, That Ni∣cagora the Mother of Agasicles, and Wife of Echetion, brought along with her from Epidau∣rus Aesculapius, under the figure of a living Ser∣pent, in a Litter drawn with two Mules, as far as the City of Sicyona, where she was born. Philostratus adds, That he had read somewhere, that this Serpent was formerly kept by Aescu∣lapius, under Mount Pelion, when he was a young Man. Lucian, in his Dialogue, entituled Alexander, or The false Prophet, discovers to us what gave occasion to represent Aesculapius under the fi∣gure of a Serpent. He says then, That the false Prophet Alexander, having associated himself with a Byzantine Analist, call'd Cocconas, they went together into Bithynia, where they observ'd that great Serpents were kept so tame, that they suck'd the Breasts of Women, and playd with Children without doing them any hurt: (from whence doubtless comes the Fable of Olympius, who is said to lye in Bed with a Serpent.) They bought therefore one of the largest and fairest of 'em, (which is the Source and Original of the Serpent of Aesculapius,) and made choice of Paphlagonia, where the Spirits of Men are more dull and supersti∣tious, as a fit place to set up for cheating the People, and venting their Impostures. Alexander there∣fore having a long head of Hair well comb'd, and clad in a Cloak of purple strip'd with white, which was couer'd over with a Surplice, holding in his hand a Faulchion, like Perseus, from whom he said he was descended by the Mothers side, hid some Plates of Brass in an old Temple of Apollo, which is at Calcedonia, and wrote upon them, That Aes∣culapius would quickly come with his Father Apollo, to settle his abode in this place: But withal, he so order'd the matter by his Tricks, that these Plates should be found out, and presently the News of them was spread over all Pontus and Bi∣thynia; insomuch, that the Inhabitants decreed a Temple to be built for these Gods, and begun to dig the Foundations of it. Our Prophet transported him∣self in the Night-time to the place where they were digging the Foundations of the Temple, and having found there some Spring, or at least some Rain-water, he hid in it a Birds Egg, wherein he had inclos'd a very little Serpent which was newly hatch'd: The next day, very early in the morning, he came into the Market-place stark naked, having only a gilded
Girdle about him to cover his Nakedness; and hold∣ing his Faulchion in his hand, he mounted upon an Altar, and began to hold forth to the People, saying, That this place was happy, for being honour'd with the Birth of a God: At these words the whole City, which had flock'd together to see this Sight, became very attentive, and fell a-making Vows, and saying Prayers, while he was pronouncing some barbarous words in the Jewish or Phoenitian Language. After this, he ran to the place where he had hid his Birds Egg, and going into the Water, he fell a-singing the Praises of Apollo and Aesculapius, and invited the latter to descend, and shew himself visibly among Men: At the speaking of these words he dip'd a Cup into the Water, and drew out of it that mysterious Egg which held a God in∣closed in it, and while he had it in his hand, he told the People, That it contain'd Aesculapius: The People being very attentive to behold this won∣derful Mystery, he broke the Egg, and out came the little Serpent that was lodg'd in it, which twin'd round about his Fingers: And immediately the Air was fill'd with Shouts of Joy, which were intermix'd with Blessings and Praises; one desired Health of the God, and another Honour and Riches. In the mean time our Impostor return'd to his Lodging very joyful, holding in his hand Aesculapius born of an Egg, and not of a Crow, (as was said of him in former times, who was the Son of Coronis, which signi∣fies a Crow) and he shut himself up in the House with him, until the God was become a great one; and one day when all Paphlagonia came flocking about him, he sate upon a Bed in his Prophetick Habit, and holding that Serpent in his Bosom which he had brought from Macedonia, he shew'd him to the People folding about his Neck, and drawing af∣ter him a long Tail, so prodigious was his bigness. This Truth is also confirm'd by many Me∣dals coin'd by the Emperors and the People, upon which Aesculapius is represented like a great Serpent. The First is the Reverse of a Brass Medal of Antoninus Pius, coin'd by the Inhabitants of Aboniteichos, whose Tail made many Foldings, and which without doubt was the Figure of that of Alexander the Impostor, since these two words are added to it, , the Glycon of the Aboniteichites, i. e. the Inhabitants of that City of Paphlagonia which is call'd Aboniteichos, or the Castle of Abonus. By this Medal we learn, that the true Name which Alexander gave to Aesculapius, when he return'd to the World under the form of a Serpent, was Glycon, which comes from the Greek word  which is as much as to say, Sweet and beneficial to Man∣kind. We have seen also this God represented in the Medals of the Nicomedians, having the Bo∣dy of a Serpent and the Head of a Man, with this Inscription upon a Marble CNEUS GNAVIUS. Philonimus consecrated this Marble in testimony of his Thankfulness to Aesculapius the Conserver and Preserver of Man∣kind, and to Health, which the Greeks call Hygia, and the Latines, Salus, which they say was the Daughter of Aesculapius: She is there represent∣ed as giving him something to eat or drink, and holding in her Left-hand a lighted Torch. We have also a Medal of Antoninus Pius, whereon is engraven Two Serpents, with the Name of Aboniteichites, whereof the one is bi∣ting the Head of the other, to signifie that Apollo, the God of Physick, communicated his Knowledg to his Son Aesculapius; and also a Medal of the same Emperor, which represents the Arrival of Aesculapius at Rome in an Island of the Tiber, under the shape of a Serpent, as Aurelius Victor has inform'd us. The first Inventer of Physick, according to the opinion of the Greeks and Romans, was Apollo, the Father of Aesculapius, as we learn from Ovid, in these Verses, wherein he brings in Apollo thus speaking, Inventum Medicina meum est, opiferque per orbem. Dicor, & herbarum est subjecta potentia nobis. Metam. l. 1. v. 521. And thus the first God which Hippocrates taught his Scholars to swear by, was Apollo the Physi∣cian; and then after that they swore by Aescu∣lapius, Hygia, and Panacaea. Yet Hyginus, the enfranchis'd Slave says, that Apollo was only the Inventer of Medicines for the Eyes, and that Chiron was the Author of Chirurgery, and Aesculapius of that sort of Physick which is call'd the Clinica, i. e. which teaches how to visit and treat the sick which are confin'd to their Bed; tho Lucian tells us, that he set up an Apothecaries Shop at Pergamus; but this looks like a piece of Railery of this Satyrist. There are also antient Medals of Brass and Silver, done by the Family of the Acilii, with the Head of Aesculapius crown'd with a Laurel on one side, either because he was the Son of Apollo, to whom that Tree was consecrated, or because it supplies Medicines for the Cure of Wounds. Albricius describes Aesculapius in the habit of a Physician, with a long Beard of massy Gold, which Dionysius, the Tyrant of Syracuse, took away from him, alledging in Railery, that it did not become the Son to be represented with a Beard, since his Father Apollo, who was much older than he, had none. In this figure Aescu∣lapius holds his Beard with his right-hand, as if he were in a profound study, and in his left-hand a Staff, about which a Serpent is twi∣ning; the Serpent intimates to us that Diseases with respect to Physicians, are like a Serpent which casts off its old Skin, because Physicians are to free the Sick from Diseases and Infirm∣ties,
and make them healthful and vigorous: another reason why this Animal is consecrated to the God of Physick, is, because the Serpent being the Emblem of Prudence, it signifies, that this Virtue is more especially requisite for a Physician. Pliny thinks that the Serpent was dedicated to Aesculapius, because there are some Salts extracted from this Animal, which are Ingredients in many Medicines that are neces∣sary for the Preservation of Life: the Staff was likewise given to him to signifie that those persons who are raised up from a sick Bed, had need manage themselves well to prevent a Re∣lapse, or rather because Physick is the Comfort and Staff of Life; this Staff had Knots in it, to signifie the Difficulty of this Art, and that it was not easie to cure Diseases. AES, a Metal which was found in the Bow∣els of the Earth, whereof Money was antiently made: which gives me occasion to speak of se∣veral kinds of Money and their use. 'Tis certain that at first People traffick'd one with another, by Exchanges of Commodities which their own Country produc'd, for those of Forein Countries: But the Difficulty they found in ballancing these Exchange, put them upon the Invention of Money, made of Metal or other Materials, according to the Diversity of Countries. The Lacedemonians had no other Mony but little round pieces or Ingots of red Iron, which had been quench'd in Vinegar. Caesar, in his Commentaries, lib. 7. says, that in England there was no other Money but what was made of Copper and Lead, together with some Buttons and Rings of Iron, which they weigh'd. Authors are very much divided about the Invention and antient Use of Money: Some think that it is not very antient; and these ground their Opinion upon the Authority of Homer, who says, Iliad. lib. 7. the Greeks bought the Wine which was brought to them in Ships from Lemnos, by giving in exchange for it Copper, Iron, Skins of Beasts, Cattel, and sometimes Slaves. This Opinion is also con∣firm'd by another Passage in Iliad. lib. 6. where the Poet relates that Glaucus exchang'd his Ar∣mour of Gold, which was reckon'd to be worth an hundred Oxen, for that of Diomedes, which was only of Brass. But Pollux lib. 9. c. 7. un∣derstands by these Oxen, not any living Ani∣mals, but pieces of Money on which was stampt the figure of an Ox.; which is justify'd by the Authority of Plutarch, in the Apo∣thegms of Agesilus, who complains that he was driven out of Asia by thirty thousand Men of the King of Persia's, which were arm'd with Bows and Arrows; by which he meant so ma∣ny pieces of Gold, call'd Daricks, which were stampt with an Archer. Others, on the contrary, will have it that Money made of Metal has been used in all times, from the beginning of Mankind. This Opinion they build on a passage in Josephus, in his tenth Book Of the Jewish Antiquities, where he makes Cain the Inventor of it, and says that he increas'd his Riches by the Mony which he amass'd from all parts. In the twentieth Chap∣ter of Genesis, 'tis observ'd, that Abimelech made a Present to Abraham of a thousand pieces of Silver, Ecce mille argenteos dedi fratri tuo. And the Sons of Jacob carried pieces of Silver into Egypt to buy Corn with during the Famine, for the Scripture tells us that Joseph their Bro∣ther order'd the Silver to be put into their Sacks together with the Corn. We cannot therefore clearly discover, in these dark times of Antiquity, who was the first Inventer or Coiner of Money. We read indeed in Genesis ch. 4. v. 22. that Tubal-Cain, the Son of Lamech and Sella, was a Worker in Brass and Iron; but 'tis not said that he coin'd any Money: All the Certainty we can find in this matter, is only the use of pieces of Gold and Silver in Commerce from the beginning of the World, which may be prov'd by many places of Genesis and Exodus, and by the 43 ch. of the Prophet Exekiel. The Hebrews or Israelites us'd many pieces of money in their Traffick. The Great Cicar, or the Talent of the Sanctu∣ary, which weigh'd 100 Minae, or 250 Roman pounds. The Manch or Mine, which weigh'd two pounds and a half, or 30 ounces. The Shekel of the Sanctuary, which weigh'd half an ounce or 20 Oboli. The Drachma, which had an Harp on one side, and on the other a Bunch of Grapes. The Little Shekel which weigh'd two drams. The Gera or Obolus, which weigh'd from 14 to 15 grains Herodotus says, that the Lydians were the first who coin'd pieces of Gold and Silver: But there are some Authors who attribute the first Coining of Money to Erichthonus the fourth King of Athens; and others who ascribe it to Jonos King of Thessaly, of whom Lucan is one, in lib. 7. of his Pharsalia. Plutarch, in the Life of Theseus the tenth King of Athens, says, He caus'd pieces of Silver to be coin'd of the value of two drachma's, ha∣ving on one side an Ox, in favour of the Ma∣rathonian Bull, or the Captain Minotaurus; and on the other Jupiter with an Owl. He caus'd also another piece to be coin'd, which was stampt on one side with a Minerva, and on the other with two Owls, to shew that it was of double the value: they were call'd Staterae, (being worth two shillings and four pence) and weigh'd four drams.
The Money of the Pelopounesians was stampt with a Snail, which gave occasion to that Pro∣verb,  The Snail surpasses Wisdom and Vertue, which is as much as to say, All things are procur'd by Money. Philip, the Father of Alexander the Great, caus'd pieces of Gold to be made, which bore his own Image and Name. Plautus mentions them in his Bacchides; Ducentos nummos auros Philippeos probos dabin'? The Cyzicenians who liv'd in Bithynia caus'd pieces of Silver to be coin'd of a very fine Metal, wheron was engraven the Goddess Cy∣bele on one side, and on the Reverse was a Lion. But it does most clearly appear, That among the Romans, Servius Tullus their King was the first who caus'd Brass-Money to be coin'd, for in former times they used Brass in the Lump of a Pound-weight, which was call'd Aes grave, as Pliny assures us, Servius rex primus signavit as, antea rudi uses Romae Timaeus tradit. The first Money therefore that the Romans us'd was made of Brass, about the year 180 from the Building of Rome: It was stampt with a Sheep, or, according to Varro, with an Ox; from whence comes the word Pecunia to signifie Sil∣ver: tho some think that the word comes from the Leather-Money which Numa caus'd to be made, ex assibus scorteis. Nevertheless Plutarch mentions a Money more antient, which Saturn caus'd to be stampt, having on one side his own figure, and on the other a Ship; that he might leave to Posterity a Monument of his Flight, and Arrival in Italy on Ship-board. Macrobius says, It was Janus who caus'd this Money to be stampt in honour of Saturn, which Ovid confirms in these Verses, At bona posteritus puppim formavit in aere Hospitis adventum testificata Dei. Whether it were Saturn or Janus that coin'd this Money signifies little; nevertheless it makes it evident that Servius Tullus was not the first who coined Brass-Money, unless they mean that he was the first who stamp'd Figures of Animals on it, and gave it a Currency throughout Italy. Aurelius Victor mentions a certain Game a∣mongst the Romans, by tossing up a piece of Janus's Money, saying Navi an Dii? which will you have, a God or a Ship? because it had the Head of a God represented on one side, and a Ship on the other, (like our Cross or Pile.) Yet the pieces of Copper-Money, which were made in a Mass of a pound-weight, were not used of a long time: for the first Pay that the Roman Legions received, was of this Mo∣ney, according to Titus Livius; also Pecuniary Mulcts were paid in this sort of Coin. But, according to the Fasti Capitolini, in the year 485, and five years before the first Punick War, under the Consulship of Q. Fabius Maxi∣mus Pictor and L. Quintius Gulo, certain Silver pieces were coin'd which were called Denarii, because they were of the value of ten Asses; Argentum signatum, says Pliny, anno Urbis qua∣dringentesimo octogesimo qainto, quinque annis ante primum bellum Panicum. This is the Sum of what hath been hitherto said of the Roman Money. In the time of Nu∣ma the Romans used Leather-Money, Nummis scorteis; and for two hundred years after, Copper always in a Mass of a pound-weight. Servius Tullus, their sixth King coined pieces of a less value, which he call'd Trientes and Qua∣drantes, these had the Figure of a Ship stampt upon them: He also coin'd other kinds, which he called Sextantes, and Ʋnciales, or Ʋnciaria Stips. These are all the sorts which were cur∣rant among the Romans all this time. There were also several small sorts of Leaden Money, according to Martial, lib. 10. epigr. 74. Centum merebor plumbeos die teto. Silver pieces were not coined till the year 485. viz. the Denarius, which was ten Asses in value; the Semidenarius, call'd Quinarius, or five Asses; the fourth part of the Denarius, call'd Sesterti∣um; and lastly, the Teruncius. All these sorts of Money were Silver, stampt on one side with a Woman's Head, which represented Rome, and on the other with a X, or a V, or some other Letter to signifie the Value. Upon some of them was stampt the Images of Caster and Pollux, two Roman Gods. There were other kinds also, on which was represented Victory on foot crowning a Trophy with Garlands, seated on a Triumphal Chariot, holding out Garlands, ready to crown the Victorious. Fe∣stus and Titus Livius call them, Nummi Victorati, Bigati, Quadrigati. In the latter Ages of the Commonwealth, the Masters of the Mint caus'd the Heads of such Persons as were famous either in War or Peace, with a Representation of their great Actions to be stampt on pieces of Money. Pieces of Gold called Nummi aurei, were not used in Commerce, till the Consulship of Clau∣dius Nero and Livius Salinator, which was in the year 546, after the Building of Rome, and sixty two years after these pieces of Silver began to be currant: they weighed two drams and an half. Per as & libram, or Aere & librâ, were Phra∣ses used among the Romans in selling by weight and ballance. Their Adoptions, Obligations, Exportations, Pay∣ments, Sales, and Purchases, were made in Cop∣per, by guess and weight, as we shall shew un∣der Denarii aperti.
AES, this Word also signifies a Bell, with which the Romans us'd to give notice that the Publick Baths were open, or going to be shut; as we may learn from that of Martial, lib. 14. epigr. 163. Redde pilam, sonat ae thermarum. AESO, Aeson, the Father of Jason, whom Medea restor'd to his Youth again, by the pow∣er of her Magick. AESOPUS, Aesop, who compos'd the Fa∣bles, so ingenious, and full of good Instru∣ctions, there being not any one of them but contains excellent moral Advice, which may make us just and prudent in the conduct of our Lives. We may with pleasure see there most natural Representations of all mundane Transactions. The Pictures are not drawn with dead Colours, but with living and sensi∣tive Creatures, which do not only represent to us the Faces and outward Shapes of Men, but also the Dispositions of their Mind. Aesop was a Phrygian Slave, of small stature, very deform'd, being bunch'd behind and before. He obtained the Gift of making Fables of Mercury, as we learn from Philostratus in his Description of Fables; When I was a Child (says he) my Mother told me a story of Fables. Aesop (continues he) being a Shepherd, commonly sed his Flock near a Temple belonging to Mercury, into which he often went to pray that God to inspire him with Knowledge, to which he had a great Inclinati∣on. Several Persons frequented the Temple upon the same account; but the Offerings they made to that God were much more valuable than Aesop's, who had nothing to give him but a few Honey-combs, and the Stroakings of the Milk of his Sheep, with a few Flowers with which he cover'd his Altars. Mercury, as a bountiful and generous Deity, was willing to reward their Devotions, and answer'd their Prayers; to some he gave Wisdom, to others Eloquence; to some Astrology, and others Poetry: Aesop only was forgot in the Distribution, and com∣plain'd of it; Mercury not knowing what remain'd to give him, call'd to mind a Fable which the Hours, his Nurses, had taught him in his Child-hood, of a Cow that spake to a Man, and had made him desire the Oxen of the Sun, whereupon he re∣solv'd to give Aesop a Faculty of making Fables, in which he became very excellent. There was another of that Name, who was a Comedian, and Cicero's intimate Friend. Pliny says of him, That one day he made a Banquet of such an excessive Expence, that one Ragou, made of the Tongues of those Birds that imitate Man's voice, which thought to cost six hundred Sesterces, or fif∣teen thousand Crowns. He had a Son as ex∣travagant as himself, who at a Feast drank several Pearls of extraordinary Value, beat to powder. AESTAS, Summer, the hottest Season of the Year, which is between Spring and Au∣tumn. The Summer heretofore contained six months, the Year being then divided into two parts only, Winter and Summer: for the Sum∣mer was reckon'd from the Equinox of March to the Equinox of September, and the Winter from the Equinox of September to the Equinox of March. But the Astronomers have now divided the Year into four equal parts, or Seasons, Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter: the Summer Solstice begins in the Sign Cancer, June 12. when the Sun is nearest us, and makes the longest day in the Year. Poets represent the Summer in the Form of a Goddess crowned with Ears of Corn, holding a Sickle in one hand, and a Sheaf of Corn in the other. AESTIMATIO, Estimation, or Valuation, a Term of the Roman Law, used in buying and selling, and is taken not only for an Apprais∣ment, Value or Price, but also for the things appraised. They say, aestimare litem, to signi∣fie, to tax the Costs of a Suit. AETAS, an Age in general, contained no more at first than twenty five or thirty years; but afterwards it was counted an hundred years. Servius observes, that an Age is taken sometimes for the space of thirty years, for an hundred and ten years, and sometimes for a thousand. 'Tis necessary to say something here of the four Ages of the World, according to the Poets, both Greek and Latin, who have reduc'd them to two, the Golden Age, or as we Chri∣stians speak, the State of Innocence and Hap∣piness before the Fall of Man; and the Iron Age, or that of Sins and Miseries, after the Fall. What the Scripture informs us concerning that Innocence and Happiness in which God created the first Man, seems to have given oc∣casion for what the Poets have said of the four Ages of the World, viz. the Golden, Silver, Brass, and Iron Ages. Ovid in his Metamorph. lib. 1. ver. 80. has described the Golden Age, which is the State of Innocence, thus, Aurea prima sata est aetas, quae vindice nullo. Sponte suâ sine lege fidem rectumque colebat. That is called the Silver-Age, in which the Spring was no longer the only Season of the Year, but the Earth refused to produce its Fruits, unless forc'd by the long Labour of Tillage. In fine, when Men had need of Cloths to defend them from the Sharpness and Injuries of the Weather, and to apply them∣selves to Arts and Sciences, to supply the Ne∣cessities of Life. —Subiit argentea prolis Auro deterior.
The two following Ages, viz. the Brass and Iron, degenerated yet more, and run into all sorts of Crimes and Vices. Tertia post illas successit ahenea proles Saevior ingeniis, &c, Victa jacet pietas, terras Astraea reliquit. The Golden Age, or Age of Innocence, if we may believe the Poets, was common to many Nations; for Ovid saith, that in the times of Janus and Saturn the Italians enjoy'd the Company of the Gods, and liv'd in Inno∣cence, Justice, Peace, and all other Advanta∣ges of the Golden Age; this he speaks in lib. 1. Fastorum. The Golden Age was then in Italy, when Saturn and Janus reigned there. Virgil has taken notice but of two Ages, one before the Reign of Jupiter, the other after: for it was in the Reign of Jupiter that Men be∣gan to divide and till the ground. 'Twas then that Jupiter condemn'd Men to a hard and la∣borious Life, and forc'd them to invent Arts. Seneca follows the same Method, distin∣guishing the two Ages of Men into just and happy, and unjust and unhappy, viz. the Gol∣den and the Iron Age. Hesiod lived many Ages before these Latin Poets, and made this Distinction of Ages before them. He describes the three first much like those of Ovid. He also calls them the Golden, Silver and Steel Ages; the fourth he makes an Age of Justice and Valour. This fourth Age of Hesiod may be computed about the time of Noah, when there was a Restauration of Ju∣stice. This is not the only Point in which Hesiod hits upon the Truth; for he has plainly discover'd that it was Woman by whom all E∣vil entred into the World: Sed Mulier manibus magnum operculum cum dimovisset, dispersit, homi∣nibus autem immisit curas, v. 92. This is the Description he gives of Pandora, who was the first Woman made by the hand of God. This was that Pandora who open'd the Fatal Box of Evils which over-spread the Earth, in which Hesiod is follow'd by the other Poets; as Pau∣sanias observes. The Life of every Man is likewise divided into Four Ages, or Four different Times of which 'tis made up, viz. Infancy, which con∣tinues till the Fourteenth Year; Youth, to Twenty Four; Manhood, to Sixty; and Old Age, to the end of our Life. The Age or Term of Life at which a Man was qualified for Offices, war differently ap∣pointed in the Common-wealth of Rome, and under the Emperors. A Man ought to be at least Seventeen years old to be Soldier. None could obtain a Quaestorship till the Age of Twenty Seven. They would not allow any to be Tribunur Plebis till Thirty Years old. None could be an Aedile before he was Thirty seven Years old. Nor a Praetor or Consul till Forty. These fix'd Times could not be dispens'd with, especially under the Emperors. Tacitus teaches us, that at first they had no respect to Age, even in bestowing their great∣est Dignities, and he mentions young Men who were Dictators and Consuls. It does not appear that those Ages were settled till the Year 373. under the Consulship of Posthumius Albinus and C. Calpurnius Piso, when Julius the Tribune made a Law, as Titus Livius relates, which ascertain'd the Age for all Offices. AETERNITAS, Eternity, was reckon∣ed among the Gods worshiped at Rome. It is differently represented to us upon Medals; her Statue was sometimes drawn in the Habit of a Roman Lady, holding a Javelin in her Right-hand, and a Cornu-copia in her Left, set∣ting her Left-foot upon a Globe. The Empe∣ror Adrian caus'd her to be graven holding two Heads in her Hands. Upon some Medals of Philip, Eternity is also represented sitting upon an Elephant; on a Chariot drawn by two Elephants or two Lyons, with this Motto, ETERNITAS. AETHER, Jupiter, or the more fine part of the Air, which is easily inflam'd, and where the Thunder and Lightning is formed out of the subtle Matter, which is set on fire there: Hence it is that the Poets say, that Jupiter cau∣ses the Thunder, and darts Lightning upon the Earth. This word comes from , to burn; and 'tis likely that Jupiter is also nam'd , because  comes from , ferveo, to be hot. AETHIOPIA, a very large Country of Africk. It was first call'd Aetheria, after that Atlantia, and since Aethiopia, from Ae∣thiops the Son of Vulcan, according to Pliny; or rather from the word , uro, to burn. The Hebrews call it Chus, that is to say, Black. Geographers place Ethiopia under the Torrid Zone, between Arabia and Egypt. The exces∣sive Heat of that Climate hath given Birth to many monstrous Men and Beasts, of which the Historians Pliny, Strabo, and others speak. AETHIOPES, The Ethiopians, or People of Ethiopia. Hesiod calls them , Black Men. Homer gives 'em the Epithet of Blameless. They go to fight dancing, as Lucian says, and before they draw out their Arrows, which are set round their Heads in form of Rays, they leap and dance to affright their Enemies. They were the first who found out Astrology; for 'tis a subtile Nation, which excels all others in Ingenuity and Knowledg. Homer calls them Thrice happy. They treated Jupiter, with all his Train of Gods, Twelve whole Days at their Sacrifices, as we learn from the same Lucian.
AETHON, the Name of one of the Four Horses of the Sun; the First is call'd Pyrois, i. e. Red, because the Sun, when it ascends above our Horizon, being overspread with Vapors from the Earth, appears red; the Second is Eous, i. e. Shining or Bright, because the Sun being mounted up, and having dispers'd the Vapors, appears clear and bright; Aethon is the Third, which signifies Burning, as the Sun is at Noon, when it is in the middle of its course, and when it scorches us with its Heat and Fire; the Fourth is call'd Phlegon, Russet∣colour'd, as the Sun is when it sets. AETHRA, the Daughter of Oceanus and Thetis, and Wife of Atlas, by whom she had a Son named Hyas, and Seven Daughters, who so lamented the Death of their Brother Hyas, who was torn in pieces by a Lyon, that they dyed of Grief: Jupiter chang'd 'em into so ma∣ny Stars, which the Astronomers called Hyades, or Rainy. AETION, the Father of Andromache the Wife of Hector, who was slain at Thebes by the Greeks, with his Seven Sons. He was particu∣larly honoured at the Olympick-Games, says Lucian. AETION, Aetion, a famous antient Pain∣ter, who has left us a famous Piece of the Ameurs of Roxana and Alexander, which he shewed to the Publick at the Olympick-Games; he drew a magnificent Chamber, where Roxana sate upon her Bed shining in glorious Apparel, but more glorious yet by her Beauty, although she lookt down for shame at the presence of Alexander, who stood before her: A Thousand little Cupids flew about her, of whom some lifted up her Veil behind, to shew her to the Prince, others undrest her, others pull'd Alex∣ander by the Robe, as a young Bridegroom full of Modesty, and presented him to his Mistris: He throws his Crown at her Feet, accompa∣nied by Ephestion, who holds a Torch in his Hand, and learning upon a beautiful Boy, which represents Hymenaeus. On his side are other little Cupids which wantonly play with his Arms. Some carry his Lance bowing un∣der so heavy a burden, others his Buckler, up∣on which there is one sitting whom they carry in Triumph, while another lies in ambush in his Breast-plate, who attends 'em in the passage to affright 'em. This Piece gain'd Aetion so great Reputation, that he who presided over the Games, gave him his Daughter in Marriage. AETNA, Aetna, a burning Mountain in Sicily, which was also call'd by some Mount Gibel, which sends forth from time to time Whirlwinds of Fire and Smoke, and Clouds of Ashes. This Fire is fed by Veins of Brim∣stone and Bitumen kindled by the Winds, which are inclosed in these subterraneous Ca∣verns. Fabulous Antiquity would make us be∣lieve, that Jupiter having slain the rebellious Gyants with Thunder, shut them up in this Mountain; that the Bellowings, which are heard to come out of it, are the Groans of those Gyants, who are overwhelm'd with the excessive weight of that Mountain, and that these Fires that issue out of it, are the Breath and Wind of these miserable Creatures: This Virgil describes in these Verses of Lib. 3. of his Aeneids, v. 578. & seq. Fama est Enceladi semustum fulmine corpus Urgeri mole hâc, ingentemque insuper Aetnam Impositam, ruptis flammam expirare caminis; Et fessum quoties motat latus, intremere Murmure Trinacriam.— AFFIXUM, or AFFIXA, that which is fixed or joyned to a Building. The things which are added to an House, and are over and above the Building. AGAMEMNON, the Son of Atreus and Europa, and Brother of Menelaus, was King of Myeenae, one of the Kingdoms of Peloponnesus. Going to the Siege of Troy to revenge the Rape of his Sister-in-law Helena, he left with his Wife Clytemnestra, a musical Poet who was faithful to him, to divert her in his absence, and so hinder her from acting any thing contrary to the Fidelity she ow'd him. Aegistheus the Son of Thyestes, who endeavour'd to debauch her, seeing that this Poet broke all his Measures, and obstructed his Designs, carry'd him away into a desart Isle, and left him there to die of Hunger, and returning to Mycaenae, debauch'd Clytemnestra, and got possession of the King∣dom. Agamemneo, at his return from the Tre∣jan War, was slain by his own Wife at a Ban∣quet which she had prepared for him, having inclos'd him in a Garment without a Bosom when he came out of the Bath. Orestes re∣veng'd the Death of his Father upon his Mo∣ther, and Aegistheus, who debauch'd her, for he kill'd 'em both. Agamemnon was chang'd in∣to an Eagle after his Death. AGANIPPIDES, an Epithete which the Poets give the Muses, from the Fountain Aga∣nippe, or Hippocrene, which was consecrated to them. AGAVE, the Daughter of Cadmus and Hermione, who in the shape of a Boar tore in pieces her Son Pantheus, King of Thebes, because he abolish'd the Orgia or Feasts of Bacchus in his Realm, upon account of Debauches com∣mitted in them. AGE, Quodagis, a Form of Speech us'd in the antient Sacrifices, which was often repeated to the Person that offer'd, to make him more careful and attentive; as if it were said to him, Mind what you are about; Let not your Thoughts ramble.
AGENORA, the Goddess Agenora, who makes us active, and to whom the Romans built a Temple upon Mount Aventine. AGGERES, Heaps of Earth which were rais'd upon the Tombs of the Antients; Virgil makes mention of them in his Aeneids, Lib. XI. v. 850. —Terrino ex aggere bustum. as also in v. 6. of Lib. VII. Aggere composito tumuli.— Sidonius writes to one of his Relations named Secundus, that coming from Lyons to Clermont in Auvergne, he observ'd that Time and Water had almost laid plain an Heap or Bank of Earth, which cover'd the Tomb of Apollinaris his Kins∣man, who was Praefectus Praeterio, A. C. 409. Catulus speaks also of these Tombs, and calls them, Coacervatum bustum excelso aggere. Aggere Tarquinii, the Ramparts of Earth which Tarquinius rais'd between the Mountains, Vimi∣nalis, & Esquilinus, from whence Suetonius says, they cast down Criminals head-long: Verbera∣tum per vicos agerent, qud praecipitaretur ex aggere. AGLAIS, One of the Three Graces, which the Greeks call'd Charites, the Compa∣nions of Venus the Goddess of Beauty. They were the Daughterr of Jupiter and Eurynome. AGLAURA, the Daughter of Cecrops, and Sister of Hirsa, with whom Mercury fell in love: This Messenger of the Gods, to gain the Favour of his Mistris, engag'd her Sister Aglaura, who promis'd to serve him, by giving her a Sum of Money. This provok'd Minerva so much, who could not endure such fordid Avarice, that she commanded Envy to make her jealous of her Sister Hirsa; while she was contriving to cross Mercury's Designs, he turn'd her into a Statue of Salt. AGLIBOLUS, some learned Men guess, that this word comes from  and , to cast a light, to shine. Hesychius says, that Aiglitis, which signifies Shining, is a Name of the Sun; and so Aglibolus is the Sun. Mr. Spon, in his CURIOUS ENQUIRIES after Antiquities, says, that there was an antient Mar∣ble at Rome, in the Vineyard of Cardinal Car∣pegna, on which was the Portrait of two Syrian Deities, with an Inscription in Greek thus englished, To the Honour of Aglibolus and Malak-belus. The Gods of the Country, and he affirms, that Aglibolus is the Sun, and Malak-belus the Moon. He says, that the Habit of Aglibolus is not after the Roman Fashion, but, like the Syrians, short, with a sort of Cloak uppermost, which ought not to seem strange, since these Figures were drawn in Syria, and every Nation is clothed af∣ter their own Fashion, as Theodoret says. The Habit of Malak-belus is something like that which the Romans wore in their Wars, which they call'd Paludamentum, with a Cloak over it. But the Crown is not like the Roman, no more than the Hair which the Romans usually shav'd; and this gave occasion to Vespasian, as Suetonius relates, to tell the Romans, when they were frighted at the sight of a Comet with a long Tail above their Horizon, that that Comet did not belong to their Country, but the Kingdom of Persia, who wore long Hair, and had most reason to fear the effects of it. Salmasius is of another opinion in his Commentaries upon the Historia Augusta, for he will have Malak-belus to be the Sun, and Aglibolus the Moon, but he gives no reason for the Conjecture, and 'tis likely he never saw the Marble, which I have spoken of. AGNATI, are the Relations on the Fa∣thers side, and who are of the same Race. In the Civil-Law 'tis said, Ad agnatos deducere ali∣quem, To put any one under a Guardian, To forbid him the Administration of his Goods, by the advice of his Relations. AGNO, a Fountain of Arcadia, so call'd from a Nymph so nam'd, the Nurse of Jupiter. When the Water of it was us'd in sacred mat∣ters, it ascended in the form of a Cloud, which after fell down in Rain. AGNODICE, a young Maid, who being desirous to learn Physick, conceal'd her Sex, and went to be instructed by Herophyus a Physician, she particularly acquir'd the Skill of Midwisery. The Physicians much envy'd her, because she was preferr'd before 'em, sum∣mon'd her before the Judges of the Arcopa∣gus, accusing her of debouching the Women she deliver'd. But having discover'd her Sex, she convicted them of a Calumny, which oc∣casion'd the Judges to make a Law, allowing free-born Women to profess Midwisery. AGNOMEN, is a Name added to the Sur-name which was given from some particu∣lar Action; as one of the Sciplo's was named Africanus, and the other Asiaticus, from the brave Achievments which the one did in Africa, and the other in Asia. Without all doubt some Persons had heretofore a particular Sur-name, which was as it were a Fourth Name. The Author to Herennius makes mention of this Agnemen, when he says, Nomen autem cum dici∣mus, cognomen & agnomen intelligatur oportet. AGONALIA, was an immoveable Feast appointed by King Numa, which was celebrated every Year, on January 9. in Honour of the God Janus, as we learn from Ovid, Lib. I. Fa∣storum, v. 317. Quatuor adde dies ductis ex-ordine nonis Janus agonali Lucepiandus erit, The Rex Sacrorum at this Feast sacrific'd a We∣ther to the God Janus. Authors differ in their
opinions about the Occasion of this Feast. Varro will have it so call'd from a Ceremony used in all Sacrifices, where the Priest being ready to offer Sacrifice, asks the Sacrificer, Agon' which was used then for Agamne? Shall I strike? Festus derives this Word ei∣ther from Agonia, which signifies a Sacrifice, which they led to the Altar, ab agendo, from whence these sorts of Ministers were call'd Agones; or from the God Agonius, the God of Action; or from Agones, which signifie Moun∣tains, and so the Agonalia were Sacrifices which were offer'd upon a Mountain. Indeed the Mount Quirinalis was called Agonus, and the Colline-Gate which led thither Porta Agonensis, which the same Festus will have so call'd from the Games which were celebrated without that Gate in Honour of Apollo, near the Temple of Venus Erycina; where the Cirque of Flaminius was overflow'd by the Tiber. But it is more probable, that this Feast was called Agonalia, from the Greek word , which signifies Sports and Combats which were us'd in Greece, in imitation of those which Her∣cules appointed at Elis first, and consecrated to Jupiter, as these Verses of Ovid shew, Lib. I. Fastorum, v. 359. Fas etiam fieri selitis aetate priorum Nomina de Ludis Graeca tulisse diem, Et prius antiquus dicebat, Agonia, sermo Veraque judicio est ultima causa meo. There are Two Feasts celebrated at Rome of the same Name, one upon April 21. which falls on the day of the Palilia, on which the Buil∣ding of Rome is commemorated; and the other on December 11. according to Festus. AGONES, the Salii, of whom Varro speaks, in his Fifth Book of the Latin Tongue. See Salii. AGONES CAPITOLINI, Games which were celebrated every Five Years in the Capitol, instituted by the Emperor Domitian in his Consulship, and that of Corn. Dolabella Ser∣gius. All sorts of Exercises both of Body and Mind were represented there, as at the Olym∣pick-Games, as Players on Instruments, Poets, Jack-Puddings and Mimics, which strove, every one in his own Profession, who should gain the Prize. The Poet Statius recited his Thebais there, which was not well lik'd, as he complains in several places of his Silvae. This serves to ex∣plain a place in Juvenal not well understood, —Sed cum fregit subsellia versu Esurit intactam Paridi nisi vendat Agaven. Sat. VII. v. 86. But his Thebais not having the Success he expe∣cted, and he having procured no Patron by it, dyed of Hunger, and after being to subsist himself by selling the Tragedy of Agave, the Mother of Pentheus, which was never acted by Paris the Stage-Player. Some Commentators explain this place of Juvenal otherwise, and think the Poet meant the contrary, that his Work was well receiv'd and universally applauded. Altho this Expli∣cation be allowable enough, yet 'tis evidently contrary to the Complaints which Statius makes in several places of his Poems, unless we think it better to say that Statius complains that after he had receiv'd Applause for his Thebais, he was nevertheless ill requited for it afterwards. In these Exercises the chief Conqueror re∣ceiv'd a Laurel Crown adorn'd with Ribbands, but the others receiv'd a plain One without any Ornament, as we may see by these Verses of Ausonius, Et quae jamdudum tibi palma Poetica pollet Lemnisco ornata est, quo mea palma caret. Poets thus crowned were call'd Laureati. These Sports were so much esteem'd by Do∣mitian, that he changed the Account of Years, and instead of reckoning by Lustra, which is the space of five years, they counted by Ago∣nalia and Agones Capitolini, from their Instituti∣on to the time of Censorinus. AGRARIA LEX, the Agrarian Law, was made for the dividing Lands got by Conquest, which the Tribuni Plebis would have to be sha∣red among the People by Poll. Spurius Cassius Vicellinus being Consul first propounded this A∣grarian Law, Anno U. C. 267, which was the cause of a very great Quarrel betwixt the Se∣nate and the People; but it was rejected the first time. There are two Agragrian Laws men∣tioned in the Digests, one made by Julius Caesar and the other by the Emperour Nerva, but they had respect only to the Bounds of Lands, and had no relation to that we now speak of. Cassius perceiving the strong Opposition which some made that this Agrarian Law might not be received, proposed to distribute among the People the Money which arose from the Sale of the Corn brought from Sicily, but the People refused it. After this first Attempt, a peace was settled in Rome for some years; but in the Consulship of Caeso Fabius and Aemilius Mamercus, Licinius Stolo Tribune of the People proposed the Agra∣rian Law a second time in the year 269 from the Building of Rome. This second Attempt had no better Success than the former, tho it was pass'd over calmly enough. Nevertheless the Consul Caeso seeing the People fond of this Law, and that the Senate was positive it ought not to be received, contriv'd a way to satisfie both Parties, as he thought, by proposing, that only the Lands of the Vejentes, conquer'd under his Consulship, should be divided among the People, but this met withno better Success than the other.
The Tribunes of the People, being angry at the Opposition of the Senate drew up many Accusations against the Patricians and Noble∣men before the People, and caused many of them to be fined and banish'd, which so much provok'd the Cousuls, that they caused Genutius the Tribune to be stab'd: this Assassination raised a great Tumult in Rome, and stir'd up the People to revenge, till the Consul Sempro∣nius was condemned to pay a large Fine. Lastly, In the year 320 from the Building of Rome, Mutius Scaevola put Tiberius Gracchus, the Tribune of the People, in mind to have the Agrarian Law established against the Will of the Senate, Nobles and Rich Commons. Octa∣vius, his Partner, being rich, was not of the same mind, and opposed the Law. Grac∣chus, seeing that, accused him before the Peo∣ple of Prevarication and Unfaithfulness in his Office, and caused him to be depos'd with Dis∣grace. This Obstacle being remov'd, the A∣grarian Law passed, and Commissioners were appointed to divide the Lands. AGRIPPA, several Persons among the Antients bore this Name, which was usually given to such as came into the World with Difficulty, or which were born with their Feet forward, as Aulus Gellius affirms. The most eminent of this Name were, AGRIPPA SYLVIUS, the twelfth King of the Latins, the Son of Tyberinus Sylvius, whom he succeeded; he reigned thirty or forty years, and Aremulus succeeded him in the year of the World 3281. AGRIPPA MENENIUS, surnamed Lanatus; he was chosen General of the Romans against the Sabins, whom he conquer'd, and obtain'd the lesser Triumph called Ovation: he was endow'd with admirable Eloquence, which made him undertake with Success to reconcile the Senate and the People of Rome; to this end he went to the Aventine Mount, where he pathetically represented to the People, that all the Commonwealth was but one great Body, of which the Senate is the Head and Stomach; which seems alone to devour all that the La∣bour and Industry of the other Parts can get, but in Reality 'tis only to distribute it to the rest of the Body to nourish and strengthen it; and if the Members do not daily supply them with the usual Nourishment, they themselves would soon be found to be without Vigour, Heat or Life. This excellent Comparison was so aptly apply'd, and so zealously explained by Agrippa, that the People were reconciled to the Senate, who consented to the Election of a Tribune, chosen out of the People, to pro∣tect them against the Authority of the great Ones. This Magistrate had a right to oppose the Consultations of the Senate, by saying this Word, Veto, i. e. I oppose it, and forbid you to proceed further. AGRIPPA, named Marcus, a Man of a mean Original, a Favourite of Augustus, Ad∣miral of the Empire, a great Captain, and a Companion of that Prince in his Victories. He assisted him much in obtaining that Victory which he had in the Sea-fight against Sextus Pom∣peius, of which Virgil speaks. Augustus bestow'd the Consulship upon him twice together, and, as a Surplus of his Favour, he made him his Son-in-Law, by marrying his Daughter Julia to him, who had been first married to Marcellus his Nephew, who died without Children. This Agrippa had two Daughters and three Sons, viz. Calus, Lucius, and Agrippa, who was a Posthumous Child, i. e. born after his Father's Death. Augustus adopted Caius and Lucius before they were seventeen years of Age; he had them proclaimed Princes of the Youth, and earnest∣ly desired that they might be chosen Consuls. The first married Livia the Sister of Germanicus. These two Princes were soon taken from him, by the Wickedness of another Livia their Mo∣ther-in-Law, or by their own Misfortunes; one in a Voyage to Spain, whither he went to command the Armies, and the other in his Return from Armenia, from whence he came ill of a Wound. As for Agrippa the posthu∣mous Child, Augustus complain'd of him, and caused him to be banish'd by a Decree of the Senate, into the Isle Planasia. He was indeed a stupid and brutish Prince, and withal a sim∣ple Man. Tiberius, who succeeded Augustus, made his Access to the Empire remarkable by the Death of Agrippa, who being surpriz'd was slain by a Centurion, whom he sent on pur∣pose, without making any Defence. Tacit. An∣nal. lib. 1. AGRIPPA, Herod, the Son of Aristobu∣lus, whom Herod the Elder put to Death. He was King of the Jews, and had the Favour of the Emperour Caligula, who at his coming to the Crown released him from Prison, where Tiberius had shut him up, for wishing Caligula had his place. This Emperour, besides his Li∣berty, gave him a Chain of Gold, of the same weight with that which he had worn out of Love to him while he was in Prison, and gave him the Tetrarchy of his Uncle Philip, who died without Children, and allow'd him to take upon him the Title of The King of the Jews. He made himself infamous at his Arrival at Jerusalem, by the Death of St. James the Great, and the Imprisonment of St. Peter. But his Cruelty was not long unpunish'd, for as he was in Caesarea Palaestine, busied in the Celebra∣tion of the Publick Plays for the Health of the Emperour, he was struck on a sudden, as he
was making a Speech to the People, with a surprising terrible Pain, of which soon after he died. AGRIPPINA, the Grand-daughter of Augustus, and Daughter of Marcus Agrippa, was the Wife of Germanicus the Son of Drusus the Brother of Tiberius. Some believe that her Hus∣band was poisoned by Cn. Piso, tho this Crime was but weakly proved at the Condemnation of Piso. She carried her Husband's Ashes to Rome, and laid them in the Tomb of the Cae∣sors. Tacitus says, she was a Woman of an haughty and untameable Spirit, but she aton'd for her Passions by her Chastity, and the Love she bare to her Husband. AGRIPPINA, named Julia, who mar∣ried, at her second Marriage, the Emperour Claudius, who was her Uncle; but she soon after poison'd him with what she put into Mushrooms, which afterwards at Rome were called The Food of the Gods. Britannicus, who was Claudius's Son by his first Marriage, ought to have succeeded him in the Empire; but Agrippina advanc'd her Son Nero to it, contrary to his Right, that she herself might reign un∣der the Name of her Son. She had him by Domitius Aeneobarbus her first Husband, and Claudius adopted him into his Family, which opened a way for his Accession to the Sove∣reign Dignity. But this ambitious Princess was well rewarded for it, for Nero caused her to be slain by Anicetus, and, for compleating her Infamy, order'd that the Day of her Nati∣vity, should be reckon'd among the unfortu∣nate Days. AJAX, the Locrian, the Son of Oileus, so named from the City and Country of Locris, near Mount Parnassus. He signaliz'd himself at the Siege of Troy by many notable Exploits. After the taking of the City, he pluck'd Cassan∣dra, the Daughter of King Priam, from the Altar of Minerva, to which she was fled as an Asylum. Some say, he ravish'd her, and that Minerva, being provok'd, reveng'd the Fact by slaying him with a Thunderbolt, which sir'd his Ship, and so drowned him in the Sea. But Philostratus says the contrary, that Ajax offer'd no Force to Cassandra, but that Agamem∣non took her away from him, having seen her in his Tent, and to avoid the Mischief he might design against him, fled by Sea in the night, and suffer'd Shipwrack by a Tempest that overtook him. The Greeks much lamen∣ted him, and made an extraordinary Funeral for him, for they fill'd a Ship with Wood, as if they would make a Funeral-Pile for him, slew several black Beasts in honour of him, and having also set up black Sails in the Ship, they set it on fire about break of day, and left it to run into the Main Sea all in a flame, till it was consum'd to Ashes. AJAX TELAMONIUS, the Son of Telamon, King of Salamis, and the fair Eriboea, according to Pindar. He was one of the most valiant Greeks that was at the Siege of Troy. After the Death of Achilles, he pretended that his Armour belonged to him as the next of kin; but Thetis exposing them to the Publick, that every one that pretended a Right to them might claim them, V;lysses disputed it with him and gained them. Ajax was thereupon so much enraged, that he fell upon a Flock of Sheep, with his Sword drawn and brandished, and slew them, supposing them to be Grecians, and then he thrust himself through with his own Sword and died. AIUS LOCUTIUS, a Speaking Voice, to which the Romans erected an Altar, accor∣ding to Cicero and Aulus Gellius, or a small Temple, according to P. Victor, in the New-street. The occasion of it, as Cicero and Livy relate, was thus; One named M. Ceditius, a Plebeian, went and acquainted the Tribunes, that passing through the New-street in the night, he heard a Voice more than human over the Temple of Vesta, which gave the Romans no∣tice that the Gauls were coming against Rome. This Information was neglected upon account of the Person who gave it; but the Event prov'd the Truth of it. Hereupon Camillus thought, that, to appease the angry Gods, he ought to ac∣knowledge this Voice as a new Deity, under the Title of The Speaking God, and to build an Altar to offer Sacrifice to him. ALA, a Wing, in the Roman Armies, was made up of the Cavalry and Infantry of the Confederates, and which cover'd the Body of the Roman Army, as the Wings cover the Bo∣dies of Birds. There was a Right and a Left Wing, both mix'd with the Cavalry and In∣fantry, which they called Alares, or Alares Co∣piae. They were made up each of four hun∣dred Horsemen divided into ten Squadrons, and 4200 Foot. Some say that Pan the Indian, a Captain of Bacchus, was the first Inventor of this way of drawing up an Army in Battle. whence it comes to pass that the Antients have painted him with Horns on his Head, because what we call Wings they called Horns. ALADUS or ALADINUS SYLVIUS, Eutropius calls him Romus Cassiodorus, and Sextus Victor names him Aremulus. Titus Livius, Messala, and Sabellicus call him Romulus. But tho there are different Opinions about the Name of this Prince, there is an universal Consent in the Ab∣horrence of his Tyranny, and a general Agree∣ment about his exttaordinary Death. His Pride transported him so far as to equal himself with Jupiter the King of the Gods in his Age. He counterfeited the Noise of his Thunder by certain Engines, but at last he perished by a
Tempest and Thunder as real as his own were vain. Fire from Heaven consum'd his Palace; the Lake, in the middle of which it was built, flowed extraordinarily, and contributed to the Destruction of his Family. He reigned nine∣teen years. ALAPA, a Box on the Ear. Majoris Alapae mecum veneunt. Phaed. I do not grant them Liberty so easily. (Boxes on the Ear were usually given to Slaves when they were set at Liberty.) ALAUDA, a Lark. The Poets say it was Scylla the Daughter of Nisus King of Megara, whom she deliver'd into the hands of Minos King of Crete, having cut off his fatal Hair, which was of a purple Colour. The Gods changed her into a Lark, and her Father into a Hawk, which continually pursues her, says the Fable to punish her horrible Treason. ALAUDA, the Name of a Roman Legion, of a French one, according to Bochart; the Sol∣diers of which carried a Lark's Tuft upon the top of their Helmets. ALBA, a Name given to three or four Ci∣ties, of which the principal was Alba Longa, so called by the Antients because it extended to a great Length in the Territory of Rome, it was built by Ascanius the Son of Aeneas, from whence the Inhabitants are called Albini. As∣canius built it in a place where he had observ'd a white Sow, thirty years after the Foundation of Lavinium, which his Father had built. This number of Years was signified to him by the thirty Pigs which that Sow then suckled. He would have transported the Gods of Troy, which Aeneas had brought with him, into this new City; but he found the next day they were carried to Lavinium: whereupon Ascani∣us left them there, and contented himself with settling a College of six hundred Trojans, to serve them according to the Worship used in Phrygia. Aegistheus was chosen to be the Chief of those Priests. This City had several Kings, and maintained fierce Wars against the Romans; which did not cease till the famous Combat between the three Curatii on the Albins parts, and the three Horatii on the Ro∣mans side. The three Curatii were slain, and and by their Death their Country became sub∣ject to the Romans, as both Parties had agreed before the Combat, Metius Suffetius was made the first Governour of it. ALBINUS, a Native of Adrumetum in A∣frick: He was descended of a Noble Family which came from Rome, having the Whiteness of the Europeans, but a frizled Beard like those of that Country; his Stature was tall and pro∣portionably thick, he was of a melancholy Temper, and had a wide Mouth; he was also a great Eater. A certain Writer, named Co∣drus, has told incredible things of him, saying, That he eat at one Breakfast five hundred Figs, one hundred Peaches, ten Melons, twenty pounds of Raisins, one hundred Wood-peckers, and four hundred Oysters; which without doubt is rather an Hy∣perbole than a Truth. After the Death of the Emperour Pertinax, Albinus was chosen Empe∣rour by the Troops which he commanded in Great-Britain; and at the same time Severus, who had just defeated Pescennius Niger, was likewise chosen Emperour by the Eastern Troops. Albinus, fearing least he should be seiz'd in England, went into France with fifty thousand Men, and Severus had about as many. Albinus being secure, because the City of Lyons took his part, gave Severus battel. He had an Advantage at the first Onset, and Severus him∣self, being faln from his Horse, had thoughts of giving over the Battel; but at last Albinus was conquer'd, and the Conquerour caus'd his Head to be cut off and sent to Rome, and cast his Body into the River Rhosne. ALBION or BRITANNIA, England. Caesar, l. 5. c. 3. of the War with the Gauls, gives this De∣scription of it; the interiour part of Britannia is in∣habited by the Natives of the Country, but on the Coasts by the Gauls, which, for the most part, keep still their Names: the Island is well peopled, and their Houses much like the Gauls: they have much Cattel: they use Copper Money, or Iron Rings by weight, for want of Silver: they have Mines of Tin in the mid∣dle of the Country, and of Iron on the Coasts, which yield no great Revenue, but the Copper which they use is brought them from abroad: all sorts of Wood grow there as in France, except Beach and Firr: the People scruple to eat Hares, Geese and Hens, altho they breed them up for Pleasure: the Air is more temperate than in Gallia, and the Cold less violent: the Isle is triangular, the side which is op∣posite to Gallia is above an hundred and twenty Leagues in length, from the County of Kent, which is the furthest end towards the East, and where al∣most all the Ships from Gallia do land, to the other which is Southward: the Western Coast, which lies overagainst Spain and Ireland, contains near 180 Leagues in length. Ireland is not half so big as England: between them lies the Isle of Mon, or Anglesea, where some say there are thirty Days all Night in Winter; but I found no such thing, only I have observ'd by Water-Clocks, that the Nights are shorter in those Parts than they are in Gallia. The most civiliz'd People of England are those of the County of Kent, which lies along the Coasts. The inward parts of the Countrey are not till'd in all places, and most of the Inhabitants live upon Milk and the Flesh of their Flocks, and wear their Skins for Clothing. All the English paint their Bodies with Woad, which makes them of a blewish Colour, and renders them more formidable in Battel. They shave off all their Hair except that of their Head and Whiskers.
Their Women are common to ten or twelve, but their Children belong to those who married them. Tacitus, in the Life of Agricola, gives us this Character of England; It is the biggest Isle which is yet known: it has Germany on the East, Spain on the West, Gallia on the South, and the Main O∣cean, which has no Bounds, on the North. Fabius and Titus Livius, the two most eloquent of our Hi∣storians, as well antient as modern, have compared it to a long Buckler, or the Head of an Ax, because the hither side is of that figure. It was not known till our time that 'twas an Isle, after a Tour was made about the Northern Coast of it, where there are discover'd other Isles at a further distance called the Orcades, and Island it self, which a perpetual Winter keeps from our View. The Original of the Inhabitants is not known, whether they are Indige∣nae or Strangers. The Scots have Hair and a Sta∣ture like the Germans. Those who dwell on the side next Spain, have frizled Hair, and are of a Tawny Colour. The rest are like the Gauls, to whom they are Neighbours. The Sky is always thick and cloudy, but the Cold is never very fierce: the Days are longer than in France, but the Night is very clear, especially about the extreme parts of the Isle, where there is but little distance between the End of one day and the Begin∣ning of the next; some say, that in a clear and se∣rene Sky, they do not wholly lose their Light, but it seems to turn about above the Horizon; so that, properly speaking, they never see the Sun either rise or set. They have neither Vines nor Olive-teees, nor other Fruit-trees which grow in hot Countries, altho otherwise it is very Fruitful: their Fruits come out early, but are a long time in ripening, for want of Heat, and by reason of the abundance of their Moi∣sture. ALBO-GALERUS, a sort of Cap made of white Wool, which had a Tuft on the Top, and upon which they wore Branches of Olives embroider'd. The Flamen Dialis, or Priest of Jupiter only had a Right to wear it. ALBULA, a River where Tiberius Sylvius was drown'd, who was King of the Albini, from whom it was immediately named Tiber. ALBUNA, a Goddess worshipped in the Country of Tibur [now Tivoli.] Some think she was Ino the Daughter of Athamas, who fearing her Husband, cast her self headlong into the Sea with her Son Melicerta. Other Authors confound her with the tenth Sibyl, call'd Tiburtina, because she was born at Tibur. ALBUTIUS, the Father of the Sorcerer Canidius. He was extraordinarily nice in his Victuals, and in the Cookery of it, insomuch that he beat his Servants before they offended. Horace speaks thus of him, lib. 2. Sat. 2. v. 66. —Hic neque Servus, Albutî senis exemplo, dum munia didit, Savus erit.— He will not follow the Example of Old Albutius, when he commands his Slaves any thing. ALCESTIS, the Daughter of Pelias and Wife of Admetus King of Thessaly. Apollo ob∣tained of the Destinies, that if Admetus could procure any Person to die in his stead, he should live as many years as he had done alrea∣dy. The Father and Mother of Admetus ha∣ving refus'd him that Favour, his Wife Alcestis offer'd to die for him. Hercules came unexpect∣edly, and, having heard what had pass'd, went to the Tomb of Alcestis, and rescu'd her from the Jaws of Death, and restored her to her Husband. Others say, he went down into Hell, and took her from Proserpina. Euripides, in his Alcestis, relates, That Hercu∣les was entertained by Admetus the day that Al∣cestis his Wife died, and all his House was in Mourning. Admetus lodg'd him in an Apartment by himself, that he might not disturb his Guest by so doleful an Object. Hercules requited his Host well, for he undertook to encounter Death, who had taken away the Soul of Alcestis; he chas'd Death away, brought back her Soul to her Body, and restor'd his Wife alive to Admetus. This seems to be the History of Elisha counterfeited, who rais'd the Son of the Shunamite from the dead. ALCIBIADES, the Son of Clinias and Dinomache, he was the most beautiful Man in the World, and of the neatest shape that ever was seen. The Grandees of his Family gave him as great preheminence above all the Athe∣nians, as Athens had above the rest of the Cities of Greece. His Courage and Conduct were shewn in the Wars against the Lacedaemonians and Persians. But this Great Man had so great a Mixture of Vices and Corruptions, with these rare Endowments of Mind and Body, that he was condemn'd to Death, and his Goods to be confiscated, because he blasphemed the Gods. When he repented of his Extravagances, after this Disgrace, he banish'd those that had de∣bauch'd him, and put himself under the In∣struction of Socrates, who made him a good Man. Afterwards flying to King Artaxerxes, he was basely slain by the Lacedaemonians, who bore him a mortal Hatred, and had made them∣selves Masters of Athens and all Greece. His Statue, because he was one of the most Vali∣ant Grecians, was set up, by a Decree of the Se∣nate, in a publick Place at Rome, according to the Pythian Oracle. ALCIDES, an Epithet given to Hercules, from the Word , which signifies Strength and Virtue; or from Alcaeus his Grand-father by the Father's side. ALCITHOE, a Theban Woman, who despising the Orgiae, or Festivals of Bacchus, and beginning a Journey whilst they were celebra∣ting, was changed into a Screech-Owl, and her Sisters into Batts.
ALCMENA, the Daughter of Electryo, and Lysidicae, whose Father was Pelops, and Mo∣ther Hippodamia, she married Amphitryo her Co∣sin-German, upon condition that he should re∣venge the Death of her Brother, which the Theleboans, a People of Aetolia had kill'd. While Amphitryo was employ'd against them, Jupiter, who was in Love with Alcmena, took the shape of Amphitryo, and lay with her a whole Night, which he made as long as Three, having com∣manded the Night and Sleep, by the Media∣tion of Mercury, not to leave Men for that time, and by this Conjunction Alcmena became the Mother of Hercules. Lucian has related this Fable in his Dialogue between Mercury and the Sun, which we shall set down here entire: Phoebus. Jupiter says you must not drive to day to morrow, nor the next day, but keep with∣in; that during that time there may be one en∣tire Night; bid the Hours unharness their Hor∣ses, and do you put out your Light, and repose your self a while. Sun. You bring me very strange News, Mercury; I do not know that I have in the least drove beyond my just limits, or disturb'd the Mountains; why then is he so angry with me, to make the Night thrice as long as the day? Mercury. Not in the least, this is not to be for a continuance, he only now desires that this Night may be long on his own account. Sun. Pray, where is he? From whence sent he you on this Errand? Mercury. From Beotia Phaebus, he is with Amphitryo's Wife, whom he is enamour'd with, and now enjoys. Sun. And will not one Night be suf∣ficient? Mercury. No, for he intends to get a great and warlike Hero, and this is impossi∣ble to be done in one Night. Sun. Let him go on with success; but we had no such do∣ings in Saturu's time; he never defil'd Rhea's Bed, nor left Heaven to fleep at Thebes, but Day was then Day, and Night had only its proportion of hours, and nothing was strange and out of due course, nor did he ever med∣dle with mortal Woman; but now for the sake of this Wretch, all things must be in∣verted; my Horses will grow unmanageable for want of working, the way will become difficult to travel in, and Men must live in dismal Darkness; thus must they sleep for the Amours of Jove, till he perfect this mighty Champion you talk of. Mercury. No more words, Phaebus, lest it prove prejudicial to you. I must make haste to Luna and Somnus, and tell 'em what Jupiter's Orders are, that she may re∣tard her Motion; and that he do not leave Men, that they may not perceive that the Night was so long. This is the reason why Lycophron calls. Hercu∣les the Lyon of Three Nights. Alcmena having gone her time, first brought forth Iphyclus, which she had conceived by her Husband Am∣phitryo. But jeajous Juno hindred her when she was about to bring forth Hercules, which she had conceiv'd by Jupiter; for she birb'd Lucina, the Goddess of Child-bearing, that instead of assisting her, she, on the contrary should ob∣struct her, by making certain Figures with her Fingers. Pansanias, in his Baeotrice, says, That Juno sent the Pharmacides or Sorcereresses into the Chamber of Alcmena in the time of her Travail, to hinder her by their Enchant∣ments: But Jupiter dispell'd all their Charms, by declaring himself from Heaven by Thun∣der, in favour of his Son, and reconcil'd Am∣phitryon and Alcmena, who were fall'n out. Alcmena dyed in her return from Argos to Thebes, as Pausanius says, on the Confines of Megara. There was a Dispute between the the Heraclites about her Burial, some desiring that her Body should be carryed to Argos, and others to Thebes; but the Oracle of Apollo at Delphos ordered, that her Tomb should be made in Megora. ALCMON and PASSALUS, rather Achaemon, or Achmon and Passalus, Two Bro∣thers who were of very wicked and debauch'd Inclinations; they were the Sons of a Woman called Sexmonis, who us'd to tell Fortunes: She had them beware of a Melampygus, i. e. a Crea∣ture whose back-parts were black and hairy, Wherefore meeting one day with Hercules, who was asleep leaning against a Tree, they took up a resolution to kill him; but Hercules awaking, and perceiving their design, seiz'd on 'em, and hang'd 'em by the heels on his Club, and as he march'd with 'em in this po∣sture, they perceiv'd his back-parts, and remem∣bring the Prediction of their Mother, they look'd upon themselves as undone: But Her∣cules having learn'd of 'em the cause of their fear, let 'em go. ALCYON, The Kings Fisher, a Bird much extoll'd, of whom this Fable is told; That Alcynoe the Daughter of Aeolus, having lost the beautiful Cey, her Husband, in the Sea, who was the Son of the Day-Star, tormented her∣self with vain Grief; till the Gods, mov'd with Compassion, chang'd her into a Bird, which still searches about the Water for him she lost there. It is a small Bird, and its Note is very mournful. To requite her Love, when she makes her Nest, and sits on her young ones, the Winds are still, and the Sea calm in the sharpest time of Winter: These serene Days are call'd Halcyonian from the Alcyon, and du∣ring them, the Sky is calm, and the surface of the Sea as smooth as a Looking-Glass. Pliny gives this Description of this Bird, Lib. X. cap. 32. It is, says he, a little bigger than a Sparrow, and of a blue colour, but hath some red
and white Feathers. The smallest of them sing com∣monly among the Reeds. They breed about the mid∣dle of December. Their Nests are round, in the form of a large Bowl, having only a little Hole to go in at. ALCYONEUS, a Gyant, who had many Daughters, which after his Death cast themselves head-long from the Cape of Pillena into the Sea: Amphurite mov'd with Compas∣sion for 'em, chang'd 'em into Birds. ALECTO, One of the Three Furies of Hell, according to the Poets, the Daughters of Acheron and Nox, or of Pluto and Proserpina. They are reverenc'd by the Antients, as the Goddesses, by whom Crimes were punished. they are painted with a furious Aspect, and wearing a Cap of Serpents, holding Whips and lighted Torches in their Hands. ALECTRYO, a young Man, a Con∣fident of Mars in his Amours. One Day when Mars was gone to see Venus, and lye with her in the absence of her Husband Vulcan, he left him at the Gate to watch when the Day ap∣pear'd, but this pretty Youth falling asleep, the Sun discover'd the whole Intrigue, so that Vulcan caught both the Lovers in his Nets. Mars, angry at this, chang'd this young Man into a Cock, who still keeps the Crest of the Helmet which he had before he was chang'd; and all his Generation ever since, to retrieve his Honour, give notice of the approach of the Day. ALEMANNI, the Germans: These People, says Tacitus, were never debauch'd by Commerce or Alliance with other People, which is the reason that they are all alike; for they have yellow Hair, blue Eyes, a fierce Aspect, and an advantagious Stature, yet they cannot bear long Fatigues, and are only brisk at the first; Heat and Thirst are very unsupport∣able to 'em, but they endure Cold and Hunger very well, by reason of the Constitution of their Country. Those that inhabit our Fron∣tiers value Money upon the account of Com∣merce, and know some antient Pieces of our Coin, which they value more than others, as those that have a Saw or a Chariot on them. The rest traffick by exchange of Goods still, as the first Men did. Their Cavalry carry on∣ly a Lance and a Buckler: Their Infantry car∣ry also Darts, of which every Soldier has se∣veral, which he knows how to cast with great Force and Dexterity, being not at all hindred by his Clothes or Arms; for their only Gar∣ment is a long Coat. If we consider their Troops in general, their Infantry is the best, which is the reason that they mix it with their Cavalry. 'Tis such a Disgrace among 'em to quit their Buckler, that they who have done is, never dare come to their Assemblies or Sa∣crifices. In choosing their Kings they much respect their Birth, and in their Governours their Vertue. None but the Priests among 'em have right to imprison and punish. Of all the Gods, they chiefly worship Mercury, and sacrifice even Men to him at certain Solemni∣ties. They think it not agreeable to the Gran∣dieur of the Gods, to paint them as Men, or shut them up in Temples, but they only con∣secrate Groves to 'em, and adore such as are most solitary. They are much given to Augu∣ries and Lots, which they perform with lit∣tle Ceremony. They cut a Branch of a cer∣tain Fruit-Tree in several pieces, and having mark'd them with certain Characters, cast 'em carelesly upon a white Cloth; then the Priest, or Master of the Family, if it be a private House, after he has made a Prayer to the Gods, lifts up each piece three times, and interprets them according to the Marks on 'em. They also consult the flying and chirping of Birds, and the neighing of Horses is with them a certain Presage: To this end they feed white Horses in their dedicated Groves, and will not suffer them to be prophan'd by the service of Men; and when they have a mind to consult 'em, they yoke 'em in a Chariot of their Gods, and the Priest or King follows them to observe their Neighing; there is no Augury to which they give more Credit. They make use also of another Invention to know the Event of their Wars; They take a Captive of their Ene∣mies, and match him with one of their own Party, and judg of the issue of the War by the success of their Combat. They count by Nights and not by Days, as we do; and in their Orders of State, they set down on such a Night, and not on such a Day; because, as they think, the Night was first. They meet in Council armed, and the Priests alone have power to en∣joyn silence, as they have also to punish: Their Punishments are different, according to their Crimes; they hang Traytors and Deserters on Trees; the cowardly, the base, and the infa∣mous they smoother in Puddles, and then throw an Hurdle upon 'em. Their Coat, which is all the Garment they wear, as I have above observed, is fasten'd with a Button or Clasp, the rest of their Body is naked: The richest of them have their Garments not large and full, as the Parthians and Sarmatians, but close, according to the shape of their Bodies: They also clothe themselves with Furs. The Womens Garments are much like the Mens, save that they wear a kind of Linnen Shift with out Sleeves, border'd with Crimson-Silk, which leaves their Arms and Bosom naked. Their Marriages nevertheless are untainted, and their Chastity is not blemished by their Meetings, Festivals, and publick Shews. They neither
send nor receive Love-Letters or Billet-Douxes, insomuch that Adultery is seldom found among so great a People: they allow not second Marri∣age, and a Woman takes an Husband to be uni∣ted to her, as one Body and one Soul. 'Tis an odious thing among 'em to destroy a Child in the Womb or hinder Conception; every one is brought up in his own Family, without any o∣ther Nurse than his own Mother. There are few People that take more pleasure in entertaining Strangers; 'tis a Crime for any Man to shut his House against them, whosoever they be: When any one comes to their Houses, the Ma∣ster of it gives him whatever he has, and when he has nothing left, he will carry him to his Neighbour, who receives him with the same Respect and Freedom. They drink Beer, for no Vines grow in their Country. Their Food is very plain, wild Fruits, Milk curdled, and Venison, and they live without Dainties and Expence. They have but one sort of pub∣lick Show, their young Men dance naked on the points of Spears and Javelins. They do not divide the Year into Four parts, as other Nations. The Autumn is as little known as the Fruits of it. Their Funerals are without any Pomp or Magnificence, they only burn the Bodies of some Persons of Quality with a particular sort of Wood, putting nothing upon the Pile but their Arms, and sometimes the Horse of the deceas'd without Perfumes or Garments; their Graves are made of Turfs, and they contemn the Costliness of our Tombs. In fine, they are great Drinkers, and very great Gamesters, insomuch that they will play away themselves after they have lost all their Goods. They celebrate in old Verses, of which all their History is compos'd, a God born in their Land, called Tuisco, and his Son, Man, who were the first Inhabitants of the Country. Caesar speaking of the Germans in his Sixth Book, De Bello Gallico, tells us, That they have nei∣ther Priests nor Sacrifices, and own no Deity but such as they see and feel the Effects of, as the Sun, the Moon, and the Fire; and that War and Hunting were their only Exercises. ALEMANNIA, Germany. This Coun∣try, says Tacitus, is bounded with the Rhine, Danube, and Ocean, except on the part next Sarmatia and Dacia, where it is bounded with the Mountains, on which a very warlike Peo∣ple inhabit. The Ocean there makes great Bays and large Isles. The Rhine takes it rise in the Country of the Grisons, and falling from the top of the Alps, discharges it self, after a long course, into the North-Sea, inclining a little toward the West. The Danube falls from Mount Abnoba, and empties it self into the Euxine-Sea at six Months, for the seventh is lost in the Marshes. Hercules is said to have been in this Country; and Ulysses himself, in his long and fabulous Travels, was carried by a Tempest into Germany, where he built a City upon the Banks of the Rhine, which is still cal∣led Aschelburg, from the Greek Name which he gave it: Some add, that he had an Altar con∣secrated to him there, under the Title of the Son of Laertes, and that there remain to this day some Monuments of him with Greek In∣scriptions in the Borders of the Grisons and Ger∣many, which I neither assert, or call in question the Truth of: ALETIDES, antient Sacrifices which the Athenians offer'd to Icarus and Erigone, in which they danced Puppets. Icarus was the Son of Aebalus, and Father of Erigone, who having re∣ceiv'd of Bacchus a Bottle full of Wine, gave it the Shepherds of Attica to drink, who were very thirsty, because of the Heat of their Coun∣trey; they drank of it till they lost the use of their Reason, and supposing themselves to be poyson'd by that Liquor, they fell upon him, and killing him, cast his Body into a Pit: He had a little Bitch named Mara, who went, and pulling his Daughter Erigone by the lower part of her Garment, brought her to the place where the Body of her Father was; she seeing him in this condition, hang'd herself for grief, and many Athenian Virgins, who lov'd her ex∣traordinarily, follow'd her Example. The Bitch also pin'd away with Grief, and Jupiter translated her to Haven under the Name of Canicula, i. e. the Dog-Star. Icarus was chang'd into that Sign of the Zodiac which is called Charles's Wain, and Erigone into another Sign call'd Virgo. The Oracle of Apollo being con∣sulted, order'd that a solemn Sacrifice should be offer'd to the Ghosts of Erigone and her Com∣panions, in which the Images of the Virgins hanged were represented; and 'twas in this Solemnity that some Virgins swung themselves about in the Air. ALEXANDER, surnamed the GREAT, was of a middling stature, and rather small than great, as his Medal represents him on the Reverse, and as Historians speak of him, which has given occasion for this Verse, Magnus Alexander corpore parvus erat. He had a very lofty Countenance, and his Eyes placed very high in his Head, well-shap'd, and generally looking upward. He was the Son of Philip, King of Macedon, and Olympias; he succeeded his Father in his Kingdom, which he found full of Tumults, and wavering after his Death; but he soon settled it by the Pu∣nishment of his Murtherers, and made Greece tremble by the Destruction of Thebes. He ad∣vanc'd his Arms farther than any King before him, and passing the Hellespont, defeated the Captains of Darius in a pitch'd Battel, and
conquer'd all the Provinces as far as Cilicia, and vanquisht Darius, King of Persia. Lastly, not to mention Tyre or Arbella, he subdu'd Asia, as far as the Indies, and then the Indies themselves, making the Ocean the Bounds of his Empire. He dyed at Babylon of Poyson, or a Feaver, be∣ing 32 years of Age, having reign'd Twelve Years. He was liberal and magnificent, and lov'd Glory and Learning. He is accus'd of Cruelty to his Friends who had not Complai∣sance enough to flatter him, and believe him the Son of Jupiter. He kill'd Clitus because he would not approve that he should use the Customs of those he had conquer'd, nor that he should be ador'd as a God: Yet 'tis said, that Aristobulus, one of his Captains, reading to him, as he was sailing upon Hydaspes, a Relation he had written of his Battel with Porus, in which he flatter'd him very much; Alexander threw the Book into the Water, and told him, that he ought to do so, because he was so base-spirited to attribute false Actions to Alexander, as if he had done no real ones. In like manner he re∣primanded an Architect, who would have cut Mount Athos after his likeness, and make him to hold a City in one Hand, and pour a River out with the other. He would not meddle with Darius's Wife, and took care of his Mo∣ther and Children. ALEXANDER SEVERUS, the Son of Varus and Mammaea. He was made Emperor of Rome before he was 16 years of Age, and was one of the wisest and most learned of the Emperors. He would not suf∣fer any Offices to be sold, but gave them, to Persons of Merit. His Council was made up of the most virtuous and able Lawyers of the Empire, viz. Ulpian, Callistratus, and Modestinus. He was a great Lover of Arts and Sciences. He was liberal without Profuseness, valiant without Cruelty, a severe Judg, yet was eve∣ry way just and equitable. He discover'd a great Inclination to the Christian Religion; for he set up in his Chap∣pel the Image of Jesus Christ, together with Abrahams: And some likewise conjecture, that he intended to build him a Temple at Rome. His Severity, tho' just, yet was fatal to him, and provoked the Soldiers of the German Le∣gion to slay him near Mens, after he had reign'd Thirteen years. He retain'd so great a Modesty in his highest pitch of Honour, that he never would suffer himself to be call'd Lord; for he order'd that all Salutations to him should be utter'd in these words, Ave Alexander, and condemn'd by his Modesty his Predecessors, and chiefly Helioga∣balus, who would be saluted thus, Dominus, ac Deus noster sic fieri jubet, Our Lord and God will have it so: As Suetonius saith. ALIMENTA, an Allowance of Meat given to a single person to live on for a Year or a Month. The Romans did often in their Wills, give a certain Sum to serve for an Al∣lowance of Meat to their Children. In pueros, puellasque singulas damnas esto dare cibarii nomine aureos decem. They also extended this Libe∣rality to their Free-Men, as we learn from the Lawyer Scavola: Quisquis mihi haeres erit, omni∣bus libertis meis, quos hoc testamento manu misi, alimentorum nomine in menses singulos certam pecu∣niam dato. i. e. I charge him that is mine Heir, to give monthly a certain Sum for an Allow∣ance of Meat, to all my Free-Men, to whom I have given Liberty by this my Will. They practis'd also the same thing towards those whom they called Alumnos and Alumnas, as these words in the Law do testifie; Mevio infanti alumno meo quadringinta dari volo, quae pe∣to à te suscipias, & usuras ei quincunces in annum usque vicesimum aetatis praestes, eumque suscipias, ac tuearis. ALIMENTARII pueri, & ALI∣MENTARIAE puellae, is spoken of young Boys and Girls, which were brought up in publick places, as in our Hospital of Christ-Church: For the Romans had certain publick places where they brought up and maintain'd poor Children and Orphans of both Sexes, at the Expence of the Treasury, or of such Banks of Money as the Emperors, and private Persons had made, and given by their Will for the Maintenance of these Hospitals. These Chil∣dren were call'd, if Boys, Alimentarii pueri; if Girls, Alimentariae puellae: They were also of∣ten call'd by the Names of their Founders. Julius Capitolinus, in his Life of Antoninus, sur∣named Pius, says, That this Prince founded an Hospital for Girls, which were call'd Faustinae, Faustines, from the Name of his Wife, Puellas alimentarias in honorum Faustinae Faustinianas con∣stituit. The same Author, speaking of the Em∣peror Alexander Severus, tells us, that he fol∣low'd the Example of Antoninus, in erecting an Hospital for Boys and Girls, and gave them his own Name, calling 'em Mammaeani and Mam∣maeans. Puellas & pueros, quemadmodum Anto∣ninus Faustinianas instituerat Mammaeanas & Mam∣maeanos instituit. ALLIENSIS PUGNA, a Fight near the River Allier. The Tribunes going against the Gauls, with a more numerous Army than the Romans had ever sent out before on foot, gave them battel having the River Allier on their backs. The Fight was fierce and obsti∣nate on both sides, but at length the Gauls were Victors, and slew many of the Romans, because the River hindred their Flight. This day, being the first of August, was mark'd in the Ro∣man Kalendar, as a fatal and unfortunate day,
in the year from the Building of Rome 365. This Loss was more felt, and prejudicial to the Romans, as Cicero says, than the sacking of Rome by the same Gauls; Majores nostri funestio∣rem diem esse voluerunt Alliensis pugna, quàm urbis captae. ALLOCUTIO, an Oration or Speech of a General of an Army to his Soldiers, either to animate them to fight, or to appease Sedition, and keep them to their Duty. To this end they raised a little Hill of Earth, as it were a kind of Tribunal of Turf, upon which the General mounted and spoke to his Soldiers, who were drawn up in their several Squadrons round about the Tribunal, and having their Captains at the Head of them. If the General's Speech pleased them, they shew'd their Appro∣bations by lifting up their Right-hands, and clashing their Bucklers one against another; but if they dislik'd it, a humming Murmur ran thro their Ranks, or else they discover'd, by a sullen Silence, that they were not pleased. If the Enemy push'd on the Battel, the Ge∣neral thought it sufficient to go through the Ranks to encourage the Soldiers, calling them every one by their Names, putting them in mind of their Courage, and the Victories they had gain'd, and promising them the Plunder, or some other Largess, if they obtain'd the Victory. ALOIDES, two Giants, the Sons of Alo∣eus, who in their infancy attempted to pull up Mount Ossa by the roots, and to set it upon Olympus, and Pelion upon that, that they might make use of them as a Ladder to climb up into Heaven, and make War with Jupiter; but these young and rash Fools were punish'd for their Madness, and shot to death by the Ar∣rows of Apollo and his Sister Diana. Virgil brings in Aeneas relating that he saw these two Giants in Hell: Hic & Aloidat geminos, immantia vid Corpora, qui manibus magnum rescindere coelum Aggressi. Virg. Aeneid. lib. 6. v. 582. Homer assures us, That they formerly bound the God Mars, and shut him up in Prison for thirteen Mouths, from whence he could not be releas'd but by the medi∣ation of Mercury. ALPHABETUM, an Alphabet; the orderly Disposition of the Letters of any Language. This Word comes from the initial Letters of the Greek Tongue, Alpha, Beta. ALPHEUS, a River of Areadia. Pausa∣nias, in his Eliaca, tells us, That Alpheus was an antient Hunter, who lov'd Arethusa, and also delighted much in Hunting. He sought her in Mar∣riage, but she deny'd him, and flying into an Isle near Syracuse, she was turn'd into a Fountain, and Alpheus into a River; which, as thrd an amorous Impatience, forces its course through the Sea, and mixes its Waters with Arethuss. Lucian, in a Dialogue between Neptune and Alpheus, introduces them speaking thus: Nept. Whence comes it that such a fine River as you, pass through the Sea without mixing with its Water any more than if you were Ice, like those Fowls who dive in one place and rise in another? Alph. It is an amorous Mystery which you ought not to condemn, because you have been in love your self. Nept. Who are you in love with, is it with a Woman, a Nymph, or any one of the Nereides? Alph. No, no, it is with a Fountain. Nept. With what Fountain pray? Alph. With Arethusa. Nept. 'Tis a fine clear Spring, which rolls its Silver Streams through the Stones with an agreeable Murmur. Alph. Ah! how well you describe her, 'tis she that I pursue. Nept. Ga, and be happy in thy Amour; but tell me when hast thou seen her, thou being in Arcadia, and she in Sicily? Alph. You are too curious, and press too far for me to answer you. Nept. You are in the right of it, and I to blame, to retard a Lover in the pursuit of his Mistress; and when you have met with her, join your self so close to her that you two may have but one Bed hereafter. Pansanias enlarges this Fable a little more in his Arcadica; Alpheus, says he, parts the Lace∣daemonians from the Tageates, and bounds them both: its Source is from Phylace. At some distance from hence he receives the Waters of several small Springs called Symboles, or A Concouse of Wa∣ters. This River has this particular Quality, that it loses its Waters under the Earth, and they rise again in other places; it goes into the River Euro∣tas, and then loses it self, and rises again in a place which the Arcadians call The Sources. It runs into the Territories of Pisa and Olympia, and dis∣charges it self in the Adriatick Gulph; from whence it passes, without mixing its Waters with the Sea, and rises in Ortygia in the Fountain of Are∣thusa, with which it mixes. Hercules cut a Canal from this River, to cleanse the Stable of Augens, which was fill'd, with the Dung of three thousand Oxen for thirty years. ALTARE, an Altar, upon which Sacrifi∣ces were offer'd to the Gods of Heaven. This Word comes from Altus, high, because, accor∣ding to Servius, they sacrificed on them to the Gods on high, or in Heaven. This is the Dif∣ference he makes betwixt these Words Ara and Altare; Novimus, says he, aras Diis esse superis & inferis consecratas, altaria verò esse superiorum tantùm Deorum; quae ab altitudine constat esse nomi∣nata. We find also another Difference of these Words, which is this, Altare was built in an high place to which they went up by Stais, as the great Altars in the Romish Churches; whereas Ara is a low Altar, like their little; ones.
ALTHAEA, the Wife of Aeneas King of Calydonia. She reveng'd the Death of her Bre∣thren by the Death of her own Son Meleager, burning the Log of Wood which was to pro∣long his Life, as long as it lasted and was not consum'd by Fire. AMALTHAEA, a Sybil surnamed Cumaea, famous in Antiquity for her Prophesies and Predictions of the coming of the Messias, who was to be born of a Virgin. We learn of Servius, that she wrote nine Books of Prophe∣sies foretelling what should befal the Empire of Rome, addressing her self to Tarquinius Pris∣cus, she presented them to him, demanding three thousand Crowns in Gold of Philippick Money; but the King rejected her Present: whereupon she burn'd three of them in the presence of that Prince. Returning within a few days, she demanded the same Price for the remaining six, and being again deny'd, she burn'd three more. This astonish'd the King so much that he bought the three which were left, at the same Price she had requir'd for all the nine. They were kept with great care, and certain Persons appointed to look after them. These Books contained the Fate of the Empire, and were never consulted but in the time of some publick Calamities. AMALTHAEA, the Daughter of Melissus King of Candia, who nurs'd Jupiter with Goats Milk and Honey. Some Authors will have it that this Goat was called Amalthaea, and that Jupiter in gratitude placed it among the Stars; giving to the Nymphs one of her Horns, which had this Vertue, to furnish them with whatever they desired; from whence it was called Cornucopia, or the Horn of Plenty. 'Twas also the Name of Atticus's Country-House in Greece, which he called so to intimate, that all things abounded there: for it is very well known that this Word signifies Plenty. Gic. l. 1. ep. 2. ad Attic. AMATHUS, a City in the Isle of Cyprus, consecrated to Venus, whose Inhabitants built a stately Temple to her and her Minion Adonis. They sacrificed at first Strangers upon her Al∣tars; but the Goddess abhorring such cruel Sacrifices, chang'd these Inhabitants into Bulls, and depriving their Wives of all Modesty, because they had contemned her Worship, made them to prostitute themselves to all Comers. AMAZONIUS, the Month of December was so called in the Reign of the Emperour Commodus by his Flatterers, in honour of a Con∣cubine which he loved extreamly, and whom he had caused to be painted like an Amaxon, as Lampridius assures us. AMAZONES, the Amazons, Women-Warriours of great Courage. They were heretofore Women of Scythia, who dwelt near Tanais and Thermodn, which conquer'd great part of Asia. They liv'd without Men, and prostituted their Bodies to Strangers, but kill'd all their Male Children, and burn'd off the left Pap of their Daughters, to make them fit for fighting. From whence some say their Name is derived from , non mamma, which signifies Without Paps. Strabo denies that there ever were any Ama∣zons. Pliny and Mela make mention of those of Scythia. Hippocrates says, that there was a Law among them, which condemn'd their Daugh∣ters to remain Virgins till they had slain three Men of their Enemies. He also says that the Cause why they cut off the Right-pap, was, that their Right-arm might become the stron∣ger, because it gain'd the Nourishment of the Breast; and they distorted the Legs of their Male Children, that they might always be Mi∣stresses over them. Some affirm, that in Africk there was a Realm of Women only, who slew all the Boys that they brought forth by their Copulation with the Neighbouring Nations, as we learn from Juan de los Sanctos, a Grey-Fryar of Portu∣gal, in his Description of the Eastern Aethiopa. Aeneas Sylvius relates, that he saw in Bohemia, for seven years, a Common-wealth exactly like that of the Amazons, establish'd by the Valour of a Woman called Valasca. The Names of the most famous Amazons were, Marthesia, Orythea, and Penthesilea, whom Virgil, in his Aeneids, supposes to be slain by Achilles. Herodotus, speaking of the Amazons, says, that the Greeks having defeated them near the River Thermodon, carried away those that re∣main'd Captives in their Ships, who after the Defeat watch'd their opportunity so well that they seiz'd the Arms of the Greeks and made a great Slaughter of them; but because they un∣derstood nothing of Navigation, they were cast by the Winds upon the Coasts of Scythia; where mounting upon the Horses that came in their way, they fought with the Scythians; who being desirous to make an amicable end of the War which they had begun, endea∣voured to persuade them to surrender them∣selves, and hoping to gain them by their weak side, told them, that in case they would do so, they should not be enjoy'd by their Lame, but by the handsomest Men. They stopt their mouths with this Answer, That their Lame were their best Men; which is since passed into a Pro∣verb among the Greeks, . Ne∣vertheless a Peace was made, and the Scythians gave them a part of their Country, where they settled themselves on the Southside of Tanais. This is what Herodotus says of the Amazons of Asia.
Philostratus, in his Picture of Neoptolemus, re∣lates, that they which sail upon the Euxine Sea do affirm, That along that Coast, between the Rivers Thermodon and Phasis, there are Amazons, which say, they are descended of Mars, who busie themselves wholly in Warlike matters, as to draw a Bow, and ride on Horses; they will not permit a Man to live among them, but when they desire to have any Children, they go to seek out Men among their Neigh∣bours, and when they bring forth Boys, they cause them to be gelt, but their Daughters they bring up to warlike Affairs, feeding them with the Milk of Cattle, and Dew which falls in the form of Honey upon the Reeds in their Marshes. The chief Expeditions of the Amazons were the War which they made against King Priamus, the Assistance they brought him at the Siege of Troy, and their Invasion of Attica, to re∣venge themselves of Theseus who had taken a∣way Antiope. As for their Expedition into the Isle of Achilles, at the mouth of the Danube, it is a Fiction of Philostratus, which no ways re∣dounds to their Honour, because they shew'd themselves very cruel there. 'Tis true Philo∣stratus is not the only Man that has represented the Amazons as wicked, for Apollonius describes them as Salvages, that have neither Faith nor Law. The Monuments which preserve the Memo∣ry of these Warlike Women are, the City of Thermiscira, the Metropolis of their State, situ∣ate in Cappadocia, near a River well known by the Name of Thermodon: the City of Ephesus and Temple of Diana are two Works of their hands. Dionysius Afer says, that they built another Temple to Diana upon the Stump of a young Elm. The Cities of Smyrna, Thyatira, Cuma and Magnesia are commonly thought to be founded by them. Apollonius will have it, that they consecrated the Temples even in the A∣reopagus, and in the Territories of Lacedaemo∣nia. The Statue of Diana at Ephesus was adorned with Paps, because the Amazons consecrated those to her which they cut off. It appears, by some Medals, that the Ama∣zons wore Garments like Men, but by others they seem cloth'd after the usual manner of their Sex. The ingenious Mr. Pet has written a Trea∣tise which contains things very learned and cu∣rious about these Heroines, as about their Se∣pulchres, the Reasons why the Names which they bear are all Greek, and the Chronology of their History, which may be consulted. AMBARVALE or AMBARVALIA, The Feast of Perambulation. The Procession they made about the plow'd and sown Fields in ho∣nour of the Goddess Ceres; like the Processions of the Papists at this day, celebrated upon the Feasts of St. Mark and Rogation-days, with larger or shorter Litanies. There were two Feasts at Rome of that Name, one in April, or according to other Authors, in the End of Ja∣nuary; and the other in July. Twelve Arval Brothers, or Priests, of which I shall speak in their place, went before a pub∣lick Procession of the Citizens who had Lands and Vineyards without the City. The same Ce∣remony was practised in the Country by other Priests among the Inhabitants of the Villages. They went three times round the Ground, e∣very one being crowned with Leaves of Oak, and singing Hymns in honour of Ceres, the Goddess of Corn. This Ceremony was called Ambarvalia, ab ambiendis arvis; the Sacrifices which they offer'd after this Procession, they call'd Ambarvales Hostiae. There were three sorts of them, viz. a Sow, a Sheep and a Bull, which is the Reason that this threefold Sacrifice was called Suovitaurilia, which is a Word compounded of Sus, Ovis and Taurus. In the first Sacrifice they pray'd to the Goddess Ceres and the God Mars, that they would preserve their Corn from Mildew and Hail, and bring it to perfect Ripeness; and in that of the month of July, they pray'd to them to bless their Harvest. Cato has left us the Form of Prayer used on this occasion, in cap. 141. De Re Rustica, but this Prayer was made to Mars only. Mars Pater, te precor quaesoque uti sies volens propitiusque mihi, domo, familiaeque nostrae: quo jus rei ergo, agrum terram, fundumque meum suo∣vitaurilia circumagi jussi, uti tu morbos vilos invi∣sosque, viduertatem vastitudinemque, calamitates, intempestasque prohibessis, defendas, averruncesque: uti tu fruges, vineta, frumenta, virgultaque gran∣dire, beneque evenire sinas: pastores, pascuaque salva servassis, dicisque bonam salutem, valetudi∣nemque mihi, domo, familiaeque nostrae. Harumce rerum ergo, fundi, terrae, agrique mei lustrandi, lustrique faciendi ergo, sicut dixi, macte hisce suo∣vitaurilibus lactantibus immolandis esto. Mars Pater, ejusdem rei ergo, macte hisce suovitaurililibus lactentibus esto. Item, Cultro facito struem & fer∣ctum uti adsiet. The same Author hath left us also another Form of Prayer, which was made in the second Feast of Perambulation, in the month of July, in which they sacrific'd a Sow before they be∣gan their Harvest, which they call'd Porca prae∣cedanea. This Prayer was put up to Janus, Ju∣piter and Juno, and not to Ceres any more than the former. Priusquam porcam foeminam immola∣bis, saith Cato, Jane struem commoveto sic: Jane Pater, te hac strue commovendâ bonas preces, precor uti sies volens, propitius mihi liberisque meis,
domo, familiaeque meae, mactus hoc fercto. Ferctum Jovi moveto & mactato sic: Jupiter, te hoc fercto obmovendo bonas preces precor uti sies vo∣lens propitius mihi, &c. Postea Jano vinum dato sic: Jane Pater, uti te struem commovendo bonat preces benè precatus sum, ejusdem rei ergo, macte vino inferio esto. Postea Jovi sit: Jupiter, macte sercto esto: ma∣cte vino inferio esto. We find likewise that this Ceremony was perform'd by the Master of the Family, ac∣company'd with his Children and Servants, every one of them being crowned with Oaken Leaves, as well as the Sacrifice, which they led three times round the Lands and Vineyards, singing Hymns to his honour: after which they sacrific'd to him sweet Wine with Honey and Milk; as we may see by the Verses of Vir∣gil, Georg. lib. 1. This manner of Procession was always us'd in the Country, were they had no Arval Priests as at Rome. AMBEGNAE or AMBIGNAE, Victims, which were accompany'd and encompass'd with other Victims, says Varro. AMBITUS, signifies in the Law of the XII. Tables, Aspace of Ground of two feet and an half, which was left to go about an House, for the Houses of old were not contiguous for fear of Fire. AMBITUS, an earnest Solicitation to get into publick Offices. Properly, 'tis the sur∣rounding a Person to have his Vote in Electi¦ons, being always busie about him, embracing and caressing him for that end. The Romans made it a Crime to solicite Offices by too eager Applications, as by extraordinary Gifts, Threatnings or open Force: they made seve∣ral Laws to hinder this soliciting, and punish those that were found guilty of it. The most considerable of them was that which was made in the Consulship of Cieero, called from his Name Lex Tullia. By that Law, the Candidates were forbidden to bestow any Combats of the Gladiators on the People, to make any pub∣lick Feast, or to cause themselves to be fol∣low'd by a Crowd of Clients, for two years before they put in for any place. A Senator, who was guilty of a Breach of this Law, was punish'd with ten years Banish∣ment; others were find and render'd incapa∣ble of any Dignity for ever; as may be seen in Cicero's Oration against Vatinius and Sextius. Nevertheless, these things had gone so far in the corrupt times of the Commonwealth, that some would publickly tell the Tribes what Sums of Money they would give them for their Votes, which was call'd Pronuntiare in tri∣bus, says Cicero. They made use of three sorts of Persons for this purpose, which they call'd Interpretes, Mediators, who assisted in making the Bargain, per quos pactio inducebatur, says A∣sconius Pedianus: Sequestres, who are the Tru∣stees, in whose hands the Money agreed for is deposited: and lastly Divisores, Dividers, who were to distribute the Money to every particu∣lar person in the Tribe. AMBROSIA, the Food of the Gods, ac∣cording to the Poets. Lucian, rallying these Poetical Gods, tells us, that Ambrosia and Ne∣ctar, of which one is the Meat and the other the Drink of the Gods, were not so excellent as the Poets describe them, since they will leave them for the Blood and Fat which they come to suck from the the Altars like Flies. Ambrosia, was also a certain Feast which the Romans celebrated on the 24th. of November, instituted in honour of Bacchus by Romulus, which the Romans call'd Brumalia, but the Greeks Ambrosia. AMBUBAIAE, Syrian Women, which dwelt at Rome, and play'd on a Pipe in the Cirque and other Places of Sports, like our Gipsies, who play upon the Tabor, and pre∣tend to tell Fortunes, and do a thousand other cheating Tricks, to sharp People of their Mo∣ney. Turnebus assures us, that they liv'd after this tricking manner, near the Hot Baths at Baiae. Cruquius is of another opinion, and says, they were a sort of Women who sold Cosme∣ticks and Drugs for painting the Skin. Horace speaks thus of them, Ambabaiarum collegia, pharmacopolae. Sat. 2. lib. 1. AMBURBALIA and AMBURBALES, Hostiae. See Ambarvalia, which is the same thing. AMBUSTA, the Marks of Burning which remain'd upon the Skin. It is a Title in Vale∣rius Maximus, Ambustarum lib. 8. cap. 1. speak∣ing of two Women whose Reputation was only blemish'd, as a Body scarr'd with Burn∣ing, tho they were not condemn'd by any pub∣lick Sentence. So, among the Antients, those who were kill'd by Thunder were call'd Consumpti, whereas those were termed Ambusti who were only Thunder-struck. For which reason it was that ius was surnamed Ambustus, as was also his whole Family, because he was smitten with Thunder in the hinder-parts: Ʋt Jovis dicatur fiius, in partibus Fabius adurtiur mollibus, obsignaturque posticis. AMILCAR, the Admiral of Carthage, who raised the Honour of his Nation by many brave Actions, which he did against the Ro∣mans. He ordinarily said of his three Sons, that he nourish'd three Lions, which would one day tear Rome in pieces, and he made his eldest Son, the Great Hannibal, to swear upon
the Altars of the Gods, that he would never be at peace with Rome. AMISSA, Things lost. These were the ways which the Antients made use of to find the things they had lost. Marsus teaches us, that they fix'd Papers upon some Post or Pillar in publick places, declaring what was lost, the Name of the Person who lost it, and the place of his Dwelling, promising a Reward to him that should bring it, as it is practised at this day. Quas siquis mihi retuleris, donabitur anro. I puer, & eitas haec-aliqud propone columnd: Et dominum Exquiliis scribe habitare tuuns. Apuleius tells us, that they caus'd the thing to be cry'd in the Cross-streets, promising like∣wise a Reward to him that should restore it: Si quis à fugâ retrahere, vel occultam demon∣strare potuerit regis filiam, Veneris ancillam, nomine Psychen, conveniat retro metas Marcias mercurium praedicatorum. They went also to the Prater, and ask'd of him some Persons to make search for the thing lost, as we learn out of Plautus; —Ad Praetorem illicò Ibo, erabo, ut conquisiteres det mihi in vicis omnibus, Qui illam ivestigent, qui invenieniant. AMMONIUS or HAMMONIUS, Jupiter Ammon, worship'd in Libya under the figure of a Ram, of which some say this was the Reason; Bacchus having subdu'd Asia, and passing with his Army through the Desarts of Africa, was in great Want of Water, and rea∣dy to perish with Thirst; but Jupiter his Fa∣ther assuming the shape of a Ram, led him to a Fountain where he refresh'd his Army, and in requital of so great a Benefit. Bacchus built him a Temple there, under the Title of Jupiter , i. e. Sandy, because of the Sands of Africa. Others say he was call'd Ammon from a Shepherd of that Name, who built an Altas to him there. The Latin Interpreter of Arutus, who is cal∣led Bossus or Germanicus Caesar, writes, That the Rom which shew'd the Fountain to Bacchus, when he conducted his Army thro the Desarts of Li∣bys, was plac'd among the Celestial ; and Bacchus erected a magnificent Temple to Jupiter in the place where he found the Fountain, about nine days Journey from Alexandria, who, from the Sand that was there, was call'd Jupiter Ammon. You may consult upon this Subject Quintus Curtius, lib. 4. Diodorus Siculus, lib. 17. or Arrian, lib. 4. de Expedit. Alenand, Jupiter was figur'd with a Ram's Head be∣cause his Oracles were always very intricate, if we may credit Servius. But Herodotus gives a better Reason, when he tells us that the Am∣monians borrow'd this Worship of the Egyptians of the City of Thebes, where Jupiter had a Ram's Head. Strabe relates, with some appearance of Rea∣son, that the Place where Jupiter Ammon's Temple stood, was formerly near the Sea, and that the great Concourse of People, which came to consult this Oracle, is an evident Proof of it; for a place so far distant from the Sea, and standing in such vast Desarts of Sand, could never be so frequented. He speaks else∣where of the Travels of Hercules, Perseus and Alexander to consult this Oracle. This Relation supposes always, that Jupiter Ammon was King of Aegypt, whose Worship, after his Apotheosis or Deification in Egypt, pass'd into the distant Provinces. Diodorus Si∣culus, describing a Tradition of the Libyans, gives us a Relation that proves the thing, viz. That Jupiter Ammon was a great King, of whom was made a fabulous God, and a fictitious Ora∣cle after his death. This Historian cites ano∣ther more ancient Writer, who says, That Ammon reign'd in Libya, and marryed Rhea the Daughter of Caelus, and Sister of Saturn and the other Titans; that Rhea divorcing herself from Ammon, marryed Saturn, and put him upon mak∣ing War with Ammon, in which he was victo∣rious, and forced Ammon to save himself by Sea, and fly into Crete, where he made himself King. Arrian says, That Perseus and Hercules ac∣counted themselves the Posterity of Jupiter; and that Alexander being envious of their Glo∣ry, call'd himself also the Son of Ammon, who was the Jupiter of Libya. AMOR, Love, according to Plato, is a God more beautiful, antient, and better than all the fabulous Deities of Antiquity. Simmi∣des makes him the Son of Mars, and Venus the Goddess of Beauty; as also doth Lucian in his Dialogues. Acasilaus will have him the Son of the Air and Night; Sapho of the God Ca∣lus and Venus. Hesiad, in his Theogonia, says, that he was born of Chaos and the Earth; and that before the Creation of the World, he was in the Divine Essence, because it lov'd its Crea∣tures from all Eternity, before they were created. He hath also diffused the same Spirit of Love among them all, which is nothing else, accor∣ding to Empedocles, but that Divine Vertue which inclines the Creatures to desire an Union one with another; or to speak more properly, a Divine Intelligence, which hath imprinted that Spirit in Nature it self: From whence arises the Harmony of the Elements, and the Copulation of Animals. The heavenly Souls, and Spirits themselves, according to the Platonists, descend by the means of Love into the Body: For which rea∣son
it is, that Orpheus will have it, that Love has the Keys of Heaven Gates, and so he represents him, as holding them in his Hands. 'Tis Love or Cupid, says Lucian, that conquers all the Gods, and Venus herself, who is his Mother. He can do nothing with Pallas, nor the Muses, nor dares to attack Diana, but he fears not Jupiter or his Thunderbolts. He is painted in the form of a beautiful Child with Wings, and a Fillet over his Eyes, who carries a Quiver upon his Shoul∣ders, holding a Bow and Arrows in one hand, and in the other a lighted Torch. The Wings which are given to Cupid denote his Levity and Inconstancy: A Bow and Qui∣ver full of Arrows are attributed to him, be∣cause he wounds the Hearts of Lovers: He is painted blind, because nothing is more blind than Love. Love is call'd by the Greeks , from the earnest solicitation which Lovers make one to the other. They also call , Mutual Love, which they make a God, and affirm him to be the Son of Mars and Venus, as Cicero tells us, Lib. 3. De Nat. Deor. whom they my∣stically represent with two Torches lighted, joyned and tyed together. Pausanias, in his Eliaca, makes mention of a Statue of Cupid and Anteros, who strives to snatch a Palm-Branch which the other holds in his hand. And Por∣phyrius, the Philosopher, has left us a Fable up∣on this Subject; That Venus perceiving that lit∣tle Cupid did not thrive, and that he fell into a languishing condition, went to ask Advice about it of the Goddess Themis, who answerd her, That he had need of an Anteros, or mutual Love to relieve him; whereupon, a little time after, Venus conceived Anteros, and he was scarce born, but Cupid ap∣parently grew, and became more beautiful every day. The Athenians, says Pausanias, erected an Altar to the God Anteros, upon the account of a cer∣tain Milesian, who was much lov'd by Timago∣ras. This last being desirous to give some proofs of his Love, cast himself headlong from a Rock, and kill'd himself; at which the Milesian was so troubled, that he also cast himself down after him, which made the A∣thenians worship the Ghost of Timagoras, under the Name of Anteros, as a Revenger of the too great Rigour of the person lov'd toward the Lover. Some also call him Anteros, who dis∣engages unhappy Lovers from that Love which cannot find a sutable return. Dido seems to allude to this in Aeneid. Lib. IV. v. 478. Invent, Germana, viam, gratare sorori Quae mihi reddat cum, vel eo me solvat a∣mantem. Ovid, in like manner says, that they call'd him Forgetful Love, Lethaeus Amor, who had a Tem∣ple at Rome near the Colline-Gate: Est propè Collinam templum venerabile portam Est illic Lethaus Amor qui pectora sanat. Inque suas gelidam lampadas addit aquam. In Remed. Amoris. Some have had recourse to Magicians and Charms, to make 'em love. Lucian brings in an Harlot named Melissa, who desired Bacchis to bring some Magician to her, who gave Phil∣tres to cause Love, and allure Lovers. She tells her, That she knew a Syrian Woman, who made a Lover return to her again, after Four Months absence, by an Enchantment which she then declar'd to her. She shall hang, says she, the Calces or Sandals of the Lover upon a Peg, and shall put upon them some Perfumes, then she shall cast some Salt into the Fire, pronouncing thy Name and his; then drawing a Magical Look∣ing Glass out of her Bosom, she shall turn every way, muttering several words with a low voice. We meet also with other Enchantments set down in Theocritus's Pharmaceutria, in Virgil and Juvenal. Josephus also, the Jewish Historian, testifies, that Moses having learn'd the Aegyptian Philosophy, made Rings for Lovers and For∣getfulness, as also did King Solomon against Witchcraft. Whatever Effects these Love-Potions might have, what Ovid tells us is more probable, That Beauty, and something else, not to be men∣tion'd, are the only Philtres, which engage any Man to love. Fallitur Aemonias siquis decurrit ad artes; Datque quod à teneri fronte revellit equi. Non facient, ut vivat amor, Medeides herbae, Mixtaque cum magicis Marsa venena sonis. Phasias Aesonidem, Circe tenuisset Ulyssem. Si modò servari carmine posset amor. Nec data profuerint pallentia philtra puellis Philtra nocent animis, vimque furoris habent. Sit procul omne nefas: Ut ameris, amabilis esto; Quod tibi non facies, solave forma dabit. Art. Amand. Lib. II. v. 99. AMPHIARAUS, the Son of Oecleus, or according to some, of Apollo and Hypermne∣stra; being unwilling to go with Adrastus, King of Argos, to war against Etheocles, King of The∣bes, hid himself, to avoid the Death which he knew would happen to him in that Expedi∣tion; but Eriphyle, his Wife, being gain'd by Adrastus with the promise of a rich Chain, be∣tray'd him, and discover'd the place where he was hid. Amphiaraus, enrag'd that he was so basely betray'd by the Treachery of his own Wife, commanded his Son Alcmeon, before his departure, That as soon as he heard of his death, he should revenge it upon his Mother Eriphyle, as the only cause of his Misfortune. The Enterprize against Thebes prov'd very un∣succesful; for of the Seven chief Comman∣ders, Five of them were slain at the first On-set, and Amphiaraus was swallow'd up
alive in the Earth, with his Chariot, as he was retreating. Philostratus gives this account of Amphiaraus, in his Second Book of the Life of Apollonius; Amphiaraus, the Son of Oecleus, at his return from Thebes, was swallow'd up in the Earth. He had an Oracle in Attica, whither he sent the Dreams of those who came to consult him about their Affairs; but above all things they must be 24 hours without Meat or Drink and Three days entire without the use of Wine. Pausanias, in his Attica, speaks of a Temple consecrated to him; At the going out of the City Oropus, upon the Sea-Coasts, about 12 Furlongs from thence, there stands the Temple of Amphia∣raus, who flying from Thebes, was swallowed up with his Chariot. Others say, that it was not in that place, but in the way that leads from Thebes to Chalcis. Nevertheless, 'tis evident that Amphiaraus was first deifi'd by the Oropians, and afterwards the Greeks decreed him divine Ho∣nours. His Statue was made of white Marble, with an Altar, of which only the third part is dedicated to him, and the rest to other Gods. Near to this Temple there is a Fountain call'd the Temple of Amphiaraus, out of which 'tis said he came when he was plac'd among the number of the Gods. None were permitted to wash or purify in that Fountain, but when they had an Answer from the Oracle, or found their trouble remov'd; then they cast some pieces of Silver or Gold into the Fountain. Jopho of Gnossus, one of the Interpreters of Am∣phiaraus's Oracles, publish'd them in Hexame∣ter Verse, which brought the People to his Temple. Amphiaraus, after he was deifi'd, instituted the way of fore-telling things to come, by Dreams; and they that came to consult his Oracle, must first sacrifice to him, as to a God, and then observe the other Ceremonies pre∣scribed. They sacrificed a Sheep, and after they have flead it, they spread the Skin upon the ground, and slept upon it, expecting a Re∣solution of what they asked, which he gave them in a Dream. The same Author, in his Corinthiaca, tells us also, That in the City of the Phliasium, behind the great Market, there is an House which is called the Prophecying or Divining-place, where Amphiaraus having watch'd one Night, began to fore-tell things to come. Plutarch, speaking of the Oracle of Amphia∣rans, says, That in the time of Xerxes, a Servant was sent to consult it concerning Mardonius. This Servant being asleep in the Temple, dreamt that an Officer of the Temple chid him much, and beat him, and at last flung a great Stone at his head, because he would not go out. This Dream prov'd true; for Mardonius was slain by the Lieutenant of the King of Lacedaemon, having receiv'd a Blow with a Stone upon his head, of which he dyed. This is al∣most all that Antiquity has left us about Am∣phiaraus and his Oracles. AMPHICTYON, the Son of Helenus; This was he, says Strabo, who appointed that famous Assembly of Greece, made up of the most vertuous and wise of Seven Cities, who were called after his Name, as were also the Laws which they made. Caelius would have us believe, that he was the first that taught Men to mingle Wine with Water. There was another of that Name, the Son of Deucalion, Governour of Attica af∣ter Cranaus, who is said to be an Interpreter of Prodigies and Dreams. AMPHILOCHUS. Lucian, in one of his Dialogues, entituled The Assembly of the Gods, tells us, That he was the Son of a Vil∣lain that slew his Mother, and that had the confidence to prophecy in Cilicia, where he foretold all that Men desired for about Two pence; so that he took away Apollo's Trade. And the same Lucian, in his Lyar, brings in Eucrates speaking thus about Amphilochus; As I return'd, says he, from Egypt, having heard of the Fame of the Oracle of Amphilochus, which answer'd clearly and punctually to every thing any person desired to know, provided they gave it in writing to his Prophet, I had the curiosity to consult him as I passed. AMPHINOMUS,and ANAPIUS, two Brothers who were eminent for their Pie∣ty, having saved their Parents, by carrying them upon their Shoulders, with the peril of their own Lives, out of the City of Catanca, which was set on fire by the Flames of Aetna. AMPHION, the Son of Jupiter and Antiope, the Daughter of Nycetus King of Baeo∣tia. Antiope was first marryed to Lycus King of Thebes; but he divorc'd her, because she had postituted herself to Enaphus, King of Sicyon. Jupiter, who was in love with her, enjoy'd her under the form of a Satyr. Derce, the Second Wife of Lycus, caus'd her to be imprison'd, out of Jealousie; but she having escaped, and seeing herself pursu'd, hid herself in Mount Citheron, where she brought forth Twins, Zethus and Amphion, who were brought up by Shepherds, and being grown up, reveng'd the Wrongs done to their Mother by Lycus and Derce, whom they caus'd to be pull'd in pieces, having ty'd them to the Tail of a mad Bull. Amphyon was very excellent at Musick, and learn'd of Mercury to play upon stringed Instru∣ments, in which he grew so great a Profi∣cient, as the Poets say, That he built the Walls of Thebes by the sound of his Harp, and that the Stones put themselves in order to make that Building. Having married Niobe,
the Daughter of Tantalus, he had by her Seven Sons, and Seven Daughters, of which their Mother was so proud, that she preferred her∣self before Latona, the Mother of Apollo and Diana, for which she lost all her Children, ex∣cept Cloris, they being slain by Apollo's and Diana's Darts. Amphion, to revenge himself, attemp∣ted to destroy Apollo's Temple; but that God slew him, and punish'd him in Hell with the loss of his Sight and Harp. Amphion receiv'd his Harp of Mercury, who was the Inventer of it, as Apollo speaks in Lu∣cian; He made (says that God to Vulcan) an In∣strument of a Tortoise-Shell, on which he play'd so excellently, so that he made me jealous, who am the God of Harmony. And after he had shewn it to Apollo, and the Muses, as Pausanias says, he made a Present of it to Amphion: . AMPHITHEATRUM, the Amphi∣theatre, a place built round or oval, which en∣compassed the Roman-Theatre, and was fur∣nish'd with Seats, on which the People sitting. saw divers Shows and Sports which were ex∣pos'd to view. It is evident, that in Vitruvius's time the true Amphitheatres were not built at Rome; and therefore 'tis a mistake in Pliny, when he speaks of Pempeii Amphitheatri, in∣stead of Pompeiani Theatri, as Lipsius observes. There were afterwards several Amphitheatres built at Rome, in imitation of the Greeks, of which the most famous was Nero's, which was built all of Tybertine-Stone, which is as hard and beautiful as Marble. It was call'd the Amphi∣theatre of Nero's Colossus or Statue. It was 135 feet broad, and 525 long, large enough to contain 87000 persons sitting at their ease; and the height of it was 165 feet. Amphi∣theatres and Theatres at first were not built for continuance, being only of Boards, which they pull'd down after the Plays were ended. Dion Cassius says, That one of these Amphitheatres fell down, and crush'd a great number of People under the Ruines of it. Augustus was the first that built one of Stone in the Campus Martius, at the Ex∣pence of StatiliusTaurus, A. U. 725. and this Am∣phitheatre remained till the time of the Empe∣ror Vespasian; for the first being burnt in Nero's time, Vespasian began a new one, in his Eighth Consulship, two Years before his Death, but Titus finish'd it. Pliny relates, that Curio made an Amphithea∣tre that turned upon huge Iron-Hinges, so that two Theatres might be made of that Amphi∣theatre at pleasure, on which different Plays might be represented at the same time. The Amphitheatres were consecrated to Diana Taurica, or Scythica, Jove Latino, or Sty∣gio, as Martial will have it, and at last to Sa∣turn. Minutius Felix tells us, That there was an Altar, upon which they sacrificed Men before they began their Sports. The Amphitheatre was divided into Three principal parts; the First, which was the Thea∣tre, was the lowest, and made as it were a plain of Sand, which was call'd the Cavea, that is to say, the Cave; because it was full of ar∣tificial subterraneous Caverns, of which some were used to shut up Beasts in, and others ser∣ved to hold Water for the imittaing of Sea-Fights, and for the conveniency of the Specta∣tors. This place was plain, even and sandy, whence it was call'd Arena, or the Sand, and from it proceeded that Latin figurative Phrase, In arenam descendere, which is as much as to say To enter the Combat, because the Gladiators fought upon that Sand, or on that Sandy Place. The second part was the Circle about the Arena, which contain'd a great number of Seats, with divers Ascents one above another, that the Spectators who sat nearest might not hinder those that sat further off from seeing. The third part was us'd for the keeping of divers kinds of Beasts, as Horses for Races and Hunting of Wild-Beasts, for Criminals, and for keeping the Athletae, i. e. Wrestlers. It is very hard, says Justus Lipsius, to set down the precise time when Amphitheatres were first built; yet that Author does not doubt to fix the Invention of them about the Declen∣sion of the Commonwealth, and believes that Curio's Theatre was an Amphitheatre, because when they pleas'd they could divide it into two parts, and when they chang'd its Form, and us'd it in its full Extent it was a true Am∣phiteatre. These Words are almost the same with Pliny's, and seem to make that Tribune of the People the first Inventor of Amphithea∣tres; for in the same place 'tis expresly ob∣serv'd, that the Diversions of the Scene were so artificially dispos'd, that altho there were, as it were, two Theatres, yet the Contrivance of the Machine-maker did order things so well, that when they pleas'd there appear'd but one Inclosure or Amphitheatre. Nevertheless Statilius Scaurus, that famous Aedile, may be thought to have preceded Curio in that Design: for, as Pliny says, Scaurus was the first who expos'd to the People an hundred and fifty Panthers: and Bullenger adds, that he us'd his Theatre as an Amphitheatre. However 'tis most evident that Julius Caesar, was the first Inventor of Amphitheatres; and Bullenger assures us, That after he had subdu'd Asia and Africa, he built a Theatre of Wood in the Campus Martius, which was called an Amphi∣theatre, because of the Ascents that were round it, and upon which the Spectators might see the Plays, sitting at their ease.
AMPHITRYO, a Theban Prince, the Son of Alcaeus and Laonoma, the Daughter of Gunaeus, according to Pausanias in his Arcadica. He marry'd Alcmena of whom the Story is famous for the Birth of Twins, whereof one was nam'd Hercules, who was the Son of Jupiter, and was surnamed Alcides, either from his Grand-father Alcaeus, or else from the Greek Word , which signifies Strength or Valour, because of his extraordinary Strength, by which he subdu'd so many huge Monsters, and clear'd the Earth of them. See Alcmena. AMPHITRITE, a Greek Word which signifies encompassing. The Poets make her a Goddess, the Daughter of Oceanus and Doris, and Wife to Neptune the God of the Sea. AMPHORA, an Earthen Vessel with two handles, wherein were put things dry and li∣quid, as Horace says in his de Arte Poetica, v. 21. —Amphora cepit Institui, currente rotâ cur urceus exit? The Potter had a Design in turning the Wheel to make an Amphora, and nevertheless he made a Pitcher only. This Vessel contain'd four Sextaries and an half of Wine, which is about nine Gallons. Suetonius tell us a Story of a Man who stood for the Quaestorship, and who drank an Ansphora of Wine at one Meal with the Emperour Tibe∣rius, Ob Epotam in Convivio propinante se vini am∣phoram. This Measure contains also three Bushels of dry Measure, the Standard of it was kept at Rome in the Capitol, to prevent false Measures, as Rhemnius Fannius Polemon, who was Lucan's Master, testifies; from whence it was called Amphora Capitolina. It was a foot square in all its Dimensions, as Length, Breadth and Depth, and consequently it was Cubical. AMPLIARE and AMPLIATIO, [Terms of the Roman Law,] to delay the Judg∣ment of any matter for better Information, to declare that we must proceed in Law by Wri∣ting and Allegations, when a matter is not suf∣ficiently discover'd or prov'd; for when such a thing happen'd in Suits, the Judg pronounc'd with a loud Voice Amplius; or he cast into a Pot a Ballot mark'd with an N and an L, which is as much as to say, Non Liquet, that is, The Matter cannot be determin'd as it stands. M. Acilius Glabrio and Calpurnius Piso forbad Ampliation or Pleadings by Writing in Law∣suits, as Cicero testifies in his first Oration against Verres. AMULA, a sort of Vessel, wherein the Lustral Water, in the Roman Sacrifices, was put. AMULIUS SYLVIUS, King of Alba, the Son of Procas, and Brother of Numiter. The Kingdom of right belonged to Numitor, and his Father gave it him at his death; but Amulius invaded it, and to secure his Usurpa∣pation he caus'd Egestus the Son of Numitor to be slain in hunting, and forc'd his Daughter, whom some name Ilia and other Rhaea and Syl∣via, to become a Vestal Virgin. She grew big as she was sacrificing to Mars in a Wood, and was after deliver'd of Twins, Rhemus and Romulus, who reveng'd their Uncle's Death by slaying Amulius the Usurper, and restoring Nu∣mitor to the Throne. AMYMONE, one of the fifty Daughters of Danaus, whom her Father forced every day to go and draw Water in the Lake of Lerna, a City of Argos, and who had her Water-pot in her hand, says Lucian, because the City was very dry. But Neptune having seen her fell in love with her and took her away, and striking a Rock with his Trident he rais'd up a Foun∣tain in her stead. She was the only one of all her Sisters who, after her Death, was not con∣demn'd to fill a Tub, full of holes, with Wa∣ter. ANALEMMA, a Greek Word, that sig∣nifies those sorts of Sun-Dials, which shew on∣ly the Height of the Sun at Noon every day, by the Largeness of the shadow of the Gnomon. 'Tis not properly a Dyal, because it does not shew the Hours, but the Signs and Months only. Of late Analemma's and Dials are joined together, which shew the Month by the length of the shadow, and the Hours by the Declina∣tion. ANCAEUS, the Son of Neptune and Astypa∣laea, who much delighted in tilling the ground and planting Vines; when he had spent seve∣ral Nights in planting a Vineyard, one of his Servants told him that he should never drink of the Wine of that Vineyard; but when he had gather'd his Vintage, and caused some of the New Wine to be brought him to drink, he call'd that Servant to convict him of a Lye; he nevertheless held firm to his Prediction, re∣peating the Proverb, Multa cadunt inter calicem supremaque labra. Or this, Inter os & offam multa cadunt. While these things pass'd, News came to Ancaeus, that a Boar was got into his Vineyard, and had made much waste in it: he thereupon let fall his Cup, and went to hunt the Boar, which run at him and slew him. Pausanias, in his Arcadica, makes mention of another Ancae∣us, the Son of Lycurgus, who went in an Expe∣dition to Cholchos, and was slain by the Calydo∣nian Boar, hunting with Meleager. ANCHISES, the Son of Capys, lived in the Desarts of Phrygia, where he spent his days in keeping his Flocks. The Fable says, that Venus often came down upon Mount Ida to en∣joy
his Love; and of her Aeneas, the Trojan Prince, was born, who in the Destruction of Troy sav'd him from the flames, carrying him upon his shoulders. He dy'd at Drepanum, and his Son celebrated anniversary Games in ho∣nour of him, of which Virgil speaks in his fifth Book. ANCILE, see ANCYLE. ANCULI and ANCULAE, the Gods and Goddesses of Slaves, whom they honour'd and pray'd to in the Miseries of their Bon∣dage. ANCUS MARTIUS, the Grandson of Numa, and fourth King of the Romans. He succeeded Tullus Hostilius, and was valiant con∣trary to the Hopes of his Neighbours. He sub∣du'd the Vejentes in two several Fights, and took some of their Towns. He enlarg'd Rome, and fortifi'd Janiculum. He built the City Ostia, at the mouth of Tiber, to facilitate and secure Navigation. He reign'd 24 years. ANCYLE, or rather ANCILIA, a sort of Buckler so call'd from the Greek Word  or , which signifies an Elbow. The Bucklers were cut and hollow'd into a Semi∣circle in the middle, and larger at the two ends. There was a Festival kept at Rome in March, called The Feast of the Holy Bucklers. The Occa∣sion of its Institution was thus; In the Reign of Numa, Rome was afflicted with so great a Plague, that all seiz'd with it dy'd without any Pos∣sibility of Cure. One day as Numa was going in one of the Streets of the City, there fell down from Heaven upon him, an Holy Buckler, or Ancyle, which he took as a Token of the Divine Protection; for the Plague began to decrease, and the Nymph Ae∣geria told him, that the Fate and Happiness of his City were annexed to it, as heretofore those of Troy were to the Palladium of Minerva. He found no great Difficulty to persuade the People to these things, and, that their Enemies might not take away this Fatal Buckler, he caus'd Veturius Mamurius to make Eleven others, so exactly like it, that the Holy Buckler could never be distinguished from the others. He put them into the Temple of Mars, under the Conduct of twelve Priests call'd Salii; of whom I shall speak in their place. Mamurius received this Reward, to be celebra∣ted in the Hymns compos'd in honour of the God Mars, as Ovid tells us in these Verses, lib. 3. Fastorum v. 391. Inde Sacerdotes operi promissa vetusto Praemia persolvunt, Mamuriumque vocant. Plutarch, explains this otherwise, for he says, That when the Salii made mention of Veturius Ma∣murius in the Hymns of Mars, it was only through a Corruption of their Language, and that they ought to have said, ob veterem memoriam. Varro is of the same Opinion, lib. 5. Itaque Salii qui cantant Veturium Mamurium, significant veterem memoriam. But the greatest number of Authors are for the former Opinion, which seems the most natural and least strained. The Feast of Holy Bucklers began the first of March, and lasted three days. It had several Names, some call'd it Saliorum Festum Saliares or Martiales Ludi, Ancyliorum festum, Mamuralia. The Salii carry'd the Bucklers through the City dancing, and the Festival was ended with a sumptuous Feast, which was by way of Emi∣nency call'd Saliaris Coena. Horace describes this Feast, and what pass'd in it lib. 1. Od. 37. Nunc est bibendum, nunc pede libero Pulsanda tellus: nunc Saliaribus Ornare pulvinar deorum Tempus erat dapibus, sodales. None could marry, nor go about any Busi∣ness when these Bucklers were carry'd, because as Ovid says, Arms denote Discord, which ought not to be found in Marriages. Arma movent pugnam, pugna est aliena maritis: Condita cum fuerint, aptius omen erit. Fast. lib. 3. v. 395. Tacitus, in the first Book of his History, at∣tributes the ill Success of the Emperour Otho against Vitellius, to his Departure from Rome, while these Holy Bucklers were carrying. ANDROMEDA, the Daughter of Ce∣pheus, King of Aethiopia, and Cassiope, who was so rash and presumptuous to dispute with Juno and the Nereides for Beauty; to punish this Sauciness, her Daughter was condemn'd to be expos'd naked upon a Rock to be devour'd by a Sea-monster, but she was rescu'd by Perseus, (who flew through the Air with the Wings which Mi∣nerva lent him to fight against the Gorgons, and who, by the help of the Buckler of that God∣dess, wherein he saw the Image of Medusa as in a Looking-glass, had taken her by the Hair and cut off her Head, and then escap'd, while her Sisters were asleep,) for as he was on his Return on the Coasts of Aethiopia, he saw An∣dromeda just ready to be devour'd by the Mon∣ster, and being mov'd with Love as well as Pity for the Misfortune of such a fair Unfor∣tunate, turn'd the Monster into stone by shew∣ing it the Head of Medusa, after he had stun'd it with a Blow of his Sword; then loosing the Virgin, who was ty'd half naked to the Rock, he help'd her to get down the steep Precipice, and carry'd her back to her Father, who, to reward him, gave her to him in Marriage. Lucian gives us a further Description of this History, in his Commendation of an House; Behold, says he, Perseus, who slew a Sea-monster and rescu'd Andromeda: Consider how in a small space the Painter has well express'd the Fear and Modesty of this young Fair one, who all naked view'd the Combat from an high Rock. Consider the terrible
Looks of the Monster, who come to devour her, and the amorous Courage of the Hero. See how he held up his Buckler against the Monster, which turned him into stone by the force of Medusa's Look, whilst he gave him a full Blow upon his Head with a Back∣sword. The History of Andromeda may be compar'd to that of Iphigenia. Andromeda being expos'd to a Sea-monster, to expiate for the Pride of her Mo∣ther, who prefer'd her own Beauty before that of the Nymphs, she was deliver'd from it by Perseus, who marry'd her after he had slain the Monster. This Perseus is nothing else but an Horseman, accor∣ding to the signification of the Hebrew word Pha∣ras, Equus. The place where Andromeda was ex∣pos'd is Joppa, or Japha, upon the Coasts of Phoenicia, as Pliny says, In quo vinculorum Andro∣medae vestigia ostendunt. The same Author assures us, that the prodi∣gious Bones of this Fish to which Andromeda was expos'd, were carry'd by Scaurus of Joppa to Rome; Belluae, cui dicebatur fuisse exposita Andro∣mede, ossae Romae apportata ex oppido Judaeae Joppe, ostendit inter reliqua miracula in aedilitate suâ M. Scanrus. 'Tis evident that it was some Whale, taken at Joppa, whose Skeleton Scaurus shew'd at Rome; and that he might make his new Story more plausible, he set it off with the old Fable of Andromeda. Vossius is of opinion that this Sea-monster to whom Andromeda was ex∣pos'd, and from whom Perseus deliver'd her, was nothing else but a Ship, or the Captain of a Ship, who had such a Monster for his Flag, and courted Andromeda, to marry her. ANDRONES, a Greek Word which sig∣nifies, The Apartment of Men, where they were accustom'd to make their Feasts, into which Women were not allow'd to come. ANGELI, Angels, These are spiritual In∣telligences, which God makes use of, as his Ministers, to do Men Good or Evil, and to execute the Commands of his Divine Provi∣dence upon them. The Greeks and Latins ac∣knowledg'd Angels under the Name of Good or Evil Genii or Daemons. It is a Truth which Homer was well satisfi'd in, that Angels or Dae∣mons do stir up many Motions and divers Pas∣sions in the Mind and Heart of Man. Hesiod tells us, that there are thirty thousand Gods or Angels dispers'd over all the Earth, to observe the Conduct of Men; Ter enim decies mille sunt in terra Dii Jovis, custodes mortalium hominum, qui judicia observant & prava opera, aere induti, passim oberrantes per terram: these Words Dii Jovis signifie Angels. 'Tis the Do∣ctrine of the Church, which even the Poets acknowledg'd with Hesiod, That the Provi∣dence of God watches over the Universe, and that he hath thirty thousand, i. e. an infinite number of Angels, the Ministers of his wrath. In fine, These Divine Guardians and Obser∣vers of our Actions are invisibly, yet most cer∣tainly in the midst of us, and encompass us on all sides. Euripides, in Cicero, makes the unfortunate OEdipus say, that he withdrew himself for fear lest the Evil Genii should hurt the City upon his account, , &c. That's the Name he gives those Genii or Daemons which he believ'd were appointed to every particular Person, and were dispos'd to hurt them, as there were others who delighted to help and benefit them. This Opinion of Hesiod, agrees with Varro's and Plato's, who also assign several Orders of Daemons or Intelligences in the Heavens, the Air, the Earth, and the subterraneous parts, that all the Universe might be fill'd with Life, Reason and Understanding, and consequently have a perfect Beauty. Nevertheless this Dif∣ference is remarkable, that Plato will have those Intelligences, which people and fill the whole Universe, to be created and appointed to their Offices from the beginning of the World; whereas Hesiod supposes them to be partly the Souls of the deceas'd. ANGERONA, a Goddess, who is pray'd to against a certain Distemper call'd a Quinsie, in Latin Angina. Pliny will have her the God∣dess of Silence, and Calmness of Mind, who banishes all Disturbances, and heals all sorts of Melancholy. The Romans instituted a Feast to her, which they call'd Angeronalia, because she cur'd their Flocks, which were troubled with the Quinsie. She is painted with her Mouth cover'd, to shew us that Pains and Griefs should be born without impatient Complaints. They sacrifi'd to her in the Temple of the Goddess Volnpia, where her Statue was set up. ANGIBATA, a Greek Word that comes from , and signifies a Transparent Vessel, in which little Images seem to move up and down in the Water, which are inclos'd in it and seal'd up hermetically. This wonderful Effect, which makes a kind of Enamell'd Fi∣gures to swim in the Water, is seen in an An∣gibata, which has lately been found out, in which a small Image rises and falls, turns about and stands still as you please. This is done by straitning and compressing the Water more or less with the Thumb, which stops the end of a long Glass Pipe or Tube fill'd with Water. The Contrivance is, The little enamell'd Image, which is hollow and has a Weight so proportion'd to its Largeness, that it will swim upon the, Water, yet so, that by the Ad∣dition of a small Weight it will rise and sink to the bottom. ANGLIA, England, see Albion.
ANGUIS, a Serpent, which was an ill Omen in Marriages, as we may see by those Verses of Terence in his Phormio, He will say that lately there happen'd to him ill Omens, a Serpent fell from the Tiles through a Gutter. The God Aesculapius is ordinarily represented under the figure of a Serpent, because he came from Epidaurus to Rome in that shape. ANGUSTUS CLAVUS, a small But∣ton in the shape of the Head of a Nail, which the Roman Knights did wear upon their Gar∣ments, call'd from thence Tunica Angusti Clavi, whereas the Senators wore them larger, and their Coat was therefore call'd Tunica Lati Cla∣vi. From hence it comes that these Words are often in Latin Authors, and chiefly in Sue∣tonius, taken for the Dignity of Knights and Senators. ANIENSIS TRIBUS, the Tribe of A∣nio, or the Inhabitants near the River Anio. In the Consulship of M. Fulvius and F. Manlius, the Censors P. Sempronius Sopho and P. Sulpitius Severa; made a Census, i. e. took an Account of the number of the People, to which they ad∣ded a new Tribe call'd Aniensis. ANIGER or ANIGRUS, a River of Thessaly, whose Waters were sweet and plea∣sant, but afterwards turn'd bitter and stinking, because the Centaurs wash'd their Wounds in it, which they had receiv'd from Hercules, as the Fable says. ANIMA, the Soul, which animates all living Creatures in general. This Word comes from , which signifies Wind or Breath; the Latins say, Animam efflare, to express the yielding up the last Breath, or at the last Gasp. The Antients were several ways mistaken about the Nature of the Soul. Some, as Lac∣tantius says, believ'd that the Soul was Air. Varro, following this Opinion, says, The Soul is Air receiv'd in at the Mouth, purified by the Lungs, warmed by the Heart, and from thence dispersed through the whole Body. Some have form'd to themselves an Idaea of Souls, as certain thin Substances like Shadows, yet visible, perform∣ing the same Functions and having the same Organs with the Bodies which they animate, since they see, speak, understand, and have need of Boats to carry them over the Rivers of Hell; so that according to their Argument they are only more subtil Bodies. This Error pass'd among the Primitive Christians, not∣withstanding the clear Light of the Gospel; and so the Antients in their Emblems have re∣presented the Soul by a Butterfly flying from the Body, which may be observed from a Basso Relievo of Marble, which represents a young Man lying upon a Bed, with a Deaths-head at his Feet, and a Butter-fly flying over him, which signifies his Soul, and by its flying away it shews us, that the Soul had forsaken the Bo∣dy, to which it was united. The Butter-fly seems to have come out of the Mouth of the deceas'd, because the An∣tients thought, as the Vulgar still do, that the Soul took its flight from the Body at the Mouth, which made Homer say, in his Iliads lib. 9. That when the Soul has once pass'd the Fence of the Teeth, it can never return again. They have exprest the Soul by a Butter-fly, which perpetuates its Being by changing its shape several times. For after this manner the Pythagorcans believe that we change our Genus or Species by the Transmigration of our Souls. Moralis tells us of an Epitaph, by which it ap∣pears, that a dead Man order'd his Heirs to make a Butter-fly over his Ashes; Haeredibus meis mando etiam cineri ut meo Volitet ebrius Papilio. There is yet extant a Representation of a Cupid endeavouring to fix an unsteady Soul, by fastening it to a Tree, for a punishment of its Inconstancy, nailing it to a dry stump, and by that means hindring it from entring into the Body it desir'd. Nicetas Choniates says, That some were of opinion that there are two Natures in the Soul, one luminous and the other dark. This last has its Original from below, and comes through some subterraneous Ca∣verns; the other descends from the Height of Hea∣ven all inflamed to adorn the Body; but in its De∣scent it is especially caution'd to take care, that while it endeavours to adorn its earthly Habitation by its Light, it doth not obscure it self by the others Darkness. The Soul is more particularly said to be that which gives Life to Animals and Vegetables. The Vegetative Soul is in Plants and Trees, the Animal in Beasts, and the Rational and Spiritual in Man. The Cartesians define the Soul of Man a thinking Substance, and by this Quality alone they think they can prove its spiritual and immortal Nature. As to the Soul of Beasts they say 'tis an Automaton, or a Machine that moves of it self and by natu∣ral Springs, that their Soul is a thin an active Substance, which participates of the Nature of Fire, and is the Source of the Vegetative Spirits. The Immortality of our Soul was not only the Opinion of the Poets, but of all Mankind. The first Idolatry was either the Worship of the Stars, or of Kings, which were Deities af∣ter their Deaths. Now this presupposes that they believed that the Souls of Kings were much of the same Nature with the Intelligen∣ces which govern the Stars. Thus the Apo∣theosis or Deification of the deceased, was an evident proof of the common belief of the Immortality of Soul.
The earnest desire of Fame is a secret proof of the inward belief of the Souls Immortality; for Men would never have taken so much pains to have eterniz'd their Name and Memo∣ry, if the Soul had been mortal: So Horace tells us, That he should not dye entirely, but that the greatest part of himself would survive af∣ter death. Non omnis moriar, multaque pars mei Vitabit Libitinam.— And Ovid says the same in these Verses; Parte tamen meliore mei super alta perennis Astra ferar. Cicero, in his Oration for the Poet Archias, explains the Immortality, so much celebrated by the Poets; he assures us, that it was the Opinion of wise Men, That immortal Glory, the love of which was so ardent in Man, sup∣poses immortal Life, which could tast the Sweetness of that Glory. This learned Man treats upon this Subject in his Tusculan Questions, and observes there, that their very Burials, Funeral-Elegies, the Examples of those who have devoted themselves to Death for the Good of their Country, the Love of Glory, wherewith Men are so inspir'd, and lastly, all that is said or believed of Hell, and all that is read concerning it in the Poets, are evident Proofs of the Immortality of Souls, and of the Belief that all Men have of it, and explaining the reason which induc'd Men to describe Hell after the manner that the Poets had re∣presented it; he says, 'twas because they thought Souls immortal, and not being able to apprehend any thing but what is material; they had describ'd Souls, and the Punishment of Hell, by corporial Representations; as we may learn by Homer, and other Poets. Euripides, in his Deification of Castor, Pollux, and Helena, tells us, That the Soul of Man, after Death, hath no Enjoyment of this sensitive Life, but hath always the same Understanding, and goes to take up its abode in Heaven, . Herodotus assures us, That the Egyptians were the first who deliver'd the Doctrine of the Souls Immortality. Plato tells us, That after Death, our Souls are conducted by a Genius, who the Poets say is Mercury, to the place where they shall be judged; and that they receive Punishments or Rewards proportionably to the good or evil they have done in their Lives. Quemlibet mo∣rientem cujusque Genius , quem vivens sortitus fuerat, in locum quendam ducit, ubi omnes judicari oportet. Judicantar & qui honestè, justè & sanctè vixerunt; & qui non, & qui mediocriter. ANIMALIA, Animals, which are di∣vided into Terrestrial, Aquatic, Birds, amphi∣bious Creatures, and Insects. The Pagans ado∣red Beasts, and creeping things, as Deities; and the most superstitious, as well as the most an∣tient Worshippers of this kind, were the Egyp∣tians. Thus, when Caesar made himself Ma∣ster of Egypt, Lucian tellus us, That he made a magnificent Treat of many of the Egyptian Deities; Non mandante fame, multas volucresque fe∣rasque Aegipti posuere Deos. Ovid, Lib. V. of his Metamorphos. relates the Flight of the Gods into Egypt from the War of the Gyants, and when Typhoeus pursu'd them, they concealed themselves under the shape of divers Animals, to avoid his Fury. Herodotus assures us, that the Egyptians were the first that made Statues, and engraved Ani∣mals in Stone: They represented Jupiter with a Rams Head, because Heracles being earnestly de∣sirous to see him, Jupiter appeared to him with a Ram's head. He says also, That Pan was one of their greatest Gods, and they represen∣ted him as a Goat, tho' they knew very well, that he was like the other Gods. Lucian declares, that the Signs of the Zodiack, and the other Constellations, were first painted by the Egyptians in the Heavens, or in the Coelestial Spheres, whose Images they would have afterwards to be upon the Earth in the same Animals, whose Nature, they affirmed, depended upon the Nature of those Constellations, and upon their Impressions on sublunary beings. It is also probable, that this Fable of the Flight of the Gods into Egypt, and their Transformation in∣to Animals, was taken from the Opinion of the Astronomers, who attributed the shape of these Creatures to the Constellations, and of the Constellations to the Gods, that is to say, to the Coelestial Intelligences. 'Tis certain that they distinguish'd the Gods from the Animals that were consecrated to 'em, and that they did not give any Honour to those Beasts, but with relation to those Gods to whom they put up their Prayers, and not to Animals. Herodotus has given us the reason, why the Egyptians gave so much Honour to the Ibis, or the Hawk; 'twas because, in the Spring, a vast number of flying Serpents came out of Arabia, to build Nests in Egypt, but were dri∣ven back by these Birds. 'Twas without doubt to the God, who had sent them these Helps, that the Egyptians intended to give Honour, by worshiping the Animals which was consecrated to him. Diodorus Siculus afferts, after Herodotus, That the Egyptians affirm'd, That they wor∣shiped those Animal which were consecrated to the Gods, in Honour to those Gods; and he assures us, that the Egyption Priests had se∣cret and mysterious Reasons for their Worship; but the People had only three Reasons for it,
of which the two former seem to be something fabulous, viz. That the Gods, at the beginning, being assaulted by a rout of wicked Men, con∣ceal'd themselves under the Form of these Ani∣mals, and ever since they had honour'd them. Secondly, That the Egyptians having been often vanquish'd by their Enemies, at length became victorious, after they set up the Figures of these Animals for their Standards. Thirdly, That all these Animals were extremely useful for the preservation of their Goods and Lives. Plutarch tells us, That we ought to interpret all these Fables in a pious and philosophical sense, piè & philosophicè: That if the Egyptians did honour Mercury under the Name of a Dog, 'twas because of the Watchfulness of that Creature. There was nothing so lewd as the Worship of the Goat, which they call'd Mendes; the Greeks, Pan; and the Latines, Faunus and Silva∣nus. The Sileni and Satyrs related to this. The Figures of these Deities were yet more immodest and impure than the Animals them∣selves; for they were the original, as I may say, of the Priapus of the Greeks. All these Idolaters protested nevertheless, That their in∣tention was by these Symbols, to honour the Fruitfulness of Nature, that continually pro∣duced an infinite number of Beasts, many of which are Masterpieces of the Fecundity of the divine Power. Some think that the greatest part of these Transformations of the Egyptian Gods into A∣nimals, or the divers ways of representing 'em under the Figures of these several Animals, arose from nothing else but some Allusions of the Names to a more antient Language; for Bochartus observes, that if Isis were changed into a Swallow, as Plutarch says, 'twas because that Sis in the Hebrew. Tongue signifies a Swal∣low: If Anubis were painted with a Dog's Head, 'twas because Nobach signifies to bark: If Apis was worshipped in the shape of an Ox, 'twas because Abbir signifies an Ox: If Jupiter chang'd himself into a Ram, 'twas because El, which is the Name of God, signifies also a Ram: If Osiris, or Bacchus be changed into a Goat, 'tis because Seir signifies a Goat: If Diana be changed into a Cat, 'tis because, in the Egyp∣tian Language, Bubastis signifies a Cat, and that's the Name of Diana: Venus is chang'd in∣to a Fish, because Atergatis come near to Dag, a Fish: Lastly, Juno, or Astarte, takes the figure of a Cow, because Hastaroth signifies Herds of Oxen. 'Tis not to be doubted, but from the time of Moses, the Egyptians worshipped their Gods under the figure of Animals, since Moses him∣self answers, That the Israelites could not of∣fer a solemn Sacrifice in Egypt, lest they should expose themselves to be stoned by the Egyptians, whose Gods they must sacrifice to the true God. ANNA PERENNA. This fabulous Story is told of her: This Anna, according to some Authors, was the Daughter of Belus, and Sister of Dido, who fled to Battus, King of the Isle of Malta, after the death of her Sister, when Hierbas, the King of the Getuli, attempted to take Carthage. When she perceiv'd herself not safe with Battus, be∣cause of the Threats of Hierbas, she fled into Italy to Laurentum, where Aeneas was settled; and as he walked one day along the Bank of the Ri∣ver Numicius, he met Anna, and presently knew her, and conducting her to his Palace, he trea∣ted her according to her Quality. Lavinia was troubled at it, and sought her Destruction, as being her Rival; but she being admonished of it in a Dream, escaped to the River Numi∣cius, whereof she was made a Nymph, as she told them that searched for her, and ordered them to call her for the future Anna Perenna, because she should be for ever under these Waters: —Placidi sum Nympha Numici Amne perenne latens, Anna Perenna vocor. Ovid. Fast. Lib. III. v. 653. This News oblig'd the Albans to make great Rejoycings along the Banks of the River in Dances, and Feasting; and in imitation of them, the Romans did the same on the Banks of Tiber. The Virgins took very undecent Liber∣ties, dancing and Iasciviously sporting without any Modesty: Ovid has describ'd these Feasts, which were made on the 15th. of March. They sacrific'd to her to obtain a long Life, Annare, & Perennare. Some have thought that she was an old Woman of Bovillae, who brought Meat to the People of Rome of old, and then fled into the holy Aventine-Mount, and in Grati∣tude this Feast was appointed in Honour of her by the Romans: Pace domi fact â signum posuêre perenne, Quod sibi defectis illa ferebat opem. Ovid. Fast. Lib. III. v. 673. ANNALES, Annals, a chronological History, which describes the remarkable Events of a State yearly, as the Annals of Cornellus Tacitus: Whereas History, says Aulus Gellius, descants upon those Events, and upon the Cau∣ses which produc'd 'em. It was allow'd at first to the Chief-Priests only to write the An∣nals of the People of Rome; that is to say, the considerable things that happen'd every year; and from thence they were called Anna∣ies Maximi, non à magnitudine, sed quòd eos Ponti∣fex consecrasset; says Festus. ANNALIS LEX, The Law which appoint∣ed the Age at which any Person was promoted to
Offices of State. Eighteen Years was required for one to be made a Roman Knight; and Twenty five to obtain a Consulship; and so for other Offices. The Romans took this Law from the Athenians. ANNALIS CLAVUS, The Nail which the Praetor, Consul, or Dictator fix'd eve∣ry Year in the Wall of Jupiter's Temple, upon the Ides of September, to shew the Number of Years. But this Custom was after changed, and the Years were reckon'd by the Consuls. ANNIBAL, an African, the Son of Amilcar, and General of the Carthaginians in the Wars against the Romans, whom he beat and defeated in several Battels. He pass'd from Spain to the foot of the Alps, in his way to Italy, and went up to the top of those Moun∣tains in Nine days time, notwihstanding the Snow with which they were covered, and in spight of the Resistance of the Mountaineers which inhabit there, whom he shut up in a Rock, which they used for a Retreat; and by an unheard of Invention, he cut a way through that part of this Mountain which most obstru∣cted his passage, with Fire and Vinegar. After this, he over-run all Italy, and brought Ter∣rour and Dread with him into all Parts, and chiefly after the Battel of Cannae, which is a small Village of Apulia, in which the Romans lost Forty Thousand Men, together with the Consul Aemilius. Annibal sent Three Bushels of Gold Rings to Carthage, and made himself a Bridg of dead Bodies. 'Twas at this Battel that he shew'd, that the greatest Men commit the greatest Faults; for he forgot himself, and lost by his own Carelesness a complete Vi∣ctory; for instead of attacking Rome, he went and drown'd all his Glory and Hopes in the Pleasures of Capua. He dyed at the Palace of Prusias, King of Bithynia, having poyson'd him∣self, because he apprehended, that this barba∣rous King would deliver him into the hands of the Romans. Thus dyed this great General, after he had made War Sixteen Years in Italy, won several Battels, brought several Nations to a Submission, either by Force or Agree∣ment, besieg'd Rome, and made himself Master of divers Cities. Juvenal having briefly run over the great Exploits of Annibal, concludes, that all this Glory ended at last with being conquer'd, ba∣nish'd, and living as a Fugitive; reduc'd to so mean a condition, as to court a petty King of Asia; and lastly with killing himself by a Ring, which was a sort of Revenge on him for that incredible multitude of Rings which he had taken from the Roman Nobles slain in the Battel of Cannae. Lucian makes him speak thus of himself in one of his Dialogues of the Dead: Having pass'd out of Africk into Spain with an handful of Men, I first made my self famous by my Valour, and after the death of my Wives Brother, having the com∣mand of the Armies, I subdu'd the Spaniards and Western Gauls; then marching over the Alps, I conquer'd all Italy, as far as Rome; after I had gain'd Three great Battels, and slain in one day so many Enemies, that I measured the Gold Rings which the Knights were, by the Bushel, and marched upon a Bridg of dead Bodies. Being recall'd into Africa, to oppose Scipio, I obey'd, as if I had been one of the meanest of the Citizens; and after being un∣justly condemn'd, I bore my Banishment patiently. ANNONA, the Victuals, or the provision of Corn for a Year. Annona Civilis, the Corn with which the Granaries of Cities were fill'd every Year, for the Subsistance of the Citizens. Annona Militaris, the Corn which was laid up in the Magazines for the Subsistance of an Ar∣my during the Campaign. ANNULUS, a Ring which the Antients wore on their Fingers. There are Three sorts of 'em; one sort was call'd Annuli Sponsalitii, Pronubi, or Geniales, Rings of Espousals, or Marriage-Rings, which the Bride-groom gives his Bride at their Marriage; others were call'd Annuli Honorarii, Rings of Honour, which were us'd as Marks of Honour, and distinction between the different Orders of Men, and with which those also were rewarded, who had done some signal Service to the Common-wealth; the Third sort were call'd Annuli Signa∣torii, or Sigillatorii, which they used to seal their Letters with. The Rings which the Romans used to give the Women betrothed to them, were ordina∣rily of Iron, and they put them upon the 4th Finger of the hand. I have seen some also of Copper and Brass, with little Knobs in the fa∣shion of a Key, to signifie, that the Husband, by giving this Nuptial-Ring to his Wife, puts her in possession of the Keys of his House, of which she ought to have the care. Some of them are found with these Inscriptions, Bonam Vitam. Amo te, na me. Rings of Honour, were Marks of Merit in the Persons who wore them. The first Romans wore only Rings of Iron, as fittest for a war∣like Nation, and they prefer'd 'em before Rings of value. Tarquinius Priscus was the first that wore one of Gold; but for a long time the Senators durst not wear 'em. Afterwards a Custom prevail'd of giving Gold Rings to them that went on an Embassy into strange Countries about the Affairs of the Common-wealth; but yet they wore them only upon the days of their Entries, or Audiences, as a Badg of their Dignity.
But afterwards the Senators wore them of Gold, as also the Knights, to distinguish them∣selves from the common People; as they were known from Senators by a Robe woven with Gold, and by their large Buttons. This hap∣pen'd about the Second Punick or Carthaginian-War. We read in Appian of Alexandria, that only Colonels in an Army had a Right to wear Gold Rings, which they used as a Mark of Nobility. It is true, that in the Disorder and Confusion of Civil-Wars, the People, and Soldiers took the liberty to wear 'em, as also Women-Slaves, and those who were made free, which obliged the Consuls, C. Asinius Pollio and C. Antistius, un∣der the Emperor Tiberius, to make an Order for∣bidding the Common-People to wear Gold Rings, at least those whose Father, or Grand-father by the Fathers side, had not a Revenue of 400 great Sesterces with a right to take place in the Fourteenth Ascent of the Theatre, which was granted to the Roman Knights when they were present at those Shows. It is also true, that from the time of the Em∣peror Commodus, the Slaves made free were ho∣noured with a Gold Ring. Aurelius Victor says, That the infamous Ma∣crinus, the Son of an enfranchis'd Slave, re∣ceiv'd a Gold Ring, and was thereby equall'd to the Knights, as these Verses of the Poet Statius shew: Mutavitque genus, laevâque ignobile ferrum Exuit, & celso natorum aequavit honori. They affected to wear 'em of an extraordi∣nary weight; I have seen some that weighed Four Pistoles and a half of Gold; which puts me in mind of what Juvenal says wittily in his Seventh Satyr, That no body will give 200 Pieces to an Orator to plead his Cause, although he be as eloquent as Cicero, unless they see an extraordinary great Ring shining on his Finger: —Ciceroni nemo ducentos Nunc dederit nummos, nisi fulserit annulus ingens. Satyr. VII. v. 139. Pliny tells us, That in his time the Excess was so great, that it seem'd to him, as though every one would be valu'd only by the Number and Weight of his Gold Rings, with which they loaded rather than adorned their Fingers. This is the same that Se∣neca, the Philosopher, says, Oneramus annulis di∣gitos, & m omni articulo gemma disponitur. These Rings were often adorned with Bea∣zels made of the same Matter, or precious Stones graved several ways. Under the Emperor Claudius, Seals were or∣dered to be made of the same Metals, and not of precious Stones. The several sorts of Engravings which were set in the Beazels of Rings made the Seals, which we name Annuli Signatorii, or Sigillatorii, with which they seal'd their Letters, which they impress'd upon their Records; as also in their Houses upon their Cellars, where they kept their Provisions. They seal'd their Letters, as we do at this day, saving, that instead of Silk they used Thread or Flax, with which they wrapt about the Letter on the outside, and then laying upon it a sort of soft Clay or Wax, they stampt the figure of their Seal upon it, after they had a little softened it with Spittle. Cicero has de∣scrib'd the manner of it to us in his Third Ora∣tion against Catiline; Tabellas proferri jussimus, quae à quoque dicebantur datae; primùm oftendimus Cethege, signum cognovit, nos linum incidimus, legi∣mus: We caused the Letters to be brough:, shew'd 'em to Cethegus, who acknowledg'd the Seal, we cut the Thread, and read them. Plautus has describ'd the same thing to us more elegantly in his Bacchides: Cedo tu ceram, & linum, actutum age, obliga ob signa citò: Give me the Wax, and Thred, quickly; bind up the Let∣ter, and seal it: This Flax was call'd Vinculum Epistolae; and Juvenal calls the Impression of the Seal upon the Wax, that was softened with Spittle, Gemma Uda. They seal'd their Contracts in the same man∣ner, as also their Wills; for as soon as the Witnesses had heard the Will read, it was seal'd in their presence, and they fix'd Three Labels to it, upon which they put Wax, and set their Seals. This was decreed by the Se∣nate, in the time of Nero, as Suetonius relates. It was likewise necessary, when a Will was opened, that either all the Witnesses, or at least most of 'em, should be present, to own their Seals: Tabellae testamenti aperiuntur hoc mo∣do, ut testes vel maxima pars eorum adhibeantur, qui signaverint testamentum, ut ita agnitis signis, rupto lino, aperiatur & recitetur. Jul. Paul. These Seals were also made use of to seal their Cellars and Pantries, where they kept Provisions for their Families; for Plautus brings in a Mistris of a House, who was going to visit her Neighbour, thus speaking in his Comedy, entituled Casina, Obsignate cellas, referte annulum ad me; And the same Poet brings in a Slave complaining of his Master for sealing the Salt-Box, for fear he should take any Salt; Isti parci promi qui salinum servis ob∣signant cum sale. ANNULI Samothracii ferrei, Rings call'd Samothracian. They had something in them which secured from Envy, and from other Evils, as Varro says. These Rings, as Artemido∣rus says, which were Iron on the out-side, and to which Art had imparted some salutary Virtue, were fortunate in Dreams. Petronius, speaking of the Rings which Tremalcion wore, tells us, That that which was upon his Little Finger
was of Gold, set thick with small Stars of Iron. Isidore, after Pliny, teaches, That the Slaves co∣ver'd their Iron Rings with Gold. These Samo∣thracian Rings may be said to be Talismans, of which the Iron was wrought under some Con∣stellation. Such also were those Rings which Solomon taught Men to make, as Josephus says, which would drive away Devils: and those hollow Rings of Artemidorus, which inclos'd in 'em some supernatural and divine Virtue. The People of the Isle of Samothrace much addicted themselves to the study of the Secrets of Nature, and Pythagoras taught them a sort of Philoso∣phy which he call'd Divine, and is the same with the Talismans, or Rings made under a certain Constellation. The Gods of Samothrace were those who presided over the Talismans. Tertul∣lian mentions three Altars, dedicated to three sorts of Deities, Magnis, Potentibus, Valentibus; and adds, 'Tis credible that these were the Gods of Samo∣thrace, who were potent for the Execution of difficult Designs, and who presided over great Undertakings. Varro calls them Divi Potentes, and supposes 'em to be Heaven and Earth. ANNUS, the Year. 'Tis, properly speak∣ing, that Time which the Sun takes in passing through the 12 Signs of the Zodiack. After several Observations, Astronomers having deter∣min'd, That the several Recesses of the Sun have certain Periods, after which that Planet seems to return to the same Points, in respect to us, and much about the same time makes the same Alteratoins of Seasons, and Temperature of the Air; call'd the Year that Number of Days which the Sun is passing through those several differences of Di∣stances and Recesses. Those who observ'd these things with grea∣ter Exactness, did first acknowledge, That the Sun did run from East to West, round the Earth in twenty four Hours, by the swift Motion of the Pri∣mum Mobile, or Highest Orb. Then they ob∣serv'd, That the Sun, besides this Motion which is common to all the Planets, had another also proper to it self, which was from West to East, round the same Globe of Earth, in the Ecliptick, which cut∣ting the Aequator obliquely, rises on both sides to∣wards the Poles, as far as the Tropicks. And lastly, That the Sun running, in one Year. through the full Extent of this great Circle of the Ecliptick, which they have divided into twelve Parts or Signs, by its Motion causes two very different Seasons, viz. Summer and Winter, when it arrives at the Tropicks, that is to say, at the two Points of the Solstices; and two other more temperate, viz. Spring and Autumn, when the Sun cuts the Ae∣quator, or the Aequinoctial. The Year is call'd in Greek  and , that is to say, Returning into it self; whence it is, that the Egyptians have represented the Year by a Serpent turning round and biting its Tail: which made Virgil say in his Georgicks, lib. 2. v. 402. Atque in se sua pervestigia volvitur annus. The Year is either Natural, which is other∣wise call'd Tropical, or Civil. The Natural or Tropick Year is that exact Space of Time which the Sun takes in passing through the Ecliptick, which is not always the same, be∣cause of the Inequality of the Sun's Motion; which seems to have been observ'd in the most antient Times by the Aegyptian Priests, and Sacrificers to Jupiter Ammon, by means of the different Quantity of Oyl which was burnt continually before the Statue of that God; for measuring with all the exactness possible what they spent in the whole year, they found that there was a considerable Difference between one Year and another, and from thence infer'd that the Years were not exactly equal. Astronomers have since by the Exactness of their Calculations and Observations, proved that the Mechanical Conjecture of the Aegypti∣ans for the Term of the Solar Year, observ'd in the time of Hipparchus and Piolemy, and a∣bout 750 years after by Albategnius, was still found very different in the time of Alphonsus King of Castile, which was about 400 years af∣ter, and the Modern Discoveries that have been made from the most curious and diligent Observations have no Agreement with the Antients. And as the Duration of the Solar Year, which we have from Ptolemy's Observations, is the greatest of all, that in Albategnius the least, so that in Alphonsus's time is in some sort a Mean between both, but that of our time seems to come near the greatest. Copernicus, who liv'd about the end of the last Age but one, took occasion to conjecture that these, tho different Inequalities, had their deter∣min'd Periods; and that, in a certain Revo∣lution of time, they pass'd through all these Differences, and then return'd to the same Posture they were in before. He has found out, by a laborious Computa∣tion, that the Term of this Period is about 1716 years, in which time the Solar year runs through all these several Changes. But because it would be very hard to fix up∣on a Computation of Years, according to such nice Differences, which consist in some few Minutes for each year, the Astronomers have, for that reason, made use of a mean Duration between the greater and the less, which con∣tains 365 days, 15 hours, and about 49 mi∣nutes. The Civil Year, which is commonly us'd by all Nations is very different, both as to its Beginning and Duration; which nevertheless may be refer'd to three different Heads, for
they either follow the Course of the Sun, or of the Moon, or of both. The Hebrews had two sorts of Years, the Secular or Natural Year, and the Sacred or Ec∣clesiastical. The Secular had respect to the Civil Go∣vernment for buying and selling, and began at the Autumnal Aequinox, in the month called Tisri, which answers to our September, because they believed that God created the World at that time. The Sacred Year had reference to their Reli∣gion, and began at the Vernal Aequinox, in the month called Nisan, which answers to our A∣pril, at which time they kept their Passover. The Aegyptians, Chaldaeans and Assyrians were the first that measur'd their Year by the Course of the Sun, and they thought at first, that the Solar Year had 360 days only, which they di∣vided into twelve months containing thirty days each; at the end of which, as we may conjecture by the Story which Plutarch relates concerning Rhea and Saturn, Mercury added five days, which he called , i. e. Added, by which means the year became 365 days long, without counting the six hours or there∣abouts, by which the Solar Year exceeds that number of days, and which, making one day in four years, is the cause that Thot, i. e. the Aegyptian year has no determin'd and fix'd place in any part of the Solar Year, which it anticipates one day every four years, and one month in 120 years, running through its whole Course in the space of 1440 years; after which it returns to the same point from which it first began. This way of reckoning the Years has been a long time in use among the Aegyptians, till, af∣ter the defeat of Mark Anthony by Augustus at the Battel of Actium, their Country was made a Province of the Roman Empire, and they were forced to submit to the Laws of the Conque∣rours and their Computation of years, which was the Julian, keeping only the Names of the months, which answer'd after such a manner to the Roman Months, that their Thot, the first day of the Year, always happen'd upon the 29th. of August; whence it comes to pass that the first day of the Aegyptian Year, which is al∣so call'd the Coptick Year, is four whole months and three days before the Kalends of January, which is the first day of the Roman Year. The Persians count their Years as the Aegyp∣tians do, ever since Cambyses became Master of Aegypt. For having ransack'd the Sepulchre of Simandius, he found a Circle of 365 Cubits round, every Cubit representing a day of the year, which was graven and mark'd by the rising and setting of the fix'd Stars, which made them fix their year to 365 days, without mentioning the hours. Quintus Curtius tells us, that the Persians adore the Sun, and have an holy Fire, kindled by its Rays, to be carry'd before their King, who is follow'd by 365 young Lords, cloath'd with yellow Robes, to represent the 365 days of the Year. The Arabians, Saracens, and Turks, at this day reckon their Year by the Course of the Moon, making it to consist of twelve Moons, whereof some have thirty, and some twenty nine days, alternatively one after the other, which make all together but 354 days; so that the Duration of time being less than the Solar Year by about eleven days, it follows, that their Month Muharran, which they count for their first place in the whole Course of the Solar Year, which it precedes 11 days every year, and more than a month in 3 years; so that in less than thirty four years it runs through all the season of the Solar Year, and returns to the Point from which it first be∣gan. And since the exact time of the 12 Moons, besides the 354 whole days, is about 8 hours and 48 minutes, which make 11 days in 30 years, they are forc'd to add 11 days extraor∣dinary in 30 years; which they do by means of a Cycle of 30 years invented by the Arabi∣ans, in which there are 19 years with 354 days only, and 11 intercalary, or Embolismical, which have every one 355 days; and these are they wherein the number of hours and mi∣nutes, which are Surplus to the whole days in every year, is found to be more than half a day, such as 2, 5, 7, 10, 13, 16, 18, 21, 24, 26, and 29, by which means they fill up all the Inequalities that can happen. The Greeks consider the Motions of the Sun and Moon in their Year, and as they suppos'd in antient times, that the Moons Course was exactly 30 days, they made their Year to con∣sist of 12 Moons, and by consequence of 360 days; but quickly perceiving their error, they took out 6 days, to bring it to the Lunar Year of 354 days, which being less than the Solar Year by 11 days, they found it convenient, for reconciling the Inequalities in the Motions of these two Luminaries, to insert at the end of every second year an intercalary month of 22 days, which they call'd, upon that account, , id est, a Month added, or inser∣ted. They understood afterwards, that the 6 hours they had omitted, which yet are a part of the time of the Solar Year above the 365 days, and make one whole day in four years, were the cause that their Year anticipated the true Solar Year one day at the end of four years; which oblig'd them to change their In∣tercalation, and put it off to the fourth year:
and then leaving only 354 days to the 3 first, under the name of the Common Year, they reckon'd 399 days to the fourth, by the addi∣tion or intercalation of one month and an half, consisting of 40 days, arising from the 11 days by which every Solar Year exceeds the Lunar, being four times counted, and the day which arises from the adding of the six hours in four years. And to render the Intercalation more re∣markable, they made a noble Consecration of it by instituting the Olympick Games, in the time of Iphitas, at which all Greece met toge∣ther every fourth year, and hence came the Computation of time by Olympiads, every one of which consisted of four years, and are so fa∣mous in History. Nevertheless they found at last, that this space of four years did not rectifie all the Irre∣gularities that happen'd in the Courses of the Sun and Moon, which oblig'd them to double 'em, and make a Revolution of 8 years, and because they were not hereby yet fully satis∣fy'd, they introduc'd another of 11 years. Notwithstanding this, the Athenians did not receive such satisfaction as they hop'd for by this last Period of 11 years, but they had still remain'd in a perpetual Confusion, had not one of their Citizens, nam'd Meto, an Astro∣nomer of very profound Judgment, at last dis∣cover'd, that all these different Changes which happen'd betwixt the two Motions of the Sun and Moon would be accommodated by a Pe∣riod made up of the two former of 8 and 11 years, i. e. in the space of 19 years, after which those Stars return again to the same place where they were at first. This Period of XIX. Years of Meto, was ordinarily call'd The Enneadecas eterais, and was receiv'd with so great Applause among the A∣thenians, that they would have it written in large Characters of Gold, and set up in a pub∣lick Place, which gave it the Name of the Gol∣den Number, and the use of it became common not only in Greece but also among the Jews, who made use of it to regulate their years, afterwards among the Romans, and lastly, a∣mong the Christians. The Athenians began their Year at the New-Moon after the Summer Solstice, in the Month call'd , i. e. between the months of June and July. All the Magistrates, says Plu∣to, must meet in the same Temple the day before the Kalends of the Summer Solstice, when the New-year begins. Some made their Year to consist only of three Months, others of four, as we read in Macrobius his first Book of his Saturnalia, Chap. 12. The Carians and Acharnanians made their Year to consist of six months, and Justin tells us, That they reckon'd but fifteen days to their Month. The Romans had three sorts of Years; 1. That of Romulus, which contain'd but ten months, beginning with March, whence it comes that December is call'd the last Month. 2. Of Numa, which corrected the gross Mi∣stake of Romulus, and added two months to the year, viz. January and February, making it to consist of 355 days only, which makes 12 Lunar months. 3. Of Julius Caesar, who dis∣covering a further Error in the Calculation, viz. That there were ten days more than Numa reckon'd, made a Year of 365 compleat days, and reserving the six hours to the end of four years, made a whole day of 'em, which he inserted before the 6th of the Calends of March; so that in that year they counted the 6th of the Calends twice, Bis sexto Calendas, whence came the word Bissextile; and the year had 366 days, and was call'd Bissextile. And this way of com∣putation has continued to our time, and from its Author is named the Julian Year. Now the 10 days which Caesar added to the year were thus distributed, to January, August, and December, each of 'em two; to April, June, September, and November, each of 'em one. But because in these latter times there is still an Errour found in this Calculation, and the Equinoxes insensibly go back from the point where Julius Caesar had fix'd them, they have found out, that the year had not just 365 days and six hours, but wanted about 11 minutes, which in 131 years, make the Aequioxes go back about a day; for an hour having 60 such minutes, a day must have 1440, which being divided by 11 make 130 and 10 over, so that the Aequinoxes were come back to the tenth of March. For which reason in the year 1582 Pope Gregory XIII, to reform this Error, caus'd 10 days to be taken from the Year, to bring the Aequinoxes to the 21 of March, and the 22, and 23 of September, and to prevent the like for the future, he order'd, that since 131 thrice counted make 393, i. e. almost 400 years, this matter should be regulated by Centuries, to make the account more easie and compleat, so that in 400 years, the Bissextile of 3 years should come to 100 Bissextiles. And this is that which is call'd The Gregorian Year. The Jews count their years by weeks, and call the seventh Sabbatical, in which they were not allow'd to plow their Ground, and were oblig'd to set all their Bond-Servants at liberty. They had also their Year of Jubilee and Release, which was every 50 years, or according to o∣thers every 49 years, so that every year of Ju∣bilee was also Subbatical, but yet more famous than others, and then all Possessions, and what∣ever
else had been alienated, return'd to its first Owner. The Greeks counted their years by Olympiads, of which every one contain'd the space of four whole and compleat years. These Olympiads took their Names from the Olympick Games, which were celebrated near the City of Pisa, otherwise call'd Olympia in Peloponnesus, from whence they were call'd Olympicks. These years were also called Iphitus's, because Iphitus first appointed them, or' at least reviv'd that Solemnity. The Romans counted by Lustra, of which every one is 4 compleat years, or the beginning of the fifth. This word comes from Luo, which sig∣nifies to pay, because at the beginning of every fifth year they paid the Tribute impos'd on them by the Censors. They also counted their Year by a Nail, which they fix'd in a Wall of the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus. The Year is divided into four Parts or Sea∣sons, viz. Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter. The Aegyptians divided it but into three Parts, Spring, Summer, and Autumn, allotting to each Season four months. They represented the Spring by a Rose, the Summer by an Ear of Corn, and the Autumn by Grapes and other Fruits. Nonnius, at the end of his Lib. 11. of his Dionysinca, describes the four Seasons of the year thus, The Seasons, saith he, appear to the Eye of the Colour of a Rose; the Daugh∣ters of the inconstent Year come into the House of their Father. The Winter casts a seeble Ray, hav∣ing her Face and Hair cover'd with Snow, and her Breast with Hoar-Frost, her Teeth chatter and all her Body is rough-coated with Cold. The Spring, crowned with Roses, sends forth a sweet Smell, and makes Garlands of Flowers for Venus and Adonis. The Summer holds in one hand a Sickle, and in the other Ears of Corn. And lastly, the Autumn ap∣pears crowned with Vine Branches, loaden with Grapes, and carrying in her hands a Basket of Fruits. The Greeks begin to count the Years from the Creation of the World, on the first of Sep∣tember. At Rome there are two ways of reckoning the Year; one begins at Christmass, because of the Nativity of our Saviour, and the No∣taries of Rome use this Date, setting to their Deeds à Nativitate: and the other at March, because of the Incarnation of Jesus Christ, this is the Reason that the Popes Bulls are thus da∣ted, Anno Incarnationis. The antient French Historians began the year at the Death of St. Martin, who dy'd in the year of Christ 401, or 402. They began not in France to reckon the year from January till 1564, by virtue of an Ordinance of Charles IX, King of France, for before they began the day next after Easter, about the twenty fifth of March. ANQUIRERE capite, or pecuniâ (in the Roman Law) to require that a Person be condemn'd to Death or fined. ANSER, a Goose. This Domestick Fowl was in great Esteem among the Romans, for having sav'd the Capitol from the Invasion of the Gauls, by her Cackling and clapping of her Wings. They were kept in the Temple of Juno, and the Censors, at their entrance into their Office, provided Meat for them. There was also every year a Feast kept at Rome, at which they carry'd a Silver Image of a Goose in state upon a Pageant adorn'd with rich Tap∣stry, with a Dog which was hang'd, to punish that Creature because he did not bark at the arrival of the Gauls. ANTAEUS, the Son of Neptune and Terra, and one of the Giants which dwelt in the De∣sarts of Libya. He forc'd all Travellers to wrestle with him, and kill'd them. He made a Vow to build Neptune a Temple of the Sculls of those he kill'd. He attack'd Hercules, who taking him by the middle of his Body, choak'd him in the Air, it being impossible to kill him otherwise, for as often as he threw him upon the ground, that Giant recover'd new Strength. which the Earth, his Mother, supply'd him with. ANTECESSORES, this Word proper∣ly signifies those who excel in any Art or Sci∣ence. Justinian has honour'd those Doctors of Law who taught publickly with this Title; there were four of them in every College, and they made up the Council of State. ANTECOENA, the First Course, the first Dish set upon the Table; it was either Fruits, or Sweet Wine, or some part of the Entertain∣ment. ANTENOR, a Trojan Prince, who is said to have deliver'd the Palladium of Troy to the Greeks, which was the cause that the City was taken. After the City was taken and de∣stroy'd, he came into Sclavonia, about the Streights of the Adriatick Sea, where he built a City of his own Name, which is since call'd Padua. ANTEROS, the Son of Mars and Venus, and Brother of Cupid. See Amor. ANTESTARI, in the Law, signifies to bear Witness against any one; whence it is that Horace says in his Sat. 9. lib. 1. v. 76. Vis ante∣stari? Will you bear Witness? And he that would, did only offers the Tip of his Ear, Ego verò op∣pono auriculam: I offer my Ear immediately to shew that I consent. ANTEVORTA and POSTVORTA Deities honour'd by the Romans, who took care of what is past and what is future, and whom
they made the Companions of Providence. ANTICYRA, an Island lying between the Streights of Meliacum, and Mount Oeta. There grew, says Pliny, the best Hellebore, which is an excellent Herb to purge the Brain; from whence comes the Proverb, Naviget Anticyram, as much as to say, That a Man that has a distem∣per'd Head, or a crackt Brain, should go to Anti∣cyra to cure it with Hellebore. ANTIGONE, the Daughter of OEdipus King of Thebes, she serv'd as an Eye to her Fa∣ther, after he had lost his Sight in his Banish∣ment. Going to pay her last respects to her Brother Polynices at his Funeral, against the ex∣press Command of Creon, she was condemn'd by him to be starv'd to Death in Prison; but she prevented her Death by hanging herself. Prince Haemon, Creon's Son, who was about to marry her, slew himself also upon her Body in a Fit of amorous Despair. The Poet Sopho∣cles handles this Tragical Subject in his Trage∣dy of that Name so nobly, that the Athenians gave him for his reward the Government of the Isle of Samos. There was another Antigone, the Daughter of Laomedon, whom Juno changed into a Stork, because she equall'd her in Beauty. ANTILOCHUS, the Son of Nestor, who accompanied him to the Siege of Troy, was slain by Memnon, whilst he endeavoured to ward the blow from his Father Nestor. Xe∣nophon tells us, in the beginning of his Treatise of Hunting, That Antilochus having exposed his own Life to save his Fathers, deserv'd so well, that the Greeks gave him the Name of Philopator, a true Lover of his Father. Quintus Calaber relates the matter otherwise, That Antilochus having seen two of his Father Nestor's Captains, Eren∣thus and Pheron, stain by Memnon, attempted to revenge their Death upon him; but having pushed him with his Javelin, Memnon run him through with his Lance. Nestor Commanded his other Son Thrasymedes to fetch off the Body of his Brother; but Achilles interposing, slew Memnon. Nevertheless, Ovid. tells us, That Antilochus was slain by Hestor. ANTINOUS, of Bithynia, the Empe∣ror Adrian's Favourite, who was drowned in the Nile, in a Voyage from Egypt. The Empe∣ror was so sensibly touched with his Loss, that to comfort himself, he plac'd him in the rank of the immortal Gods, causing Temples to be built to him, erecting Altars, and appointing Priests and Sacrifices. He caused several Medals to be stamp'd to perpetuate his Memory, and plac'd his Statues in the Colleges. We have Three Medals of his: upon the Reverse of the First there is the Figure of a Temple, with the Emperor Adrian built upon the Nile, in Honour of him, with these Greek words, , Adria∣nus construxit. At the bottom of this Temple there is drawn a Crocodile, a Creature that a∣bounds in the Nile, where Antinous dyed. Leonicus, in his Historia variâ, says, That he saw at Venice a Silver Medal of Antinous, on which were these words, , that is to say, Antinous the Here. On the reverse of this Medal is represented a Sheep, with an Inscription quite worn out. There is yet a Third Medal of Antinous, wherein, on one side is the Portraiture of this young Bithynian Lad of extraordinary Beauty, with these Greek Letters, , Hostilius Mar∣cellus Sacerdos Antinoi Achaeis dicavit: On the reverse is the Horse Pegasus, with Mercury ha∣ving his winged Shooes on, and his Caduceus. ANTIOPE, the Daughter of Nycteus, and Wife of Lycus, King of Thebes, whom Ju∣piter enjoy'd in the form of a Satyr, which was the cause that her Husband divorc'd her, and marryed Dirce, who imprison'd Antiope; but she escaped and fled to Mount Citheron, where she brought forth Twins, Zethus and Amphion, who being grown up, reveng'd the Wrong done to their Mother upon Lycus and his Wife Dirce. ANTIUM, a Sea-Town built by Asca∣nius, according to Solinus; or as Dionysius Hali∣carnassus will have it, by one of the Children of Ulysses and Circe, upon a Promontory, or the top of a Rock, 32 Miles from Oftia; it was the Metropolis of Volsci, with whom the Ro∣mans had War for Two Hundred Years. Ca∣millus took it from them, and carryed all the Beaks of their Ships away, and laid 'em up at Rome, in the place of their Comitia, or As∣semblies, called from thence Rostra. This Ci∣ty was given to the old Praetorian Soldiers; and Nero caused a Port to be built there. Antiun, says Suetonius, coloniam deduxit ascriptis veteranis, è praetorio, ubi & portum operis sumptuosissimi fecit. ANTONINUS, the adopted Son of Adrian, to whom he succeeded: He was Sur∣named Pius, for his excellent Morals and sweet Temper, to which a reverse of a Medal al∣ludes, which represents Aeneas carrying his Fa∣ther Anchises upon his Shoulders from Troy. (This was the Badge of Piety and Love to∣wards Parents, among the Antients.) Antoni∣nus had a long Visage, which the Physiogmo∣nists say, is a sign of Good Nature and Kind∣ness, to which we may add a sweet, modest, and majestick Air, and a due proportion of all parts of his Face, as in the rest of his Body. He must be acknowledg'd to be a Prince good, merciful, just, liberal, sober, and eloquent,
one that was truly worthy to govern so great an Empire. This Emperor was compard to Numa, and indeed they had a very great resem∣blance one to the other, both as to their Minds and the Lineaments of their Face. He caus'd the Temple of Augustus, which was much ruin∣ed, to be rebuilt, and rais'd a new one to his Predecessor Adrian, who adopted him. He dyed in the Seventieth Year of his Age, and was as much lamented, as if he had been a very young Man; and 'twas observ'd, that he gave up the Ghost as if he had been in a sleep, Hea∣ven recompensing the sweetness of his Life by the easiness of his Death. He govern'd the Em∣pire Twenty two Years and Seven Months, or Twenty four Years, according to others. ANTONINUS. See Marcus Aurelius Antoninus. ANTONINUS HELIOGABALUS. See Heliogabalus. M. ANTONIUS, Mark Anthony, a Trium-vir, the Grand-Son of Mark Anthony the Orator, and Brother of Lucius. He took Cae∣sar's part, when he was Tribune of the People, and Augur. He went into Gallia, and engag'd him in a Civil-War against Pompey and his Fol∣lowers. Attempting to possess himself of Mu∣tina, Brutus's Province; he was declar'd an Enemy to the Senate and People of Rome, by the perswasion of Cicero. He establish'd the Triumvirate of Octavius Caesar, Lampidius, and himself, which they all Three manag'd with much Cruelty. Caesar abandon'd Cicero to the Resentments of Anthony, who caus'd his Head to be cut off as he was carryed in his Litter, and set it up in the Rostrum where the Roman Orators us'd to plead. In the beginning of his Triumvirate he divorc'd his Wife Fulvia, to marry Octavia the Sister of Augustus; but he left her a little time after for Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt, with whom he was extremely enamour'd, which so enrag'd Augustus, that he rais'd an Army against him, and defeated him at that famous Sea-fight near Actium. The year following he pursu'd him as far as Ale∣xandria, whither he fled; but seeing himself deserted by his Friends, he kill'd himself at the Age of 56 years. ANTRONIUS, the Croatian, had a Cow of wonderful Beauty, and he had learn'd of a cer∣tain Diviner, that he who sacrific'd it to Diana upon Mount Aventine, should make his own City Mistris of the whole World by that Sa∣crifice. This Oracle being told to Servius Tul∣lus, he commanded Antrimius to wash himself in the Tiber, before he offered his Sacrifice. In the interim Servius prevented him; and sacrific'd the Cow, and fasten'd her Horns to the Tem∣ple of the Goddess; whence arose the Custom of fastening the Horns of an Ox to that Tem∣ple, whereas a Stag's Head was commonly hang'd up in other Temples belonging to the same Goddess. ANUBIS, the God of the Aegyptians, pi∣ctur'd with the Face of a Dog, wrapp'd up in Linnen. Diodorus Siculus thought him the Son of Osyris, call'd Jupiter, under whose Name Mercury was worshipped, whom Apuleius de∣scribes with a Dogs Head, carrying in his Right Hand the Caduceus, and in his Left a Palm-Branch. ANXUR, or AXUR, as it is found on a Medal of Pansa, Jovis Axur, otherwise call'd Terracina, a City situate upon an Hill that rea∣ches along the Sea-side from Ostia to Naples, which is Forty Miles from Rome. It was made a Colony in the Year 424. under the Consulship of Aemilius Mamercus and L. Plautus, who sent thither Three Hundred Citizens, to every one of whom they gave a considerable parcel of Land. 'Tis thought by some, that it was call'd Anxur, because Jupiter Anxurus, or Beardless Jupiter was worship'd there; for this word Anxur or Axur, signifies quasi , without a Razor. Circaeum{que} jugum, queis Jupiter Anxuris arvis Praesidet.—Aeneid. Lib. VII. v. 799. APATURIA, a Surname given Miner∣va by Aethra (the Daughter of Oceanus and Thetis) who consecrated a Temple to this God∣dess, according to the Admonition she had gi∣ven her, and order'd that the Trazomenian Vir∣gins should for the future dedicate their Gir∣dles to her at their Marriage. There were also Feasts called Apaturia, ce∣lebrated by the Athenians in October, in Honour of Bacchus, Jupiter, and Pallas, where the young Men and Maids spent theri time in Sports and Feasts, which lasted for severaldays. APELLES, of the Isle of Coos, one of the most excellent Painters of the Antients: He drew several Pictures, all which were great Master-pieces. He drew the Image of Fortune lying on a Bed, holding upon her Left Arm her Corna-copia, having her Right Hand sup∣ported by a Wheel, to shew her Instability and Inconstancy, with this Inscription, Fortu∣nae Reduci; and when he was asked, Why he painted Fortune in that posture, he answered, Because she never is at rest. Being on a time ac∣cus'd by a Painter who envy'd his Fame, that he had conspir'd against King Ptolomy, and cau∣sed Tyre to revolt, and Pelusium to be taken, the Prince was thereupon very angry with him, as a Traytor and Assassine, and had cut off his Head, if one of his Accomplices had not clear'd him when he was upon the Rack. Apelles therefore to revenge himself for this Calumny, which had done him so much mischief, designed this
Picture, He painted a Prince with great Ears, as Midas is only drawn, sitting upon a Throne atten∣ded with Suspicion and Ignorance, reaching out his Hand to Calumny, who was coming towards him with a fiery Countenance; she held in her Left Hand a Torch, aad with her other dragg'd a young innocent Child by the Hair; before her went Envy with a pale Face and blear Eyes, accompanyed with Fraud and Deceit, which dressed and adorn'd Ca∣lumny, to make her appear more agreeable; after them came Repentance, under the Figure of a Lady clad in Mourning, with her Clothes all torn, who turn'd her Head towards Truth, being full of Sorrow and Shame. He also drew the Picture of Alexander in the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, under the Figure of a Jupiter, holding a Thunderbolt in his Hand, who seems to be issuing out of the Picture, as well as the Thunderbolt. Pliny says, he had Twenty. Talents of Gold for this rare piece. He has left us the Lines which he drew at Protogenes's House, which are so very fine, that they seem to grow invisible; but this did not gain him so much Reputation and Esteem as his Venus proceeding from the Sea, although that Picture was never finish'd by reason of his Death. APEX, a sort of Bonnet, or Cap, very plain and light, which draws to a point on the top; used by the Priests call'd Salii. Festus and Servius derive the word from the Verb Apere, which is an old Latin word signi∣fying to join or bind; because of the two wool∣len Strings, which coming from the Bonnet, were used to tye it under the Chin. APHRODITE, a Name given to Ve∣nus, because she was generated of the Froth of the Sea, and from hence her Feasts were call'd Aphrodisiana. APIS, otherwise called Osyris and Serapis, the Son of Jupiter and Niobe, who marryed Io, the Wife of King Inachus, and was named af∣terwards Isis. He left his Kingdom to his Bro∣ther Aegialeus, and going into Aegypt, he civi∣liz'd the Aegyptians, which made Hermes Trisme∣gistus think that Apis was a great Philosopher. He was put to death by one named Typho, who cast himself into the Sea: When his Wife Io searched for him, a very handsom Bull ap∣peaared to her, which she believed to be her Husband, whom she afterward caus'd to be ho∣nour'd in Aegypt, under the figure of that Ani∣mal. He was taken out of the midst of the Herd, but then he was to be white-headed, black in the Body, with a white Spot upon his Back, the figure of a Snail upon his Tongue, and the Hairs of his Tail were to be tied dou∣ble. When this God happen'd to die, no body valu'd his Hair (tho he had the Periwig of Ni∣sus, says Lucian) but he shav'd it all off, in to∣ken of his Grief. When he readily took the Meat that was offer'd him, this was look'd upon as a good Omen; but on the contrary, if he refus'd to eat, this was look'd upon as a bad one. Thus Germanicus, in his Voyage from Egypt, drew a Presage of his own Death, from this Animal's refusing to eat Meat out of his Hand. This is the Fable, the History fol∣lows; APIS, was one of the most antient Gods of Egypt, and as he was honour'd under the fi∣gure of an Ox, many have thought that it was Joseph himself, who was represented and ho∣nour'd under that mysterious figure. Julius Firmicus Maternus, who liv'd in the time of Con∣stantine the Emperour, was of opinion, That the Egyptians ador'd Joseph under the name of Apis or Scrapis, which Name he thought was derived from Sara his Grandmother; and that all this Worship was given to Joseph, as being the Preserver of Egypt, during the great Famine of seven years: Josepho post mortem Aegyptii pa∣trio gentis suae instituto templa fecerunt: & quia Sarae pronepos fucrat, Serapis dictus est. This Historian afterwards relates the opinion of others, who thought that Apis was a King who distributed great Quantities of Corn a∣mong the People in a time of Famine, and that after his death a Temple was erected to him, in which an Ox was kept, as the lively Symbol of an Husbandman: Alii repertum in Historiis Graecorum veteribus ferunt Apim quondam patrem-familias, sive regem in Aegypto Memphis po∣situm, cum famis tempore frumenta apud Alexan∣driam defecissent, ex proprio affatim civibus ali∣menta praebuisse: quo defuncto, in honorem ejus in∣stituerint apud Memphim templum, in quo bos, quasi indicium optimi agricolae, nutritur. The Worship of Apis was, without doubt, more antient than the City of Alexandria, which was built by Alexander: but either this was a Mistake in the matter of Fact, which does no ways prejudice the rest of the History, or else under the name of Alexandria we must understand a little City which was formerly in the same place. See what St. Austin says of Apis, cap. 5. lib. 18. de Civ. Dei. At this time Apis, King of the Argives, having sail'd into Egypt, and dying there, became the famous Serapis, the greatest of all the Egyptian Gods. Now, the Reason given by Varro, why he was no more called Apis, but Serapis after his death, is very natural and easie, because the Greeks call a Coffin , and the Coffin of Apis having been honour'd before any Temple was built to him, from hence he was at first called Sorosapis or Sorapis, and after that by the change of one letter, which often happens, Serapis.
It was also ordained, That whosoever should call him a Man should be punish'd with death; and Varro adds, That all the Statues of Isis and Serapis had a Finger upon their Lips to signifie this Prohibition. As to the Ox which Egypt kept so tenderly in honour of him, out of a strange superstitious Humour, because they worship'd it only while alive, and not when it was in the Coffin, they call'd it Apis and not Serapis. When the Ox died, another was sub∣stituted in his room, having the same Marks with the former, which pass'd for a great Mi∣racle; but certainly it was not difficult for Evil Spirits, who took pleasure in deceiving this People, to represent to a Cow, when she went to Bull, an Ox having the same Marks with the former; as Jacob made the Goats and Sheep of the same colours, by placing speckled Rods before the Eyes of the Dams, at the time of Conception. The Author of the Book de Mirabilibus Scri∣pturae, which is among the Works of St. Austin, affirms, That the Egyptians erected the figure of an Ox near the Scpulchre of Joseph. Suidas says the same thing, viz. That Apis was the Symbol of Joseph, or of some other rich Person, who had furnished the Egyptians with Corn in the time of a great Famine; and that a Temple was built to him after his death, wherein an Ox was kept, as being the resemblance of an Husbandman, . There is a very great Agreement between Joseph and this Symbol, for 'tis very well known, that Joseph interpreted Pharaoh's Dream by the Power of Divine Wisdom, and that he took the seven fat Kine to be signs of the Fruitfulness of the Land. Now, 'tis hardly to be imagin'd, but this miraclous Prediction of seven Years of Plenty, and seven of Famine, and the Preser∣vation of Egypt by laying up great Quantities of Corn, must inspire the Egyptians with a great Veneration for Joseph; and it was impossible but the great Opinion they had of him must, in process of time, degenerate into Superstiti∣on, in a People who had so strong an Inclina∣tion to it. In fine, Trogus Pompeius, or his E∣pitomizer Justin, says, That considering the Vene∣ration that Nation had for Joseph, 'twas impossible that they, who made all their Benefactors Gods and Demigods, should not give him Divine Honours. The Name of Apis agrees very well to Joseph, for since the Egyptian Tongue must needs have a great affinity with that of the Canaanites or He∣brews, Apis may be derived from the Hebrew word Ab, which signifies a Father, from whence we have the word Avus. Now, Joseph was truly a Father to Egypt, and therefore Pharaoh caused him to be proclaimed every where with this Epithet Abrec, which signifies Pater Tanet, i. e. a Tender Father. APIUM, Smallage, an Aquatick Plant, that grows by the water-side; which, according to Philostratus and Hyginus, was occasioned by the Death of young Archemorus, whom his Nurse Hypsiphile left lying upon Smallage near a Fountain, where a Serpent kill'd him. Gar∣lands were made of this Plant, which were given to those who were victorious at the Ne∣maean Games, that were instituted in honour of him. Plutarch, in the third Question of his Sym∣posiacks, says, that this Plant was used for the same purpose at the Isthmian Games, that were in honour of Palemon. Hence it was that Ti∣moleon, in the War of the Sicilians against the Carthaginians, took it for an Omen of assured Victory, that the Souldiers had Bundles of Smallage, since the Victors at the Isthmian Games, that were celebrated near Corinth, were crown∣ed with it; and hence also the Admiral Ship of King Antigonus was call'd Isthmion, because a Smallage grew of it self upon the Stern of that Ship. This Plant was peculiarly consecrated to the dead, according to the Testimony of Pliny, De∣functorum epulis dicatum Apium. And Agrippa, in chap. 25. of his first Book of Occult Philosophy, informs us, That the Cypress as well as Smallage was a direful Plant dedicated to Pluto, which it was not lawful for any to crown themselves with on Festival days. APOLLINARES LUDI, the Apolli∣narian Games, instituted by Augustus in honour of Apollo, as an Acknowledgment for the Vi∣ctory he obtain'd, by his means, over Anthony and Cleopatra, near the Promontory of Actium. These Games were celebrated every Year, sometimes on one day and sometimes on ano∣ther; but afterwards they were fix'd to the fourth day of July, by Lucius Varus, the Prae∣tor. APOLLO, a famous God among the Greeks and Romans, to whom they attribute the Invention of many excellent Arts, and to whom they erected many Temples and Statues made by the most skilful Artificers. Cicero, in lib. 3. de Nat. Deorum, informs us, that the Ancients worship'd four Apollo's: The first and most ancient was the Son of Vulcan, whom the Athenians took for their Tutelary God: The second was the Son of Corybas, born in the Isle of Crete, and who contended with Jupiter for the Goverment of that Isle: The third was esteem'd the Son of Jupiter and Latona, who came from Scy∣thia to Delphos: And the fourth was called No∣mion, who was born in Arcadia, and to whom the Arcadians gave that Name, because he had been their Legislator; for  in Greek signifies a Law: yet 'tis believed that this Name was given for some other reason, which may in∣duce us to think that the second and third
Apollo were one and the same Person, accor∣ding to the following Fable, 'Tis said therefore that Jupiter having heard the Complaint which the Infernal Spirits made against the Physician Aes∣culapius, the Son of Apollo, who cured the Sick with his Medicines, and even raised the Dead to Life again, as he did Hippolytus, (which depopu∣lated Pluto's Kingdom) destroy'd him with a Thun∣derbolt: Apollo being irritated against Jupiter, reveng'd it upon the Cyclops, who made the Thun∣derbolt, and kill'd them with his Arrows: for this Action Apollo was driven out of Heaven, and forced for a Livelyhood, says Lucian, to hire himself out to Admetus in Thessaly, as a Shep∣herd to look after his Flocks; and afterwards in Phrygia to Laomedon, in the company of Nep∣tune, where they passed their miserable time in making of Bricks, wherewith they built the Walls of Troy, and were so unfortunate as never to be paid for their Labour. From hence it appears that he was call'd Nomion from , which signifies a Shepherd. The Fable also relates of him, That Mercury, soon after he was born, stole the Flock of Admetus from him, by playing upon an Instrument made of Tortoise-shell; but when Apollo would have shot an Arrow at him, he found that he had also rob'd him of his Bow and Arrows, at which the God fell a laughing, as Horace tells us in these Verses, Te, boves olim nisi reddidisses Per dolum amotas, puerum minaci Voce dum terret, viduus pharetrâ Risit Apollo. Carm. Lib. 1. Od. 10. I intend not in this place to treat of any other Apollo but him who was the Son of Jupi∣ter and Latona, who was brought to bed of him and Diana in the Isle of Delos, according to the most common opinion, tho Tacitus is of another mind, when he tells us, How the Ephe∣sians in former times represented to the Senate, that Apollo and Diana were not born in the Isle of De∣los, as ignorant People believe, and for proof of this, he says, they shew'd at that time a consecrated River and Forest in their Country, where Latona, being big with these Deities was happily deliver'd; that the Olive-tree on which she lean'd in the pains of her Travail was still remaining after so many A∣ges; that the River was called Cenchris, and the Forest Ortygia; and that Apollo retir'd to this place when he fled from the Wrath of Jupiter, after the slaughter of the Cyclopes. Plutarch, in the Life of Pelopidas, thinks that Apollo was born in the City of Tegyra, where there were two Fountains, one of which was called the Palm, and the other the Olive, with a Mountain cal∣led Delos. But whatsoever was the place of his Birth, 'tis certain that the Antients believ'd Apollo to be the Inventer and God of Harmony, as he himself boasts to Daphne, who despised his Courtship, —Per me concordant carmina nervis. In the second place they made him the God of Physick and Botany, which consist in knowing the Virtue of Plants; and this was the opinion both of the Greeks and Romans, upon which ac∣count Ovid brings him in speaking thus, Inventum medicina meum est, epiferque per orbem Dicor, & herbarum subject a potentia nobis. Metam. lib. 1. Thus Hippocrates order'd his Disciples to swear by Apollo the God of Medicine; yet Hyginus makes Apollo to be only the Inventer of Medi∣cines relating to the Eyes, such as our Oculists profess to know. M. Falvius Nebilior being Censor in the year 574, built a Temple to him under the Title of The God of Medicine; and the Falisci instituted Sacrifices for him, and a Soci∣ety of Priests upon Mount Soracte, where his Priests have been seen to walk unhurt upon burning Coals, for a proof of their Sanctity, and of the Protection they receive from this God, as Virgil tells us, Summe Deûm, & sancti custos Seractis Apollo, Quem primi colimus, cui pineas ardor acevo Pascitur, & medium freti pietate per ignem Cultores mulid premimus vestigia pra. Aeneid. lib. 11. v. 785. In the third place, the Invention of Bows and Arrows is attributed to him, and therefore he is made the God of Archers who shoot out of the Long-Bow, or the Cross-Bow. He kil∣led the Serpent Python with his Arrows, from whence he was surnamed the Pythian: And obliged the Greeks to institute the Pythian Games in honour of him, of which I shall speak here∣after. Instituit sacros celebri certamine ludos, Pythla de domita serpentis nomine dictos. Ovid. Metam. lib. 1. He was accounted the God of Musick, and of Poetry, and was always painted with his Harp when he was in their Company. The Poets commonly invoke him when they begin their Poems, to the end he may inspire them, and enable them to sing the Praises of Gods and Men in suitable Strains. Antiquity also believ'd him to be a Prophet, who foretold things to come, and deliver'd Oracles to Cities and Private Persons who con∣sulted him with Water, Incense and the Tripod, about their Undertaking: And when he was about to deliver his Oracles, says Lucian, the Colour of his Face chang'd, his Hair stood on end, his Throat swell'd, his Eyes roll'd about, and his Body trem∣bled; at last he open'd his sacred Mouth and pro∣phesied. The places which were most famous for his Oracles, were Delos, Claros, Tenedos, Cyrtha and
Patara, and from these places he was surnam'd Delian, Clarian, &c. He deliver'd Oracles at Delos during the six Months of Summer, and at Patara in Lycia, during the six Months of Winter: the Delians therefore, fancying that he return'd to Delos at the beginning of Sum∣mer, came all to welcom him there with the Sound of Musical Instruments, dancing and playing antick Tricks, as Virgil has observ'd in these Verses, Qualis ubi hybernam Lyciam, Xanthique flu∣enta Descrit, ac Delum maternam invisit Apollo, Instauratque cheros, &c. Aeneid. lib. 4. v. 143. The Greeks called this Solemnity , and the Removing of the God . At Delos there was an Altar in his Temple, which pass'd for an extraordinary piece of Art, it was made of little pieces of Horn, so exactly join'd together, that they seem'd all to be but one entire piece. It was call'd Ara Apollinis, and Ara Cornea. Martial mentions it in his Book of Shows, Nec Triviae templo molles laudentur honores. Dissimuletque deum cornibus ara frequens. Epigr. 1. v. 3. On this Altar Sacrifices were offer'd to him, not such as were bloody, as Macrobius says, lib. 1. of his Saturnalia, but of the Fruits of the Ground, with the Sound of Trumpets and o∣ther Instruments of Musick, while the Altar was crown'd with Vervain. This we learn from a passage of Cato in his Fragments of Hi∣story: Nutrix haec omnia saciebat in verbenis ac tubis sinc hostiis Deli ad Apollinis genitoris arom. Nevertheless Victims of Animals, as of Bulls and the like, were also offer'd to him; which may be proved out of Lucian in his Dialogue of Sacrifices, where he introduces Chryses a Priest of Apollo, and perfectly well skill'd in his My∣steries, complaining to the God himself, That now his Temple was slighted which had been highly esteem'd in former times, when they burnt upon his Altars the Thighs of Bulls and Goats. He had also a Temple at Claros, a little City in the Territory of Colophona, where there was also a Mountain and a Grove dedicated to the Clarian Apollo. This is represented to us in a Greek Medal of the Emperour Trebonian, in which there is the Picture of the Emperour on one side, and on the Reverse a Temple stand∣ing upon four Pillars; over the fore-part of the Gate Apollo sits holding a Harp in his hand, and under the Stairs of the Temple, these Letters are to be read TO KOINON , the Corporation of the Ionians. Under these Let∣ters is an Ox to be seen at the foot of an Altar, and round about it there are thirteen Persons placed in a Semicircle who lift up their hands on high, with this Inscription under the sides of the Medal, , i. e. Under Claudius Aristion, a Priest of the Ionian Colepho∣nians. This last Word discovers to us, that the Colophonians stamp'd this Medal, for their City was one of the most famous in all Ionia; and that which chiefly render'd it famous was the Temple of Clarian Apollo, which, next to that of Ephesus, was the most considerable in all Ionia: altho it was never finished, as we learn from Pausanias in his Achaica, yet it was very famous for the Oracles which Apollo gave there. It was not built in Colophon it self, but in Claros a little City belonging to the Territory of Co∣lophon. The most celebrated and the richest of all the Temples which Greece erected to this God, was that at Delphos: all the Nations of the Earth vy'd with one another in sending rich Presents thither, and People came from all parts to consult this God there. Croesus sent thither Ingots of Gold to build an Altar in that Temple: and Phalaris, the Tyrant of Agrigen∣tum, made a Present to it of a brazen Bull, which was a Masterpiece of Art, and a Testi∣mony of his Piety. The Romans likewise made many Altars, and built many Temples to him at Rome, and in other Cities of the Empire; but the most famous of them all was that which Augustus built upon Mount Palatine, after the Victory of Actium which he obtain'd over Anthony and Cleopatra Queen of Egypt; from whence Apollo was called by the Names of Apollo Palatinus, Actiacus, and Navalis: for this Prince could not satisfie himself with building to this God (to whom he had address'd himself before the Fight) a Chappel upon the Promontory of A∣ctium, with Games and Sacrifices in honour to him; but he had a mind to give yet more sig∣nal and remarkable demonstrations of his Piety, by erecting stately Temples to him in the Capi∣tal City of the Empire, whose Structure and Magnificence is almost incredible. It was built of the Marble of Claros, with divers Or∣naments within and without of richer Mate∣rials: There you might see a spatious Portico for the holding a Library of Greek and Latin Authors: Upon the Walls of this Temple was painted the History of Danaus's fifty Daughters on one side, and on the other Equestrian Sta∣tues of the Children of Egypt: In the place be∣fore the Temple there were four Cows of Brass, done by the hand of Myron, and there∣fore called Armenta Mironis, which represented the Daughters of Pretus the King of Argos, who were chang'd into Cows, because they were counted more beautiful than Juno, or rather
because this Change of 'em was made in their own imagination by a black Melancholy, whereof Melampus cur'd 'em with one Dose of Hellebore, according to the Relation of Pliny. In the same place grew a Laurel-Tree, which was of the same Age with Augustus, and had been planted before the Palace of that Prince. The Gates of this Temple were of Ivory, en∣rich'd with many Basso-relievo's, which repre∣sented the Gaules when they threw themselves head-long from the top of the Capitol, and the Fourteen Daughters of Niobe the Daughter of Tantalus, who perish'd miserably through the Pride of their Mother, who had provok'd the Wrath of Apollo and Latona against her. In the Frontispiece there appear'd a Chariot of the Sun of massie Gold, whose Figure was crown'd with Rays, which darted so much Fire, and so vigorous a Light, that they were taken for the true Rays of that Star. Within the Temple was plac'd the Statue of the God made of Marble, done by the hand of Scopas, an excellent Statuary; together with another Giant-like Statue made of Brass, being Fifty foot high. There also was to be seen a Can∣dlestick in the shape of a Tree, on whose Bran∣ches the Fruit hang'd, which were like so ma∣ny sparkling Lamps; and on these Branches the Poets hung their Poems which they of∣fer'd up to Apollo, as Horace tells us, Ep. 3. l. 1. —Et tangere vitet Scripta, Palatinus quaecunque recepit Apollo. The same Poet in Compliment to Augustus, in∣vites him to examin these Poems, and consider whether they were worthy of Apollo; —Si minus Apolline dignum Vis complere libris, & vatibus addere calcar. Horat. lib. 2. ep. 1. Augustus caus'd also an Image of the same God to be made of Silver, which wore Sandals up∣on its Feet; and for this reason he was call'd Apollo Sandapilarius, or rather because this Sta∣tue was plac'd at Rome, in Sandapilario vico. The Greeks represented Apollo as young and beardless, having Hair dishevel'd, and flying up, as it were, with a blast of Wind, carry∣ing upon his Back a Quiver furnish'd with Ar∣rows, and holding a Bow in his Hand, as we see in the Medals of Nero, where he is drawn crown'd with Laurel, having his Quiver upon his Shoulder, and the Star of Phoebus by his side, with these Greek words, , i. e. Apollo the Saviour. We have also other Medals whereon he is represented, sometimes holding a Harp in one Hand, and a Branch of Laurel in the other; and sometimes clothed with a long Robe, ha∣ving a Harp in one Hand, and in the other a Cup, which is the Emblem of his Divinity. There is yet remaining an antient Figure of Jasper, on which the Tripod of Apollo is to be seen, and the Crow which was consecrated to him, having at his Feet a Harp on one side, and on the other a Branch of Laurel. The Emperor Gallienus, after his Expedition in the East, caus'd him to be represented in the shape of a Centaur, holding in one Hand his Harp, and in the other a Globe, with this Device, Apollini comiti. Probus made him appear like a Charioteer, mounted upon a Chariot crown'd with Rays, who holds the Reins of his Four Horses, with these words, Soli invicto. The other Emperor, as Constantius, Aurelian, and Crispus, stamp'd an Image of him upon their Money, which shew'd the Figure of a clear Sun, crown'd with Rays, holding in the Right Hand a Globe, and in the Left a Whip, with this Device, Soli invicto comiti; which signifies, that they had vanquish'd and subdu'd many Provinces by the Assistance of Apollo, or the Sun. Lucian in his Dea Syria informs us, that there si a Temple in that Country, where the Statue of Apollo has a Beard, and appears to be of per∣fect Age, and not like a young Man, as he is usually represented; because, say they, this is an Imperfection: His statue there has also this peculiar to it, that it is clothed, whereas all the other Statues of this God are not. In this Temple Apollo delivers his Oracles himself, whereas in other places it is done by his Priests. When he has a mind to fore-tell any thing, he shakes himself, then the Priests take him up upon their Shoulders, and if they do not, he moves of himself and sweats: When they hold him, he leads them whither he will, and guides them as a Coachman does his Horses, turning here and there, and going from one place to another: As soon as the High-Priest asks him what he has a mind to know, if the thing dis∣pleases him, he goes backward, if not, he goes forward. Thus they divine what his Will is; and they do nothing either in publick or pri∣vate until they have first consulted him; and he foretells the Change of Times and Seasons, and even Death it self. Among Animals, the Wolf, the Raven, the Crow, the Cigale [the Cicada of the Antients, a flying Insect like a Grashopper] the Cock, and the Spar-Hawk; as also the Laurel, and Olive-Tree, among Trees, were consecrated to him by the Antients. Apollo was esteem'd a God different from the Sun; for the latter was suppos'd to be the Son of Hyperion, one of the Titans, from whence he was call'd Hyperione natus, and Titania proles; whereas Apollo was the Son of Jupiter and Latona; nevertheless they are frequently confounded.
Vossius thinks that the Jubal mentioned in Holy Scripture was Apollo, to whom the Pagans attributed the Invention and Honour of Vo∣cal and Instrumental Musick. Bochart has ob∣served that the Isle of Delos, where Apollo was born, takes its name from Dahal, i. e. Terror Deus; that the name of Mount Cynthus, where Latona was brought to bed, is deriv'd from Chanat, i. e. in lucem edere. This Fable then of Apollo comes originally from the East, and Apollo is an Egyptian God, according to Pausa∣nias, who relates that a Senator call'd Antoninus built at Epidaurus a Temple to Apollo and Aescu∣lapius, Egyptian Gods; for of [the four Apollo's mentioned by Cicero, the three latter were cer∣tainly of Greek original, but the most antient was he of Egypt. Lactantius proves that Apollo was no more than a mere Man; and that he was like other Men, not only in his Birth but in his Crimes, which tho the Fable did not invent, yet could not conceal. Vossius further tells us, That the Fable of the Raven sent by Apollo, is plainly copied from the History of the Raven sent by Noah; for as the Raven, sent to discover whether the Wa∣ters of the Deluge were gone off from the Face of the Earth, did not return again into the Ark; so the Poets feign'd, that Apollo having sent a Raven to fetch Water, this lazy and un∣faithful Bird rested on a Fig-tree, and waited till the Figs were ripe, to eat them, as Ovid tells us. Bochart remarks, with great probability, that the Fable of the Serpent Python kill'd by Apollo, took its original from Phoenicia, because the Name of Python or Pethon in the Hebrew Tongue signifies a Serpent, and from thence Apollo was call'd Pythian. APOLLONIUS TYANAEUS, a Phi∣losopher and Magician, who was for some time one of the Friends of the Emperour Domitian, but this Happiness lasted not long; for being accused of having foretold his Accession to the Empire, and sacrificing an Infant upon this oc∣casion, he was first ignominiously shav'd, and then sentenc'd to die; but when the Sentence was just ready to be put in execution, he made himself invisible, and vanish'd out of their sight who were present, by the Help of a De∣mon, who transported him to Pouzol. The Church of Christ never had a greater Enemy than this Magician; for, by the seeming Inno∣cence of his Life, and his deceitful Tricks, which were accounted true Miracles, he gave occasion to Hierocles, a Philosopher, to compose a Book, wherein he compares him, with mis∣chievous artifice, to JESUS CHRIST. After he had a long time deceiv'd the World by his Prodigies, he died all alone, having no body with him to bear witness of his Death, not so much as Damis his dear Disciple, and the Com∣panion of all his Impostures. No doubt he had a mind to make People believe that his Body, which never appear'd any more upon Earth, was carried up into Heaven, and that in this also he resembled JESUS CHRIST, whom he pretended to imitate in his Life-time. Philostratus has given a large account of it; but it is rather a well-contriv'd Fable than a true History. As he was one day haranguing the People of Ephesus, he stopt all on a sudden, and going back two or three paces, while he look'd down upon the ground with frightful Eyes, he cry'd out, Smite the Tyrant, smite the Tyrant, meaning Domitian; his Auditors were mightily astonisht at this Discourse, and all of them expected he should explain himself, which he did immedi∣ately, by telling them, That in that very Hour Domitian was killed; the News of his Death came quickly after, and the Curious finding that his Words did so exactly agree with the Action, which happen'd at so great a distance from him, this wonderfully increas'd his Re∣putation to the Prejudice of the Christian Reli∣gion. The Emperour Caracalla and the Ephesi∣ans erected a Statue to him under the Name of Hercules , or He that drives away Evils; and the Emperour Severus had his Image together with that of JESUS CHRIST in his Oratory. APOPHRAS, a Greek word, us'd among the Athenians to signifie an Unhappy Day, on which nothing was to be undertaken; or for some great Defeat which happen'd on that day, or for any other publick Calamity. APOTHEOSIS, the Consecration or Dei∣fication of Great Men after their Death. The Greeks and Romans plac'd the Inventors of Libe∣ral and Mechanical Arts amongst the Gods; so they did Ceres, Bacchus, and Vulcan: they deified also the Founders of Cities, great Gene∣rals, and, in process of time, their Kings and Emperours. This we learn from Horace lib. 2. Ep. 1. where he writes thus to Caesar Augustus: Cùm tot sustineas ac tanta negotia solus: Res Italas armis tuteris, moribus ornes.. . . . . . . . . . . Praesenti tibi maturos largimur honores, Jurandasque tuum per nomen ponimus aras. The Description which Ovid gives of the Apotheosis of Hercules, made by Jupiter himself, cannot be read without Admiration; and every one must apply it to the Brightness of a pure Soul, when it goes out of the Filthiness of Body and Matter, that then being purified from all the Stains of this Mortal Life, it en∣ters upon a Life altogether Divine. These are the words of Jupiter to the other Gods:
—Oetaeas spernite stammas. Omnia qui vicit, vincet, quos cernitis, ignes: Nec nisi maternâ Volcanum parte potentem Sentiet. Aeternum est, à me quad traxit, & expers Atque immune necis, nullû{que} domabile flammâ. Idque ego defunctum terrâ, coelestibus oris Accipiam, &c. Metam. l. 9. v. 250. In another place of the same Poet, Venus de∣sires of Jupiter the Deification of Aeneas: —Quamvis parvum, des, optime, Numen; Dummodo des aliquod. Satis est inamabile reg∣num Aspexisse semel, stygios semel isse per amnes. Assensere Dei. ibid. l. 14. v. 489. The Meaning of the Poet is, That Aeneas having made a Descent into Hell, out of Piety and Religion, in his Life-time, it was not just that he should descend thither again after his Death. The Expiation of his Mortality was made, not by Fire, but by Water, and for this end a Com∣mission was granted to the River Numicius, which wash'd away the stains of his Mortality: Hunc jubet Aeneae quaecunque obnoxia morti, Abluere; & tacito deferre sub aequora cursu. Corniger exequitur Veneris mandata; suisque Quicquid in Aenea fuerat mortale, repurgat, Et respergit aquis; pars optima restitit illi. Lustratum genitrix divino corpus odore Unxit, & ambrosiâ cum dulci nectare mixtâ Contigit os, fecitque Deum. ibid. v. 500. The Apotheosis of Romulus is thus describ'd: —Corpus mortale per auras Dilapsum tenues; ceu tatâ plumbea fundâ Missa solet medio glans intabescere coelo. Pulchra subit facies, & pulvinatibus altis Dignior est, &c. ibid. v. 724. These Deifications were to be authorized in Greece by the Oracle of some God, and at Rome by a Decree of the Senate, which declar'd an Emperour to be of the number of the Gods, and order'd Temples to be built, Sacrifices to be offer'd, and Divine Honours to be paid him. When Alexander the Great had a mind to a∣dore Ephestion as a God; one Philp, who came from Babylon, gave an account that an Oracle of Jupiter Hammon, had commanded Ephestion to be worshipt as a God, and to offer Sacrifice unto him, as Diodorus Siculus tells us in lib. 17. Alexander testified so great Joy at this Deifica∣tion, that the Historians say he was the first that offer'd Sacrifice to him, and that he kill'd for that end no less than ten thousand Victims. But the Athenians did not only adore Great Men after their Death, but they worship'd them, and sacrific'd to them even while they were alive. This they did to Demetrius Polyor∣cetes, as Demochares testifies in lib. 20. of his History, where he relates, That Demetrius re∣turning from Leucada to Athens, the Athenians came out to meet him being crown'd with Garlands of Flowers; that they made Libations of Wine, and were accompanied with Singing-Men and Musicians who sung Hymns to his Honour; that the Common-People prestrated themselves before him, crying with a loud Voice, that Demetrius was the only true God. We salute thee, said they, Son of Venus and of the Almighty Neptune, and we conjure thee to give us Peace, for thou art the Lord, the other Gods are asleep in the time of our Necessity, and are deaf to our Prayers. Upon this Subject you may consult Athenaeus and Duris the Sami∣an. Pythagoras, who was the first that assum'd the Name of a Philosopher, i. e. a Lover of Wis∣dom, having dwelt twenty years at Crotona, went afterwards to Metapontum and died there. The Metapontines, admiring his profound Do∣ctrine, consecrated his House into a Temple, and worship'd him as a God. All Greece de∣creed Sacrifices to be offer'd, and Altars to be erected to Lysander after his Death, upon the account of his Vertue; and Duris remarks, That he was the first of the Grecians to whom Di∣vine Worship was given, and in honour of whom Hymns were sung; which must be understood during his Life, since there were many others to whom Sacrifices were offer'd and Altars e∣rected after their Death, a long time before Lysander. The Romans follow'd the Example of the Greeks, and made Gods of their Emperours. The Senate decreed to them Divine Honours, Sacrifices and Temples, and instituted Priests, Festivals and Games in honour of them, as the Greeks had done before them. The manner of Deification us'd among the Romans, was, by letting an Eagle fly, which came out of the top of the Funeral-pile on which the Body of the Emperour was burnt; and their Supersti∣tion inclin'd them to believe that the Soul of the Emperour by this means flew up into Hea∣ven among the Gods. Thus they deified Judius Caesar, Augustus, and other Emperours whether good or bad; the good for the great esteem they had of their Vertues, and the bad out of Flattery, and in compliance with the Torrent of Custom. APPELLATIO, an Appeal from any Sentence, when we are not satisfi'd with it. An Appeal, say the Lawyers, is nothing else, but a complaint made by a Person who has lost the Cause to a superiour Judg, against the In∣justice of an inferiour and subordinate. In the Roman Law, he who would not abide by a Sen∣tence, was oblig'd at the instant it was given, or at least in two or three days after, to declare, either vivâ voco or by writing, that he did ap∣peal from it; since that the time was limited to ten days, after which no Appeal was to be admitted. In France any one may appeal within the space of thirty years.
This Appeal was to be notified to the Judg and the adverse Party. If the Judg consented to the Appeal, he gave the Appellant a Wri∣ting containing a Summary of the Cause, and the Reasons of his Sentence, which he carried to the superiour Judg; and if he did not con∣sent, nevertheless he gave a Writing contain∣ing an account of the whole matter, and the Reasons why he would not consent nor admit the Appeal. But whether the subordinate Judg did consent to the Appeal or not, still the Ap∣pellant might always carry the Suit before a superiour Judg. This was a very good Custom tho it is not at present used in France. In Civil matters none but he who had lost the Cause could appeal; but in criminal Cau∣ses, when a Man's Life was concern'd, any Person was admitted to bring an Appeal, tho he who was condemn'd did not desire it. APPELLATORIUS LIBELLUS, a Writ of Appeal, a Writ which is obtain'd in Chancery for admitting an Appeal, and for summoning the Adversary before the Judg, when he has obtain'd a Sentence in his favour, to see if it can be set aside. APPIADES, are five Pagan Deities which were ador'd under that general Name, viz. Ve∣nus, Pallas, Vesta, Concordia and Pax, whose Tem∣ples were at Rome near Caesar's Market-place, where were the Fountains of Appius, from whence the name Appiades was given them. APPIANA FAMILIA, the Appian Family; most illustrious among the Romans. Its Original was from L. Appius, who obtain'd the Prize at the Nemean Games in Achaia. There were many Consuls of this Name who always maintain'd the Authority of the Se∣nate, against the Attempts and Violence of the Tribunes and People. APPIUS CLAUDIUS, surnamed the Blind, when he was Censor, caus'd the way to be pav'd, which leads from the Gate Capena to Brundusium, and which from his Name was called Via Appia. He made also an Aquaeduct, which brought the River Anio into Rome, the Water whereof was carried up as high as Mount Aventine. He, understanding that the Senate was just upon the point of concluding a Peace with King Pyrrhus, caused himself to be carried into the Senate, where by several notable Arguments he dissuaded them from it, till he had withdrawn his Troops out of Italy. APRILIS, the second Month of Romulus's Year, which consisted only of ten Months, and commenc'd with March; but it is the fourth Month of Numa's Year, which consist∣ed of twelve Months, beginning with Janua∣ry. Macrobius derives the word Aprilis from the Greek , as if one should say Aphrilis, i. e. One descended of Venus, or Born of the Scum of the Se, because this Month was dedicated to Ven by Romulus. There are other Authors who think this Word may more probably be deriv'd from the Verb Aperiro, which signifies to open, because in this Month the Flowers be∣gin to blow, and the Earth does send forth Seeds and Plants. These Festivals and Solemnities were obser∣ved by the Romans, during this Month. On the Calends of the Month, which was the first day, there was no pleading of Causes; but the Roman Ladies being crowned with Myrtle, and wash'd under the same Trees, of∣fer'd up a Sacrifice to Venus. Ovid relates the Original of this Ceremony: He tells us, That one day as Venus was drying her wet Hair by the Ri∣ver-side, the Satyrs perceiv'd her quite naked, which caus'd in her so much Shame and Confusion, that she cover'd her self presently with a Myrtle. And this the Roman Ladies imitate by this Ceremony. On the same day the Maids, who are fit for Marriage, sacrifice to Fortuna Virilis, praying her to hide the Defects of their Body from those who have a mind to marry them, as Ovid tells us, Fast. lib. 3. v. 150. Ut tegat hoc, celetque viros, Fortuna Virilis Praestat: & hoc parvo ture rogata facit. They sacrific'd also to Venus surnam'd Verti∣cordia, to make the new-married Husbands prove faithful to their Conjugal Vow. On the fifth, which was the day of the Nones, the Festival of Megalesia began to be solemniz'd in honour of the Mother of the Gods, which lasted for eight days together. See Megalesia. On the sixth, the Commemoration of the Dedication of the Temple of Fortuna Publica was celebrated on the Quirinal Mount, which P. Sempronius vow'd, and Martius Ahala dedica∣ted ten years after, appointing the Memorial of it to be observed every year. On the seventh, the Commemoration of the Birth of Apollo was in like manner observ'd. On the eighth Games were appointed for the Victory which J. Caesar obtain'd over Juba and Scipio, after the Battel of Pharsalia. On the ninth and tenth the Games of Ceres were celebrated in the Circus called Cerealia, which were instituted by C. Meunnius, Aedilis Curulis. See Cerealia. On the twelfth, according to the new Ca∣lendar, was observ'd the great Solemnity of the Mother of the Gods, and particularly of her Arrival at Rome, with Processions and ma∣ny Games to her Honour. On the thirteeenth, which was the day of the Ides, a Sacrifice was offer'd to Jupiter Victor and to Liberty, because on that day their two Temples were dedicated at Rome, one by Q. Fabius, in performance of the Vow he had made at the War against the Samnites; and the
other by T. Gracchus, out of the pecuniary Fines of the Commonwealth. On the fifteenth, was kept the Festival of the Fordicides, at which thirty Cows ready to calve were sacrificed. See Fordicidia. On the same day the Governess of the Ve∣stal Virgins burnt the Calves which were ta∣ken out of these Cows, and of the Ashes a Perfume was made, wherewith the Romans perfum'd themselves on the day of the Palilia, or of the Foundation of Rome. On the sixteenth, Augustus was surnamed Imperator. On the eighteenth, there was a Horse-race, call'd Equiria, in the Great Circus; where were also to be seen Foxes running cover'd with Straw, which was set on fire to divert the People. The occasion of this Diversion was thus: The Son of a certain Peasant in the little City of Carseoli, walking about his Corn, per∣ceiv'd a Fox catch'd in a Snare; he takes him and binds him about with some Straw, and having set it on fire, lets him run among the Corn, which he burnt all up: and the Romans, in revenge for this, burnt the Foxes after this manner, cover'd all over with Straw; as Ovid informs us, Fast. lib. 4. v. 711. Utque luat poenas, gens hac Cerealibus ardet: Quoque modò segetes perdidit, ipsa perit. On the nineteenth, or thirteenth of the Ca∣lends of May, the Anniversary of the great So∣lemnity of the Feast of Ceres Eleusina was ob∣serv'd, at which the Roman Ladies, clad in white Linnen, and holding Lamps in their hands, sacrific'd to her a Sow, with great So∣lemnity. On the twentieth or twenty first was cele∣brated the Feast of Palilia, or the Foundation of Rome, dedicated to Pales the Patroness of Shepherds. See Palilia. On the same day a Sacrifice was offer'd to to the Immortal Gods, for the Victory which Julius Caesar obtain'd in Spain over Pompey's Sons, the News whereof was brought to Rome by a Courier, the Night before the Palilia. On the twenty first, the Festival was kept which was call'd Vinalia Priora, at which a Sa∣crifice of New Wine was offer'd to Venus, and according to some, to Jupiter; of which none were permitted to drink till they had first of∣fer'd this Sacrifice. See Vinalia. On the twenty seventh, was the Feast call'd Robigalia, from Robigus the God of Mil-dew and Hoar-frost which blast the Corn. See Ro∣bigalia. On the twenty ninth, the Festival in ho∣nour of Flora, the Goddess of Flowers, was kept, which was called Floralia. On the last day, some Sacrifices were offer'd to Vesta, upon the Palatine Mount, in the Pa∣lace of Augustus. AQUA, Water, one of the four Elements, or the four Principles which concur to the Production of all Beings. Thales Milesius, one of the Wise Men, thought Water was the Principle of all things; but Heraclitus said it was Fire. The Priests, call'd Magi, admitted the two Principles of Fire and Water; and Euripides, the Scholar of Anaxagoras asserted the two other Elements of Air and Earth; but Pythagoras, Empedocles, Epicharmus, and the o∣ther Philosophers, affirm'd that there were four Principles, viz. Air, Fire, Water, and Earth. The Egyptian Priests, to signifie that all things subsist only by this Element, cover'd and adorn'd a Vessel full of Water, which they look'd upon as the Temple wherein their God resided, and prostrating themselves on the Ground, with Hands lifted up to Heaven, they gave thanks to the Divine Goodness for his admirable Inventions. Pliny, in lib. 31. ch. 1. makes an Encomium on Water, wherein he reckons up so many excellent Qualities of it, as make it proba∣ble that this gave occasion to that superstitious Worship which was paid to it: For he tells us, That the Empire of the Waters consists in ruling over all the other Elements, in over-flowing the Earth, extinguishing the Fire, in raising it self up into the Air, and continuing there suspended, in mounting up as high as Heaven, and descending a∣gain with that fruitful Vertue, which makes the Earth produce all sorts of Plants and Animals. Upon this account it was that the Poets inven∣ted Fables, to make the Wonders of this Ele∣ment more grateful. The Book of Wisdom deplores the Blind∣ness of those Idolaters, who worship'd not the Almighty Power of the true God, but the Force and Abundance of Water, which has something very beautiful and terrible at the same time, . Plutarch says, That the Egyptians ador'd the Waters of Nile, whose Inundations serv'd them in∣stead of Rain. Thus the Nile was held to be their Jupiter, who was thought to be the cause of Rain; and so in Athenaeus we find this Prayer address'd to the Nile, as being the Ju∣piter of Egypt, . The Eastern Nations had no less a Venera∣tion for their Rivers: Herodotus and Strabo say, the Persians reverenc'd the Rivers so much, that they durst not throw nor suffer any Ex∣crement to fall into them, nor so much as wash their Hands in them. Xerxes sacrific'd white Horses to the River Strymon, according to Herodotus: and Tiridates did as much to the River Euphrates before he pass'd over it, accor∣ding to the Relation of Tacitus. Pliny says, that the same Tiridates would not put to Sea,
because he would not lose that Reverence which he thought was due to the Ocean, by spitting in it. Atergatis the Goddess of the Assyrians, of whom we shall give an account in the proper place, was also the Goddess of Waters; for she was drawn as half Woman and half Fish. The Greeks consider'd Water as one of the four general Principles of all sublunary Beings, and call'd it in former times . There are several sorts of Water, that of the Sea, of Rivers, of Springs, of Lakes, and Rain-Water, which is gather'd and kept in Water-houses and Cisteins. Of all these sorts there is none better than Rain-Water, says Vitruvius, because it is compos'd of the lightest and most subtil Particles, which are extracted out of all other Waters, and which the Air has purified for a long time by its Motion, till they are dissolv'd, and so fall down in Showers upon the Earth; for the Earth being heated emits its Moisture out of its Breast, after the same manner as our Bodies, when they are hot, do sweat. There are hot Springs whose Waters are not proper for ordinary Drink, al∣tho they have no ill Taste; and these are only to be used for the Cure of some Diseases, which require Dryness and Heat. There are cold Waters whose Smell and Taste are un∣pleasant, such are the Waters call'd Albulae, which are near to Tivoli, and those in the Springs which are near to Ardea. All hot Springs have a Medicinal Virtue, beause af∣ter they are heated, they have another Effect than common Water; for the Sulphureous are good for Diseases of the Nerves, which they fortifie by heating them, and besides they con∣sume the bad Humours. The Aluminous cure those Bodies which are weaken'd with the Palsie, or any other such like Disease, by re∣ducing the Parts, which are distemper'd by Cold, to their natural state by Heat. The Bi∣tuminous, by purging, expel the Diseases of the inward parts. There are also cold Waters which are ni∣trous, such are those near Penna, a Country of the Vestini, and in the Country of the Cutisians, which are drank for purging and dissolving scrophulous Tumours. There is another Water which is not very clear, and besides has Scum or Froth which swims at top, of the colour of red Glass: one of this sort is to be seen, chiefly near to A∣thens, where it is convey'd to make Water-Spouts, and is made use of for washing, but not for drinking. There are also found many other kinds of Water, which have different Properties; such is the River Himera in Sicily, which, after it rises from its Spring-head, is divided into two Branches, whereof one, which runs towards Mount Aetna, is good to drink, because it passes through a sweet Earth; but the other, which runs through an Earth that yields Salt, has a very saltish Taste. Likewise in the Pare∣tonian Fields, through which there is a way to the Temple of Jupiter Hammon, there are found fenny Lakes, whose Waters are so salt, that the Salt swims at top congeal'd. There are other Waters to be met with, which percolate through Veins of unctuous Earth, and which seem as if mixt with Oil? such is the River Liparis, which runs to Soli a City in Cilicia, where all those that bath in it, when they come out of the Water, look as if they were anointed. Near to Dyrrachium and Apollonia, there are Springs which throw forth great Quantities of Pitch. There are also Springs which the Moisture of the Earth from whence they rise, makes very bitter; such is the River Hypanis in the Kingdom of Pontus, which from its Source for the space of about forty miles is sweet; but when it reaches to a place 160 miles distant from its Entrance into the Sea, a little Spring, which runs into it, makes its Waters bitter; this Bitterness pro∣ceeds from a Mine of red Arsnick, which is found near the Head of that Spring. There are Waters also which are dangerous to those that use them, by reason of the vene∣mous Juices through which they percolate: such is that Fountain at Terracina, call'd Nep∣tuniana, whose Waters are poisonous; such also was that Lake near Cyderes in Thracia, whose Waters kill'd not only those that drank of it, but even those that wash'd with it. In Macedonia, near the Grave of Euripides, two Rivulets join together, one of which has a Water so good that Passengers stop there on purpose to refresh themselves; but the Water which run on the other side is so pernicious that no body dares come near it. In that part of Arcadia which is call'd Nona∣cris, there distils from certain Mountains a Water extremely cold, which the Greeks call , the Water of Mourning, which can∣not be taken up in any other Vessel, but only in the horny part of a Mule's Foot. 'Tis said that Antipater made his Son Iolas carry some of this Water into the Province where Alexan∣der was, and that it was its Poison that kill'd that King. There is also another Water in the Alps, in the Kingdom of Cottus, which makes all that drink of it fall down suddenly. In the Country of the Falisci, near the Road which goes to Naples, there rises a Fountain, in which are found the Bones of Serpents, Li∣zards and other venemous Beasts. There are also some Fountains whose Water is soure;
such is that of Lyncostis, that of Velino in Italy, and that of Theano in the Terra Laboris, which have a Virtue to dissolve Stones in the Bladder. There are also some Fountains whose Water seems as if it were mixt with Wine; such is that of Paphlagonia, wherewith a Man may make himself drunk. In the City of Equicoli, which is in Italy, and in the Country of the Medulli, in the Alps, there are Warers which make the Throat swell. In Arcadia there is a City very well known, call'd Clitor, near which there is a Cavern, from whence a Spring rises, which makes those who drink of it hate Wine; because in this Fountain, Melampus, having first offer'd Sa∣crifice, purified the Daughters of Pretus, to cure them of their Folly, and by this means de did in effect restore them to their right Wits again. In the Isle of Chio there is a Spring which makes them mad who inconsi∣derately drink of it. At Suza, the Capital City of Persia, there is a Fountain whose Wa∣ter makes the Teeth fall out. AQUA LUSTRALIS, Lustral Water. The Antients did not make use of all sorts of Water indifferently for their Lustral Water, wherewith they purified themselves at their Sacrifices. The Romans commonly sent to fetch it from the Fountain Juturna, near the River Numicius; as the Athenians sent to that Fountain which they call'd Calirrhoe; the Trezenians to the Fountain of Hippocrene, and the Persians to the River Choaspes. They al∣ways made use of Running Water, which was clear; such as that of rapid Rivers or of the Sea, which they bless'd after their man∣ner. Hospimanus and Pontanus think that the Antients us'd only that Water which was per∣fectly pure, without any Mixture, to make their Lustral, which Opinion they ground on that passage in the sixth Book of the Aeneids, ver. 229. Idem ter socios purâ circumtulit undâ, Spargens rore levi. Yet Du Choul, speaking of this Lustral Wa∣ter, says, That they took the Ashes of the Wood which was made use of for burning the Victim, or of some pieces of Cedar, of Hysop and Cumin, which they threw into the Fire, when they were about to extinguish it, and of these Ashes made their Lustral or Holy Water, which they plac'd at the Entrance into their Temples in great Vessels, and wherewith they purifi'd themselves when they enter'd into them. They had also little Vessels, or Holy-Water Pots, wherein they put some of the Water, and with it they sprinkled those who were present with a kind of Brush; not unlike that now used in the Church of Rome. Ovid has also told us of the Water of Mercury, which was near the Porta Capena, wherewith Merchants sprinkled themselves, thinking thereby to blot out the Sins of Injustice and Fraud, which they had committed in their Trading. The Antients, when any Person was dying, were wont, out of a superstitious Fancy, to throw out all the Water in that House where he was, and the neighbouring, because they thought that the Angel of Death, or Satan, who appear'd to all Dying Persons, would wash his Sword, wherewith he had kill'd the De∣ceas'd, in that Water. AQUAEDUCTUS, an Aquaeduct, a Stru∣cture made of Stone, standing upon an uneven Ground, which was to preserve the Level of the Water, and to convey it through a Canal from one place to another. The Romans were very magnificent in their Aquaeducts, which were sometimes an hundred thousand geome∣trical paces long. The precise time when Aquaeducts first be∣gan to be made at Rome is not certainly known. Pliny informs us, that Ancus Martius, the King, was the first who began to bring Water from a Fountain call'd Aufeia, which was afterwards call'd, from his Name, Aqua Martia. Frontinus who liv'd under the Emperour Nerva, and has wrote a long Treatise upon this Subject, attri∣butes the first Aquaeduct to Appius Claudius, Censor together with M. Plautius Venox, who in the year 441, under the Consulship of M. Va∣lerius and P. Decius, built a subterraneous Water∣passage of strong Stones, vaulted at top; the rais'd Arches were of Brick or very hard Stone, and were call'd, Substructiones, opera arcuata, aerii fornices, & camerati arcus, which are mentioned by Cassiodorus. The Height of the Aquaeduct of Aqua Mar∣tia, which Q. Martius built, was level with the Top of the Viminal Mount; and that of Aqua Appia was rais'd an hundred feet above the Ground. Some have reckon'd up fourteen Aquaeducts which convey'd Water to Rome, that were of admirable Structure; but Frontinus, who was the the grand Over-seer of these Waters under the Emperour Nerva, says there were but nine Aquaeducts, in his time, at Rome. The first was that which convey'd the Aqua Appia, so call'd from Appius Claudius, Censor, who gather'd Water together from many pla∣ces in the Territory of Freseati, about seven or eight Miles from Rome, and from thence con∣vey'd it through Canals and Arches into the City; the Current of this Water from its Spring-head, as far as to the Sabini, near the Forta Tergemina was eleven thousand one hun∣dred and ninety paces long: it was divided at Rome, near the Mons Testaccus, into twenty
Castles or Repositories, called Castella, and af∣terwards distributed by many Pipes into seve∣ral Quarters of the City. The second was that of the Water of the old Tiverone, call'd Anio Vetus, begun by the Censor M. Curius Dentatus, in the year 481, under the Consulship of Septimius Carbilius and L. Papy∣rius (for the building whereof he employ'd all the Spoils he had got from King Pyrrhus) and at last finished by Fulvius Flaccus the grand Overseer of the Waters. The Canal began about twenty miles from Rome, above Tivoli, its Course was forty two thousand two hun∣dred eighty seven paces. This Water serv'd only to wash withal, to water Gardens, and for Drink for Beasts. The third Aquaeduct was that of the Aqua Martia, made by the Industry of Martius sur∣named Rex, which was begun by Ancus Mar∣tius the King. This Water came from the Fountain call'd Piconia, which is in the utmost part of the Mountains of Peligni; its Course extended to sixty one thousand seven hundred and ten paces, through subterraneous Chan∣nels, and Arches equal to Mount Viminalis: It entred into the City by the Porta Esquilina, and having furnish'd two Mountains of Rome, the Viminal and Quirinal, it emptied it self in∣to fifty one Cisterns, for the Convenience of many Parts of the City, for this Water was the clearest and best to drink. This Aquaeduct was built in the year 609. under the Consul∣ship of Sulpitius Galba and Aurelius Cotta. The fourth Aquaeduct was that of the Wa∣ter called Tepula, which the Censors Cn. Servi∣lius Scipio and L. Cassius Longinus, convey'd from the Territory of Frescati to the Capitol, being twelve thousand paces long. This Spring had no certain Source, but only some little Veins or Branches, which met together in the Canal of the Aqua Julia: one part of this Water was convey'd to the Country, and the other to the City, which was kept in fourteen Conservato∣ries, and distributed into the several Quarters of the City. The fifth was that of Aqua Julia, which M. Agrippa erected in the time of Augustus, and to which, in honour of it, he gave his Name. This Water was collected, from many Sour∣ces into one great Water-house about six miles from Rome, its Course extended to fifteen thou∣sand paces and an half; it pass'd through the Porta Esquilina, and the Trophies of Marius, and emptied it self into seventeen Cisterns, for the Accommodation of the several Quar∣ters of the City. The sixth was that of Aqua Virginis, so cal∣led, because a young Maid first discover'd its Spring-head to the Souldiers when they were searching for Water, as Frontinus tells us in his First Book of Aquaeducts. This was also the work of Agrippa which he finished in one Year, and about thirteen years after he had built the for∣mer. Its Canal began about eight miles from Rome, in the Territory of Tusculum, near the Bridge Salaro, and its Course extended to four∣teen thousand one hundred and five paces. It passed through the Campus Martius, and em∣ptied it self into many Cisterns, for the con∣venience of the several Quarters of the City. This Water, to this day is still called Aqua Virginis, and is the only ancient Aquaeduct that remains: Pope Nicolas V. repair'd it. The seventh Aquaeduct was that of a Lake called Alsietina, four thousand paces distant from Rome, and six miles to the right-hand from the Via Appia. This was the Work of Augustus, and from his Name it was called Via Augusta. It served only to fill the Circas with Water for the Naumachiae or Sea-fights, and for watering Gardens. The eighth was begun by the Emperour Caligula, but Death prevented his finishing it: Claudius his Successor thought the Design was too brave to leave it imperfect. Pliny never speaks of this Work but with great Admira∣tion. It convey'd the Water of two fine Springs, call'd Caeruleus and Curtius, which were in the Country of the Latins, thirty eight thousand paces distant from Rome, holding its Course for the space of forty six thousand pa∣ces in length, through many Arches, which terminate at last in the Porta Nevia, and rise as high as Mount Aventine. This Water was called Claudia from Claudius, and was very good to drink. The ninth was also begun by Caligula, and finish'd by Claudius in the same year with the former. It derives its Water from a place fur∣ther off than any of the rest, viz. at the di∣stance of sixty two thousand paces from the City, from a muddy River call'd Tiverone or Anio, from which another Aquaeduct was for∣merly made, and this latter is nam'd Anio No∣vus. Claudius thought fit, for purifying his thick and muddy Waters, to make, at the distance of four thousand paces from their first Rising, a Pool or Pond, wherein the Mud might settle to the bottom, which was call'd Piscina Limaria; but notwitstanding all this Precaution, when the Rains fell, the Water came to Rome very thick. These two Works were worthy of a great Prince, as well for the Height and Magnifi∣cence, as for the excessive Expences that were laid out upon them, which were found to a∣mount, according to the Computation of Vi∣genere, to thirteen millions eight hundred seventy five thousand Crowns: Vicit anteceden∣tes Aquarum ductus neossimum impendium oper i
inchoati à Caesare & peracti à Claudio; quippe à lapide quadragesimo ad eam excelsitatem, ut in om∣nes Urbis montes levarentur, &c. These are the nine Aquaeducts which Fronti∣nus treats of, that had 13594 pipes, which he calls Quinarios and were one inch in diameter and 3 in circumference. The first Aquaeduct of the Aqua Appia had 694 pipes: The Anio Vitus, or the Teverone, had 1981: That of the Aqua Martia had 1741: The Tepula had 445: The Julia 755: The Aqua Virgo 2504: The Alsietina 592: The Cloudia and Anio Novus 4882. Of all these Pipes there were only 10350 which convey'd Water for the City, the rest were for the benefit of the Countrey. There are also other Aquaeducts made at Rome since Frontinus's Time. Pope Pius IV. built one in the Year 1563. which brought Water at eight miles distance from Rome, be∣tween Tivoli and Praeneste; 'tis thought to be the ancient Alsietina. Sixtus Quintus built an A∣quaeduct of the Aqua Felix, in the year of Grace 1581, as may appear by an Inscription engraven upon an Arch, near the Gate of St. Laurence, Sixtus V. Pont. Max. Ductum Aquae Felicis Rivo pass. subterraneo Mil. XIII. Substructione arcuata VII. Suo Sumptu extruxit Anno Domini M. D. LXXXI. Pontificatus I. Let us now see how the Partition and Di∣stribution of these Waters was made into the several Quarters and private Houses. There were in all Parts of the City Conser∣vatories or Water houses, which were called Dividicula or Castella, into which the Waters emptied themselves, and from which they were convey'd on both sides by Pipes. Agrip∣pa alone, during his Edileship, made an hun∣dred and thirty of these Water-houses, ador∣ned with Statues and Pillars of Marble. There were Over-seers appointed, to whom the Care of them was committed, who were called Castellani, who distributed the Water by divers Conduits into several places of the City, and even to private Houses, and hindred any private Person from misapplying the Water to his own Use without Leave first had; which was granted upon conditon of a certain Duty to be paid, which was more or less according to the Quantity of Water any one had a mind to have. Marlianus informs us, That Agrippa was the first who invented this Partition of the Wa∣ters by Inches and Ounces, as well for the Use of the Publick as of Private Persons. The Reve∣nue of these Waters, according to the Com∣putation of Vigenere, amounted yearly to six millions two hundred and fifty thousand Crowns. The Water which was not good to drink, as that of Teverone, emitted it self into Lakes, and serv'd the Beasts to drink, and to wash withal; it was us'd also for Baths, for dying, and tanning of Hides, for milling of Cloth, and for representing the Naumachiae or Naval Fights in the Campus Martius. And after they had serv'd for these several uses, they were all gather'd together in the Cloacae, or common Gutters, and from thence emptied themselves into the Tiber. Nero, after the Burning of Rome, says Taci∣tus, hinder'd private Persons from applying the publick Water to their own use, as they had been accustomed to do, made Conserva∣tories, which might serve for quenching Fires, and appointed some Persons to look after them. The Censors, and after them the Aediles Curuli, took care of the Aquaeducts and the Waters of Rome. But under the Emperours Overseers were appointed, who had under them many subordinate Officers, who distributed them for use of the Publick and Private Persons, upon payment of a certain Duty, and enjoy'd the Benefit of it, not as a Property, but only for Life. AQUARIUS, One that pours forth Water; 'tis a Sign in the Zodiac, which is the eleventh reckoning from Aries. The Sun moves thro' it in the Month of January, and this Sign is of the Nature of Saturn; 'tis mark'd thus . The Poets feign'd, That this was Ganymede, whom Jupiter ravish'd under the shape of an Eagle, and carry'd away into Heaven, to serve as Cup∣bearer in the Room of Hebe and Vulcan. AQUILA, an Eagle, the King of Birds: He is call'd The Bird of Jupiter, because he flies highest of all Birds, and aims, say the Poets, to hatch his young ones in his Bosom. After this the Fable adds, That there was formerly a King of the Isle of Cos, call'd Merops, whom Juno chang'd into an Eagle, when he was just ready to put him∣self to death for the Loss of his Wife. But Aglo∣osthenes relates, That Jupiter being carried away from Candia, was transported to Naxus, where, as as he was preparing to make War against the Titans, he saw an Eagle with his Thunderbolt, which he took for a good Omen, and ever after that this Bird was taken into his Protection. Some Authors tell us, That Mercury being smitten with the Love of Ve∣nus, and not being able to obtain any Favour from her; One day as the Goddess was bathing her self in the River Achelous, Jupiter caus'd an Eagle to take away one of her Sandals, which he carried to Mercury, and she to get it again satisfied the Pas∣sion of her Lover. Nevertheless Ovid and Lucian inform us, That it was Jupiter who transformed himself into an Eagle to carry of the Beautiful Gany∣mede from Mount Ida. It was a Bird of good Omen, when it came flying on the right-side with expanded Wings.
Thus Aristander the Soothsayer foretold, That Alexander should be victorious, because he had seen an Eagle flying from his Enemies Camp into his own. Thus when Lucumon, call'd Tarquinius, came to settle at Rome, with all his Family, an Eagle presag'd to him that he should be King; for as he came near the Janicula, an Eagle came on a sudden and lit upon his Head, and having ta∣ken off his Cap, it play'd for some time with it in the Air, and then put it on his Head again; Tanaquilla his Wife, who was afterwards call'd Caia Caecilia, being a Tuscan by Nation, and ve∣ry well vers'd in Augury, interpreted this Pro∣digy in favour of her Husband, and assur'd him that he should be King; which was justi∣fied by the Event. In the Roman Armies the Eagle was the Ensign that was carried in the first Company of the Legion; it was of Silver, and was born upon the top of a Pike, with ex∣panded Wings, and sometimes it held in its Talons the Thunderboltof Jupiter, as being just ready to dart it, It was of Silver rather than Gold, says Pliny, because Silver is seen at a greater distance. The first who carried the Eagle in their En∣signs were the Persians, according to the Testi∣mony of Xenophon. The Romans having for∣merly carried divers other Ensigns, at last fix'd upon the Eagle, in the second year of the Con∣sulship of Marius, which they made the Ensign for the Colonel's Company in each Legion, and was carried on the top of a Pike. Some say, That Constantine was the first who appointed an Eagle with two Heads, to signifie, that tho the Empire seem'd to be divided, yet it was but one Bo∣dy. But this opinion is confuted by an Eagle with two Heads, which Lipsius observ'd in the the Pillar of Trajan, and from the Custom of later times, wherein the Eagle had but one Head, as in the Seal of the Bulla Aurea, which was made in the time of Charles IV. Emperour. The Conjecture of Father Menestrier is more probable, who says, That as the Eastern Emperors, when two of them sat upon the Throne, stamp'd their Money with a Cross having a double Bar, which each of them held with one hand, as being the Sceptre of Christians; so the Romans did the Eagle in their Heraldry, and instead of doubling their Escutcheons and Eagles, they join'd them together, and represen∣ted one Eagle with two Heads, which Custom was fol∣low'd by the Emperors of the West for some time after. The Consuls carried a Battoon of Ivory as a sign of their Dignity, on the top of which there was an Eagle, as we learn from Martial, Da nunc & volucrem sceptro quae surgit eburno. AQUILICIANA, Festivals which were celebrated at Rome during a great Drought, for obtaining Rain of the Gods. The Priests were call'd Aquilices, quia aquam cliciebant, because they brought down Ram upon the Earth by their Prayers. AQUILO, the North-Wind, which blows from the North-side, which is cold and dry. The Poets represent it to us, With the Tail of a Serpent, having its Beard and Hair cover'd with Snow and Ice. Hesiod, who has given us the Genealogy of the Winds, makes this, as well as the rest, the Son of the Stars and Aurora. ARA, an Altar. Some derive this Word from ardeo, which signifies to burn, because Per∣fumes and the Entrails of Beast were burnt on it. Others derive it from the Greek word , which signifies Prayer, from whence comes , which signifies Imprecation. Whatever the Etymology of the Word is, there is certainly a difference between Ara and Altare, which comes from altus, i. e. high, for according to Servius they did not Sacrifice on the latter, but only to the Gods on high, or Celestial Deities, but upon Ara's they sacrific'd both to those and the Infernal Gods. There is also another Diffe∣rence between these 2 Words, that there were Steps for ascending the Altars which were call'd Altaria, but there were none to those call'd Ara, which were indeed rais'd upon the ground, but in a plain and even plat. Yet notwithstanding these Differences, Authors have confounded these Words, and do often take one for t'other. We must now enquire what was the Matter of which Altars were made, what was the Fi∣gure and Ornaments, what was their Consecra∣tion and Use. The Matter of Altars was different according to several Countries and Times. At first they were made only of Turf heap'd one upon another. Pausanias, in his Elegiaca, describing the Altar of Jupiter Olympius, says, That it was made of the Ashes of the Victims that were sacrific'd to him, and was 22 feet high, and that the Steps for ascending to it were also of Ashes; and that every Year, on the 19th of February, the Aruspices were wont to carry the Ashes of the Pry∣taneum, and make an Altar of them, tempering them with the Water of the River Alpheus. The same Author mentions another Altar of Apollo Spadius which was made after the same Fashion. In following times Altars were made of Stones, of Marble, of Wood, and even of Horn, as that of Apollo in the Isle of Delos. The Figure of Altars was different, some were round, others four-square or oval; but they were always turn'd towards the East, and stood lower than the Statues of the God, which were plac'd upon Bases above the Altar. These Statues were crown'd and adorn'd with Orna∣ments convenient for them, which express'd their Divinity: thus also the Altars were ador∣ned with Festoons of Leaves and Flowers which had been dedicated to them; and so the Statues and Altars of Apollo were adorn'd with Laurel Leaves, those of Hercules with Poplar, Jupiter's with Oak, of Venus with Myrtle, and those of Pallas with Olive Leaves, Neverthe∣less the same name Verbenae, was commonly
given to them all, as we learn from Donat upon Terence's Andria, Act. 4. Sc. 4. Ex ara hinc sume verbenas tibi: upon which words he says, verbenae sunt redimicula ararum, sive omnes herbae, frondesque festae ad aras coronandas. These Altars were consecrated with Oyl, which was pour'd upon them. The People of Elis for this end made use of the Ashes which they took from the Prytaneum, and temper'd with the Water of the River Alpheus, and with these they rub'd over their Altars. They dedi∣cated them afterwards to some Deity, and put on them the Name of the God, together with his who made the Dedication. I will here sub∣join a Form of the Dedication of an Altar: C. Domitius Valens Duumvir praeeunte D. Julio Severo Pontifice legem dixit in ca verba quae infra scripta sunt. Jupiter Optime, quandoque hodie tibi hanc aram dabo dedicaboque, ollis legibus ollis{que} religionibus da∣bo dedicaboque, quas hîc hodie palam dixero; uti infimum solum hujus arae est, si quis hic hostiâ sa∣crum fecit, quod in augmentum ne protollat, idcirco tamen probè factum esto.— Sicuti dixi hanc tibi aram, Jupiter Optime, Ma∣ximè, dico dedicoque, uti sis volens propitius mihi collegisque meis, decurionibus, colonis, incolis Coloniae Martiae, Juliae, Saloniae, conjugibus{que} liberis{que} nostris. Here follows likewise the Inscription of an Altar, which the Inhabitants of Narbon erected to Casar Augustus in their City. T. Statilio Tauro, L. Cassio Longino, Coss. X. Kalend. Octob. Numini Augusti votum susceptum A plebe Narbonensium in perpetuum.Quod bonum, faustum felixque sit Imp. Caesari Divi F. Augusto P. P. Pontifici maximo Tribun. potestate XXXIIII. Conjugi, liberis, gentique ejus, Senatui, populo{que} Romano & colonis incolisque C. I. P. N. M. qui se numini ejus in perpetuum colendo obligaverunt, ple∣bes Narben. aram Narbone in foro posuit, ad quam quotannis VIIII. Kal. Oct. quâ die eum seculi felicitas orbi terrarum Rectorem edidit, tres Equites Romani à plebe & tres libertini hostias singulas immolent, & colonis & incolis, ad supplicandum numini ejus, tus & vinum de suo eâ die praestent: & VIII. Kal. Oct. tus, vinum colonis & incolis item praestent: VII. quoque Idus Januarias, quâ die primùm Imperium orbis terrarum auspicatus est, ture, vino supplicent, & hostias singulas immolent, & colonis incolis{que} tus vinum eâ die praestent. By these Inscriptions we see, that the first use of Altars, was there to offer Sacrifices and and Prayers to the Gods to whom they were dedicated. The second use of them was to render Alli∣ances more solemn, Treaties of Peace more firm, Marriages more indissoluble, and Oaths more sacred; for the two Parties having of∣fer'd Sacrifice to the Gods to witness the Sin∣cerity wherewith they swore that Alliance, and conjuring them to bring the Infractors of it to some miserable Death. Thus K. Latinus sware an Eternal Peace with Aeneas, in the presence the Armies of the Trojans and Latines. Tango aras, mediosque ignes & numina tester: Nulla dies pacem hanc Italis, nec faedera rumpet. Aen. 12. v. 201. The Romans observ'd the same Ceremony in the Oaths they took about divers Civil Affairs, and prescrib'd certain Words to be us'd by him who swore, while he laid his hand upon the Altar of the Gods. Thus Gripus in Plautus makes Labrax swear, while he held by the Altar of Ve∣nus, to restore to him a Portmanteau, and makes him repeat after him the Words of his Oath: Act. 5. Sc. 11. Rud. v. 46. Gr. Tange aram hanc Veneris. La. Tango. Gr. Per Venerem hanc juran∣dum est tibi. La. Quid jurem? Gr. Quod jubebo. La. Praei verbis quod vis—Gr. Tene aram hanc. La. Teneo—Gr. La. Venus Cyrenensis, testem te testor mihi: Si vidulum illum, quem ego in navi perdidi, Cum auro atque argento salvum investiga∣vero, Is{que} in potestatem meam pervenerit—La. Tum ego huic Gripo dico, Venus, ut tu exandias. Gr. La. Talentum argenti magnum continuo dabo. Gr. Et si fraudassis, dicito, uti in quastu tuo Venus eradicet caput atque aetatem tuam. By which Passage it appears, that they us'd Imprecations against those that should violate their Oath. From this Custom came the Latin Proverb, Amicus ad aras, which Pericles first made use of, meaning thereby, that he would serve his Friends in every thing so far as he could without offending the Gods, . This Answer he gave to one of his Friends, who desir'd him to bear false witness in his favour;  I ought to serve my Friends, but without touching the Altar. From thence came also that other Phrase, pro aris & focis pugnare, which signifies, to fight for the In∣terest of the Gods and Religion. The third use of Altars was to serve for an Asylum or place of Refuge and a Sanctuary to all those who fled to them, whatever Crimes they had comitted; for it was expresly forbid∣den by the Laws to take any one from them by Force, and especially from the Altar of Concord; which Privilege belong'd also to those that held in their arms the Statues of the Emperors. This happen'd often to Slaves, who being unfaithful to their Master, ran to the Altars and Statues, which they embrac'd as a most safe Asylum, as Plautus tells us in this Verse, Nemo accusat, Syre, nec tu aram tibi nec preca∣catorem parabis. Upon this account the Altars were call'd Arae confugii, and Euripides calls them the Retreat of Slaves, as the Caves are of Wild Beasts.
was the first who appointed these places of Refuge in the Temples, and at the Altars of the Gods, that by this means he might People his new City; during the Tri∣umvirate it was expresly forbidden to take any Criminals by force out of the Temple of Julius Caesar, who had fled thither and em∣brac'd his Altars. In fine, the privilege of these Sanctuaries came to so great an height, that at Rome and in the Cities of Greece, the Tem∣ples were fill'd with Debtors, fugitive Slaves, and Criminals, and yet the Magistrates could give no Orders about them, nor put any stop to the fury of the People, who protected these superstitions as sacred and mysterious. ARA, a Celestial sign so call'd from the Altar which the Cyclopes erected, and on which the Gods swore to assist Jupiter in his War against the Giants; for after their defeat this Altar was plac'd among the Stars. ARAE, certain Rocks in the Sea, at which Luttutius Catulus obtain'd a Naval Victory over the Carthaginians, and where a Peace was made between them and the Romans, which put an end to the first Punick Wat in the Year from the building of Rome DXII. Saxa vocant Itali, mediis quae in fluctibus aras, &c. Virg. 1. Aeneid. v. 112. Ara Maxima, an Altar call'd the greatest, from the great quantity of Stones of which it was built, as Servius tells us. This Altar was erected at Rome to Hercules in the Market∣ket place for Oxen, near the Schola Graeca, and hard by the Entrance of the Circus maximus: The occasion of building it was this. Ca∣cus being kill'd by Hercules, Evander, who had observ'd something very great and ex∣traordinary in his Physiognomy, desir'd to know his Name; and understanding that he was call'd Hercules, he cry'd out imme∣diatly, that it was he of whom his Mother Carmenta had foretold extraordinary Prodi∣gies of Courage, for which an Altar was to be erected to him which should be call'd, Ara maxima; that he himself should ap∣point his own Sacrifice, and prescribe the manner of it to Posterity: Immediatly Her∣cules sacrific'd a fine Heifer out of the Herd, and appointed those of the Family of the Potitii and Pinarii to be his Priests: Or, according to Propertius, this Altar was ere∣cted to him for finding again his Drove of Cattel, Maxima quae gregibus deveta est ara repertis; Ara per has, inquit, Maxima sacta manus. Ara Lugdunensis, an Altar in the City of Lyons, dedicated to Augustus, in the Year of Rome DCCXLIV. This Altar was in a Tem∣ple, which was erected at the common charge of Sixty several Nations of the Gauls, together with so many Statues, which bore the Names of each of these Nations. In this Temple the Emperor Caligula appoin∣ted Ludi Academici, as Suetonius says, to which great numbers of Orators and Poets came from several parts of the World, to perform their best in Eloquence and Poetry. But be∣cause it was ordain'd, that they who were out-done should be plung'd in the River Saone, if they did not like the perfor∣mance of their Tongue; this gave occa∣sion to Juvenal to express any great fear, by way of Proverb, by the timerousness of an Orator, who was to harangue before the Altar of Lyons. Palleat ut nudis pressit qui calcibus anguem, Aut Lugdunensem Rhetor dicturus ad aram. Juv. Sat. 1. v. 43. Arachne, the Daughter of Idmon of Lydia, very skilful in the art of Weaving She was so rash that she would be esteem'd more ex∣cellent than Minerva; but this Goddess pu∣nish'd her by tearing her Work in pieces, and giving her a blow with her shuttle, which so mightily offended Arachne that she hang'd her self in despair: But Minerva afterwards pity∣ing her misfortune, chang'd her into a Spi∣der, which still makes Cobwebs in the Air. ARBITER, an Arbitrator, a Judge in an amicable manner, whom the Pretor ap∣pointed for Partners to end their differences; and Arbitrators in general, are such as are chosen and agreed upon by Two Parties for determining any Controversies between them: To which end they sign'd a Bond of Arbi∣tration to submit to the Award given about the differences, under the forfeiture of a cer∣tain Summ of Money to be paid by those who refus'd to stand to it. ARBORES, Trees. The Pagan Gods, says Phaedrus, in ancient times made choice of certain Trees which they had a mind to take into their Protection: Thus Jupiter chose the Oak-tree, Venus the Myttle, Apollo the Lau∣rel, Cybele the Pine-tree, Hercules the high Pop∣lar, Minerva the Olive-tree, and Bacchus the Ivy. Men did then also reverence Trees, Woods and Plants, as being the Temples, or Bodies of some living and intelligent Divi∣nities. The Egyptians abstain'd from Onions and Leeks, because they durst not handle these Gods which grew in their Gardens, as we learn from Juvenal, Porrum & Cape nefas violare & frangere morsa. O sanctas geutes quibus hac nascuntur in hortis Numina! Sat. 15. v. 9. Pliny tells us, that if the Ancients ador'd Trees, it was only because they look'd upon them as the Temples of some Divinity. This Testimony of Pliny shews plainly, that if the
Romans ador'd Groves and their Silence, [Lucos & in iis ipsa silentia adoramus] this Worship was only paid to some intelligent Divinity, or to some Genius, which they believ'd to preside over, and also to have their Residence in these Trees. Ovid speaking of an impious Profaner of sacred Groves, and of a great Oak, under which the Dryades often us'd their innocent Diversions, tells us, that this Oak being struck with an Axe by the bold Pro∣faner, declar'd that a Nymph lodg'd in the Tree, who died at the same time with the Tree, but that her Death should not long remain unpunish'd. He mentions elsewhere a Mother who was chang'd into a Tree, and desir'd her Son never to touch any Trees, but look upon them as the Bodies of some-Nymphs. Horace devoted a Pine-tree to Dia∣na, at which he engag'd every Year to offer Sacrifice, Montium custos, nemorumquc Virgo, Imminens villae tua pinus esto, Quam per exactos ego laetus annos, Verris obliquum meditantis ictum Sanguine donem. Lib. 3. od. 22. ARCAS, the Son of Jupiter, and Calisto the Daughter of Lycaon King of Arcadia, with whom Jupiter fell in love. Juno, to be reveng'd of her Rival, chang'd her into a Bear, which Diana shot dead with her Ar∣rows in complaisance to Juno. Pausanias in his Arcadica, says that she was then with Child of Arcas, and that Jupiter sent Mercury to save the Infant alive, and plac'd the Mo∣ther in the number of the Stars under the Name of Ursa major, i. e. the great Bear. When Arcas grew up to be a great Boy, he was presented by some Hunters to Lycaon his Grandfather, who yet did not know him: But it hap'ned that Jupiter came one day to see Lycaon, and this King having a mind to try whether he was truly a God or no, caus'd Arcas to be kill'd and cut into morsels, and so serv'd up as Meat for Jupiter: But he im∣mediatly punish'd his cruelty, by changing him into a Wolf, and Arcas into the little Bear, Ʋrsa minor. These Two Bears, says Vitruvius, are plac'd in the Artic Circle, so that their Backs touch one another, having their Bellies turn'd a contrary way, one to one side, and the other to the other side. The little Bear is call'd by the Grecians Cynosura, and the great one Helice: Their Heads are opposite to one another, and their Tails also remove from one another for each Head as it goes for∣ward on each side is to the right of each Tail. ARCADES, the Arcadians, who are such Sots, says ucian, as to believe that they were Born before the Moon, and for that rea∣son would never receive Astrology. Their King Pelasgus first taught them the use of Acorns, for before his time they liv'd only upon Herbs and Roots: But Arcas the Son of Jupiter and Calisto, according to Vigenere, upon the Pictures of Philostratus, first shew'd them the Art of tilling the Ground, of sow∣ing Corn and making Bread, with which they afterwards maintain'd themselves, and forsook their Acorns: This he learn'd from Triptolemus the Son of Ceres, and the Country where they dwelt, which was formerly call'd Pelasgia, was afterwards call'd Arcadia. Among other Deities they worship'd Pan and Diana, as Virgil says, Pan Deus Arcadiae. They sacri∣fic'd Men to Jupiter Lycianus, according to the relation of Pliny. Aristotle tells us Book 4th. of his Meteors, that the Wine of this Country being put into the Skin of a He-goat, and plac'd near the fire, calcines itself, and is reduc'd to a Salt. ARCHAGATHUS, the Son of Li∣sanias, was the first Physician who came from Peloponnesus to Rome, under the Consulship of Lucius Aemilius, and Marcus Livius, in the Year of Rome DXXXV. Cassius Hemina, an ancient Writer, says that the Freedom of a Citizen was given him, and a Shop was purchas'd for him at the expence of the Publick, in the Cross Street of Acilius. 'Tis said also, that the Epithet of Healer of Wounds was given him, and that at first he met with a wondrous good Reception; but that within a little while af∣ter, when he was oblig'd to cut and burn some Members of the Body, for these un∣merciful Operations they gave him the Nick∣name of a Hangman, and were much disgu∣sted at Rome with Medicine and Physicians, at least with that part of it which is call'd Surgery. ARCHEMORUS, the Son of Lycus, according to Guichard, or of Lycurgus King of Thracia or Nemaea, according to others, was kill'd by a Serpent, and after this manner. The Ar∣gives going with their King Adrastus to the War of Thebes in favour of Polynice, were extremely distressed with thirst, and the Nurse of the young Prince, call'd Hypsiphile, whom they met, went along with him to shew them where they might have Water; but fearing to lay the Infant down upon the ground, because of the Prohibition of the Oracle, she laid it upon a smallage Plant, and thither a Serpent came and choak'd it. Adrastus and the other Grecians ran to the Place, and found the Serpent still sucking the Blood of the Child, where∣upon they kill'd it: And to comfort the King for this loss, they appointed the so∣lemn Games, call'd Nemaan, to be celebra∣ted every Fifth Year, at which the Con∣querors
were crown'd with smallage, and the Judges that prosided over them were clad in Mourning. Clemens Alexandrinus informs us, that a Funeral Oration in ho∣nour of him was also repeated at them. ARCHIGALLUS, the High Priest of Cybele Mother of the Gods, who was wont to cut and gash himself, as the other Priests of that Goddess did, who were call'd Galli Cybeles. ARCHIMAGIRUS, , the Master Cook. ARCHIMEDES, of Syracuse, a most skilful Mathematician, who by his Engines defeated all the Attacks of Marcellus at the Siege of Syracuse, and burnt also the Gallies of the Romans that were there. The Inven∣tion of the Cochlea, or Water-skrew, is com∣monly attributed to him, which is call'd the Mechanical Power of Archimedes, although Vitruvius does not make him the Inventor of it. Diodorus Siculus, who liv'd near the time of Vitruvius, ascribes the Invention of it to him. But as to the famous use which he says was made of this Machine, to make Egypt habitable, by draining the lower grounds which had formerly been overflow'd with Water, it may be doubted whether it is not much ancienter than Archimedes. Cicero glories of discovering the Sepulcher of Ar∣chimedes at Syracuse, without the Gate Acraga∣na, cover'd all over with Brambles and Thorns which grew in that place: He says, that he knew it by observing a Cylinder and a Sphere carv'd upon the Stone. ARCHIMIMUS, , the chief Buffoon, or an extraordinary Mimick, who imitates the Gate, Gesture, and Words of any Person dead or alive. ARCHITECTONICE, , and ARCHITECTURA, the Art or Science of Building. Architecture is divided into Civil and Military: Civil Architecture teaches to make any Buildings whether pub∣lick or private, sacred or profane: Milita∣ry Architecture teaches to fortifie Cities, Pas∣ses, and Sea-ports. Architecture, says Vitruvius, is a Science, which should be accompanied with great variety of Studies, and requires a vast compass of Learning; for by this means it must judge of all the Works of other Arts: In effect Architecture, or the art of Building comprehends all Sciences, and therefore the Greeks gave it a Name, which signifies a su∣periority, or superintendence over all the rest; and when Cicero would give an Exam∣ple of a Science that is of a vast extent, he instances in Architecture. This Art, like all the rest, had but weak and imperfect beginnings, and was not per∣fected till after long use and experience. At first Houses were made only for necessity; and because in the first Ages Men often chang'd their Habitations, they did not trou∣ble themselves to make their Houses either beautiful or lasting. But when in process of time, every one endeavour'd to settle in some particular Country, then Men began to build their Houses, more solid and strong that they might be able to hold out against the injuries of time: At last, when Luxury was spread among the most rich and power∣ful Nations, then they began to mind the Beauty and magnificence of their Buildings and having observ'd what contributed most either to the Strength or Beauty of them, they set down Rules about them, and so fram'd the Art of Building well, which is call'd Architecture, as those who are perfect Masters of this Art are call'd Architects. The necessity of making several sorts of Buildings first induc'd the Workmen to settle different Proportions, and from these diffe∣rent Proportions they compos'd different Or∣ders of Architecture. The Orders which the Ancients established at several times and upon divers accidents are the Tuscan, the Do∣ric, the Ionic, the Corinthian, and the Composite. That which forms each of these different Or∣ders, is the Column with its base and Capi∣tal, and the Entablature, i. e. the Architrave, the Frise and Cornish; for these are the only parts which in Buildings constitute that which is call'd an Order, and each Order has its own peculiar measures. Vitruvius is the most ancient of all the Architects whose Wri∣tings we have; he liv'd in the time of Julius Caesar and Augustus, and had view'd the state∣ly Edifices which were then in Greece and Ita∣ly. Several learned Men have also written many excellent Volumes of Architecture, as Fussitius, Varro, Septimius and Gelsus; and Cos∣sutius a Roman Citizen was sent for by King Antiochus, to finish the Temple of Jupiter Olympius in the City of hens. The Original of the Tuscan Order was in Tuscany, one of the most considerable parts of Italy, whose Name it still keeps. Of all the Orders this is the most plain and least or∣namental: 'Twas seldom us'd, save only for some Country Building where there is no need of any Order but one, or else for some great Edifice, as an Amphitheatre, and such like other Buildings. The Tuscan Column is the only thing that recommends this Order. The Doric Order was invented by the Dorians a People of Greece, and has Columns which stand by themselves, and are more ornamen∣tal than the former. The Ionic Order has its
Name from Ionia a Province of Asia, whose Columns are commonly sluted with Twenty four Gutters: But there are some which are not thus furrow'd and hollow'd, but only to the third part from the bottom of the Co∣lumn; and that third part has its Gutters fill'd with little Rods, or round Battoons ac∣cording to the different height of the Co∣lumn which in the upper part is channell'd and hollow'd into Groves, and is altogether empty. The Corinthian Order was invented at Co∣rinth, it observes the same measures with the Ionic, and the greatest difference between them is in their Capitals. The Composite was added to the other Or∣ders by the Romans, who plac'd it above the Corinthian, to show, as some Authors say, that they were Lords over all other Nations; and this was not invented till after Augustus had given Peace to the whole World. 'Tis made up of the Ionic and Corinthian, but yet is more ornamental than the Corinthian. Besides these Five Orders, there are some Authors who add yet Two more, viz. the Order of the Cargatides, and the Persic Or∣der. The former is nothing but the Ionic Order, from which it differs only in this, that instead of Columns there are Figures of Wo∣men which support the Entablature. Vitru∣vius attributes the Origine of this Order to the Ruine of the Inhabitants of Carya, a City of Peloponnesus. He says, That these People having joyn'd with the Persians to make War upon their own Nation, the Gracians routed the Persians, and obtain'd an entire Victory over them; after which they be∣sieg'd the Inhabitants of Carya, and having taken their City by force of Arms they reduc'd it to Ashes, and put all the Men in it to the Sword: As for the Women and Virgins they carried them away captive, but to perpetuate the Marks of their Crime to Posterity, they represented afterwards the Figure of these miserable Captives in the publick Edifices which they built, where by making them serve instead of Columns, they appear'd to be loaded with a heavy burden, which was, as it were the Punish∣ment they had deserv'd for the Crime of their Husbands. The Persic Order had its rise from an Accident like this: For Pausa∣nias having defeated the Persians, the Lacede∣monians, as a Mark of their Victory, erected Trophees of the Arms of their Enemies, whom they represented afterwards under the Figure of Slaves, supporting the Entablatures of their Houses. From these Two Examples divers kinds of Figures were afterwards made use of in Architecture to boar up the Cor∣nishes, and support the Corbels and Bracks. There are still some ancient footsteps to be seen near Athens, of those Figures of Women which carry Panniers on their Head, and sup∣ply the room of the Cargatides. There are al∣so Figures of Men, who are commonly call'd Atlantes, according to Vitrutius, tho' the Romans call'd them Telamones. The Greeks had some reason to call them Atlantes, from Atlas whom the Poets feign'd to bear up the Heavens, but it does not appear why the Latins gave them the name of Telamones. Bou∣dus in his Dictionary upon Vitruvius, says, that 'tis probable, he who first us'd this Word to signifie these Statues which bear some burden, wrote not Telamones, but , which Greek Word signifies, those that are miserable and labour hard: which exactly agrees to these sort of Figures, which support Cor∣nishes or Corbels, and which we commonly see in the Pillars of our ancient Temples, under the Images of some Saints, or some great Persons. ARCHITECTURE consists of Three Parts: The first treats of the Building of publick and private Edifices; the second is about the Art of Dialling, which treats of the Course of the Stars, and the way of making several sorts of Dials; the third is about the Engines which are made use of for Architecture and for War. ARCHITECTUS, an Architect: He ought, says Vitruvius, to be skill'd in Wri∣ting and Designing, to be instructed in Geo∣metry, and to have some knowledge of Op∣ticks: He ought to have learn'd Arithme∣tick, and to be well vers'd in History, to have studied Philosophy very well, and to have some insight in the Musick, Laws, Astro∣nomy, and Physick. He should be well skill'd in Designing, that he may the more easily perform all the Works he has projected according to the Draughts he hath made of them: Geometry is also a great help to him, especially to teach him how to make use of the Rule and Compass, how to lay out things by the Line, and do every thing by the Rule and Plum∣met: Opticks serve to teach him how to ad∣mit the Light, and to make Windows accor∣ding to the Situation of the Heavens: A∣rithmetick instructs him how to calculate the Charges which his Work amounts to. Hi∣story furnishes him with matter for the grea∣test part of the Ornaments in Architecture, of which he should be able to give a rational account. Philosophy is also necessary to make a perfect Architect, I mean that part of Phi∣losophy which treats of things Natural, which in Greek is call'd Physiology. As for Musick
he should be a perfect Master of it, that he may know how to Order the brasen Pipes, which are lodg'd under the Stairs of Theatres, so that the Voice of the Comedians may strike the Ears of the Auditors, with more or less force, clearness and sweetness. An Architect ought also to be skill'd in the Laws and Customs of places that he may know how to make partition Walls, Spouts, Roofs, and Common-shores; how to order the Lights of Houses, the Drains for Water, and several other things of that nature. Astronomy is also useful to him for making of Sun-dials, by teaching him to know the East, West, South and North, the Equinoxes and Solstices, &c. He ought to be knowing in Physick, to understand the Climates and Temperament of the Air, which is wholsome and which Infectious; also the Nature of Wa∣ters. For without considering these things, he cannot build an healthful Habitation. If so much knowledge is necessary to make a com∣plete Architect, 'tis to be fear'd there are but few perfect Masters of that Art. ARCHON, the chief Magistrate of Athens: The Nine Magistrates who took upon them the Government of that City, after the Death of Codrus who was the last King of it were also call'd so: At first they were chosen to be perpetual Governors; but in process of time their Office was limited to Ten Years, and at last reduced to one. This Republick was govern'd by Nine Archontes, or chief Magistrates, Six whereof were call'd, Thesmothetae, i. e. Lagislators; the other Three were, , the King; , the General, and the Archon, by way of eminence so call'd, as being superior to all the rest. They decided with sovereign Authority all religious causes and matters of State: They were chosen by lot, and afterwards examin'd and approv'd by the People in their Assem∣blies. This Name was also given to the Chief President, call'd Prytanis, who presided in the Courts of the Fifty Judges, taken out of the Five Hundred, who judg'd by turns every Month the Affairs of private Persons. ARCTOPHYLAX, a Constella∣tion, which is properly nam'd, the director of the Bear, but is otherwise call'd Bootes. ARCTOS, the Biar, a Constellation, call'd by the Greeks Arctos and Helice, which is situated in the North, having its directors near it, which is not far from Virgo. ARCTURUS, is a Star of that Con∣stellation which is properly call'd Arctophylax: This Word signifies the Tail of the Bear, be∣cause it is very near it. It rises on the first day of September, and sets on the 13th. day of May; and never appears but when it brings some Hail or Storm. The Poets feign'd that it resides amongst Men in the Day-time, as a spy upon their Actions, and afterwards gives an Account to Jupiter of their persidious and unjust dealings in Trade, or in Courts of Ju∣stice: This is the meaning of Plautus in these Verses of the Prologus to his Rudens, &c. —Nomen Arcturo est mihi Noctu fum in caelo clarus atque inter deos, Inter mortales ambuloque intardius— Hominum qui facta, mores, piatatem & fidem Noscamus— Qui falsas lites falses testimoniis Petunt, quique in Jure abjurant punim, Eotum referimus Nomina exsoripta ad Jovem. The Poets made him the Son of Jupiter and Calisto, and others said he was the Son Lycaon. Arculae aves, Birds which gave bad emens ei∣ther by their flying, or their manner of eating. Because they hindred Men from undertaking any Business, they were thus nam'd, Aroulae aves, quia arcebant ne quid fioret. ARCUS, a Bow. The Bow and Ar∣rows were the first Arms which Men made use of, as may appear from the 21th. Chapt. of Conesis, where it is said of Ismael, that he was an expert Archor; and from the 27th. Chap. where Isaac commanded his Son Esau to take his Arms, i. e. his Bow and Arrows and go a hunting. Pliny in B. 7. Chap. 56. attri∣butes the Invention of Bow and Arrows to Soythes the Son of Jupiter, from whom the Scythians, who are now the Tartars, took their Name, who were very dextrous in draw∣ing the Bow: Plutarch also in his Banquet of the Seven Wise Men, ascribes to them the Bow, and to the Greeks the Invention of stringed and wind Musick. But the Autho∣rity of Pliny is of no value, wherein he dif∣fers from the holy Scripture, which doubt∣less he never had any knowledge of. Arcus Calestis, the Rainbow which appears in the Clouds a natural Meteor; but after the Deluge it was appointed to be a Sign of the Covenant which God made with Noah, and of the Promise he gave that he would never again drown the World. The Poets feign'd that the Rainbow, or Iris, attended Juno, and carried her Orders from all parts, as Mer∣cury did those of Jupiter. See this Fable more at large under the Word Iris. Arcus, a Triumphal Arch, which was erected to the Emperors, and other great Men in ancient times, in honour of them for their brave Actions; several of them were erected at Rome; but the most ancient was that of Titus, which was very ingeniously and mag∣nificently built: On one side of it, there was the Triumphal Chariot of a Prince, with a Statue of Victory behind him, which seem'd
to hold out a Crown to him; the Ark of the Old Testament and the bundles of Rods were carried before him: On the other side was the rest of the Triumphal Pomp, as the Two Tables of the Decalogue, the Tables of Gold, the Vessels of Solomon's Temple, and the golden Candlestick which had Seven Bran∣ches. The Senate and People of Rome erected likewise a Triumphal Arch to Septimius Se∣verus, at the foot of the Capitol, after the Victory he obtain'd over the Parthians, Ar∣menians and Arabians. Victories were there represented with great Wings, holding in their hands Trophies and Crowns, with this Inscription. Imp. Cas. Lucio Septimio M. Fil. Severo. Pio pertinaci. Aug. Patri Patriae Parthico Arabico. Et Parthico Adiabenico. Pontif. Maximo. Tribunic. potest. XI. Imp. XI. Coss. III. Procoss. Et Imp. Caes. M. Aurelio. L. Fil. Antonino. Aug. Pio. Felici. Tribunic. potest. VI. Cos. Procos. P. P. optimis fortissimis{que} Principibus. Ob Rempublicam restitutam, Imperiumque Populi Romani propagatum, insignibus virtutibus. Eorum Domi. Florisque S. P. Q. R. There are still many other Triumphal Ar∣ches to be seen at Rome as that of Titus and Vesasian, that of Septimius Severus, that of Galienus which was built after a very rude manner, being of the Doric Order with one Arch only, which has this Inscription upon the Frize. Galieno Clementissimo Principi, Cujus invicta Virtus solâ pietare Superata est M. Aurelius Victor dedicatissimus Numini Majestati{que} ejus. There is also an Arch of Marcus Aureltus, and of Verus, and of Gordianus junior, and lastly, one of Constantine, which the Senate erected to him for the Victory he obtain'd against Maxentius at the Pons Milvius, in the Suburbs of Rome. This last was all of Mar∣ble, and of the Corinthian Order, and had Eight great Columns and Three Avenues. On one of its sides there is this Inscription, Imp. Caes. Pl. Constantino Maximo. P. F. Augusto S. P. Q. R. Quod instinctu divinitatis mentis magnitudine cum exercitu suo, tam de tyranno quam de omni factione uno tenpore justis Rempublicam ultus est armis. Arcum triumphis insignem dicabit. On the other side near the Rising Sun were Written these words, Votis X, and on the left hand Votis XX. On the Roof of the Arch about the middle on one side were these words Liberatori Ʋrbis, and on the other Fun∣datori quietis. Above the Capitals of each Column were represented in emboss'd work the most eminent Captives, whose Bodies were of changeable Marble, and their Hands and Feet of white Marble of the Isle of Paros. In the Frize of the little Arches was the Statue of Constantine, holding in his Hand a Scrowl, which he seems to throw among the People for a Largess. Suctonius calls these Scrowls Tessera & Missillia, and also Tessera Nummaria. For these Scrowls contain'd certain Summs of Money, and those who catch'd them were to demand them at the Exchequer, or the Lot where∣with they were mark'd, as is done in other Lotteries. AREMULUS or Remus Sylvius, the Son of Agrippa Sylvius XII. King of the La∣tines, who was killed by a Thunderbolt af∣ter he had reigned 19 Years. ARENA the bottom and middle of the Amphitheatre, so called, because that Place was covered with Sand, for concealing from the View of People, the Blood of the Gladiators that was spilt there at the Com∣bates, which was done either by removing the Sand which was stained with Blood, or laying some fresh upon it. AREOPAGUS, a famous Place in the City of Athens, so called from the Temple of Mars, the Greek Word , signifies a Burrough, and Town, and , signifies Mars. There the first Grecians passed a favourable Sentence on Mars, who was accused by Neptune for killing his Son Hal∣lirrothius, for violating the Chastity of his Daughter Alcippe. Varro, as St. Austin tells us, B. 18. Ch. 10. of the City of God, will not allow the Areo∣pagus, i. e. the Village of Mars to be so called, because Mars, whom the Greeks called  being accused of Homicide before 12 Gods, who judg'd him in this Village, was there ac∣quitted, though he had but Six Votes for him, according to the common custom of that Place, which was always favourable to the ac∣cused. He rejects therefore this common Opi∣nion, and endeavours to find out another Origi∣nal of this Name, in some old obsolete Histories upon pretence that it is a reproach to the Dei∣ties to attribute to them Quarrels, and Law∣suits: And he maintains that the History of Mars is no less Fabulous than that of the three Goddesses Juno, Minerva and Venus, who conte∣sted before Paris for the Golden Apple the Prize of the most beautiful. Areopagitae, the Areopagites, the Judges of
Athens, who decided all Causes, as well publick as private in the Areopagiu, with a Sovereign Authority, and whose Decisions were esteem'd impartial. They heard Causes only in the night time, and did not allow the Advocates to use the Ornaments of Rhetorick in defen∣ding their Clients. ARETHUSA, the Daughter of Ne∣reus, and Doris, the Companion of Diana, with whom Alpheus of Areadia, was in Love; but Arethusa, to shun his Courtship, fled into Sicily to an Isle near Syracuse, where she was chang'd into a Fountain, and her Lover into a River, whose Water runs so swiftly that it passes through several Rivers, and even thro' the Sea itself, without mingling with them, until it comes to the Fountain of Arethusa, and then it unites so with that, that they are no longer two, but one Channel. See Alpheus. Arethusa is a Fountain of Greece, which, as the Poets feign'd, was belov'd by the River Al∣pheus, who pursues it even in the subterraneous Channels through which it fled away, as far as Sicily, where Diana receiv'd it in the little Isle Ortygia. Strabo, takes a great deal of pains to refute this Fable, and has prov'd that the River Alpheus discharg'd itself into the Sea like other Rivers. 'Tis alledg'd that such things are found in the Bason of Arethusa, as were thrown, or had fallen into the River Alpheus, which seems to be a proof of the subterraneous Communication between them. Bochart has given a very ingenious explica∣tion of this Fable: For he says, that the Arethusa is a Phaenician Word, that Arith in Syriac signifies a Brook, that 'tis pro∣bable the Phaenicians call'd this Fountain Hen-Alphe, i. e. The Fountain of Willows, or the Foun∣tain for Ships, because it held a very great quantity of Water, and its Banks were all cover'd with Willows, which occasion'd the Ships to put in there, and take in fresh Wa∣ter. Ovid calls this Fountain Alphcias in his Metamorphoses. The Greeks after this having discover'd this Fountain to contain such abundance of Waters, that as Cicero describes it, 'tis fons aquae dulcis incredibili magnitudine, and understanding that it was call'd not only Arethusa, but Alpheias, hereupon feign'd that it receiv'd its Waters from the River Alpheus in Greece by subterraneous passages. ARGEI, or Argea, in the Neuter Gen∣der; were certain Places at Rome consecrated by Nama in memory of some Greek Princes who were buried there. Every Year a Sacri∣fice was offer'd to them on the 15th. of May, and the Vestal Virgins threw into the Tiber Thirty Images made of Rushes which were call'd Argei, from off the Pons sublicius at Rome. The Flaminica, or Priestess of Juno, was then clad in Mourning, with her Hair dis∣shevell'd, in a careless dress, without any Or∣nament, in a word, in a pensive and sorrow∣ful silence, as we learn from Aulus Gellius, [Flaminica cum eat ad Argeos, neque caput comito, neque capillum depectito:] Plutarch in his 32d. Roman Question, says, that the Inhabitants of Latium had so inveterate an hatred against the Grecians whom they call'd Argivae, that they never forgot to throw them into the Tiber from the top of the Pons sub∣licius, till Hercules coming to Rome dissuaded them from this Violence: And yet, to satis∣fie in some measure their hatred, they dress'd up every Year Thirty Men of straw after the Greek fashion, and caus'd them to be thrown headlong from the top of this Bridge into the Tiber, by the Vestal Virgins and the Chief Priests, after they had offer'd Sacrifice to the Manes of the Greeks, whom they had formerly put to death. Fabius Pictor, about the end of his Book, says that this word comes from one Argus, who was the Host of Evander, and came with Hercules to dwell at Rome in ancient times when it was called Saturnina, as being under the Rule of Saturn, and that the Plain which is at the bottom of the 7 Hills was called the Argean Field. (Subsidens septem collibus campus Argeus, dictus est ab Argo Evandri hospite, & ec∣mitibus Argivi Herculis, qui ad Evandrum vene∣runt & in Saturnia subsederunt. Argentum, Silver, a Metal dug out of the Bowels of the Earth, which holds the 2d. rank among Metals, Argentum, signifies also Money which is us'd in Trade and Commerce. It has in all times been us'd somewhere, though not in all Nations. Josephus in B. st. of his Jewish An∣tiquities says, that Cain amass'd together great Riches, which he had extorted : And 'tis observ'd in the 20th. Chap. of Genesis, that Abimelech King of Gerar, made a Present to Abraham of a Thousand Pieces of Silver. Ecce mille argenteos dedi fratri tuo. Plutarch in the Life of Theseus, the 10th. King of Athens, says, that he stamp'd Pieces of Silver of the Weight of two Drams. Servius Tullus was the first King who stamp'd Money of Copper at Rome, but pieces of Silver begun first to be coined in the Year 483. to the value of a Denarius, i. e. 10. Asses. [which in English Money is 7 Pence half penny.] Argentei, or Sicli, are the same thing, as may easily be proved by the Septuagints Translation of the Bible, and by the Latin Version of St. Jerom. in the 2d. B. of Kings. ch. 18. Ego dedissem tibi, says Joab, decem argenti siclos, and the other answers, si appenderes in
anibus meis mille argenteos. This sicle of Silver was of the value of 2 Shillings and Six Pence in our Money. ARGILETUM, a long Street in the City of Rome over against the Mens Palatinus, which reach'd from the end of the Velabrum, or Tuscan Street, as far as the Theatre of Marcellus to the Herb-Market. It was so cal∣led from one Argus who a had mind to kill Evander, but he himself was slain and bu∣ried there. Varro thinks that this Place was also call'd by this Name, from Argilla, or fat Earth, whereof there is a great quan∣tity in that Place. ARGONAVIS, the Ship of the Ar∣gonauts, in which Jason sail'd to Colchos, to fetch the Golden Fleece. This Ship was built by Argus, with the help of Miuer∣va, of the Pine Trees in the Forest of Pe∣lens or Dedona. Phaedrus in the 4th. Book of his Fables, Fab. 6. speaks of it after the follow∣ing manner. I would to God that the Thassa∣lian Ax, had never cut down the high Pines of the Forrest of Peleus, and that the sub∣til Argus, having a mind to go upon the Waters a daring Voyage, expos'd to many visible dangers of Death, had never fram'd a Ship by the Art of Pallas, which by ope∣ning the 1st. Entrance into the Sea, that hitherto had continued inaccessible, has been so fatal both to the Greeks and Bar∣barians. You will tell me doubtless, con∣tinues the same Author, that all this Pray∣er is impertinent, and founded upon a mi∣stake about the 1st. Ship, since it is certain that a long time before the Argonautes, Minos overcame the Violence of the Egan Sea, by covering it with a great Fleet, and reveng'd the Death of his Son by a Punish∣ment no less just than Exemplary. ARGONAUTAE, the Argonauts, a great number of Illustrious Greeks, who em∣bark'd with Jason to go and fetch the Golden Fleece, viz. Hercules, Theseus, Castor and Pol∣lux; Orpheus, Typhis, Lynas and some others, who arrived all safe at Colchos, after they had escap'd some Dangers. ARGUS, the Son of Apis succeeded his Father in the Kingdom of the Argives, and from him the Argives took their Name, for they were not so call'd before. It was under his Reign, that Greece 1st. began to masure the Ground, and sow Corn. Argus after his Death was honour'd as a God, and Temples, and Sacrifices were appointed for him; which Honour had been given before him to one called Honogyrus, who was struck dead with a Thunderbolt, and was the 1st. who yok'd Oxen to draw. St. August. B. . Of the City of God, Chap. 6. Argus, the Son of Aestor, a vigilant Prince and one of great Circumspection, to whom the Poets gave a hundred Eyes to denote his Vigilance. They also feign'd that Juno em∣ploy'd him to observe the Actions of Jupiter her Husband, and to guard Io the Daughter of Inacus whom he lov'd. But Mercury killed this Argus by the order of Jupiter, after he had lulled him asleep with the sound of his Pipe. Juno to recompence the Faithfulness of her Spy, chang'd him into a Peacock, which has as many golden Circles in his Tail, as Ar∣gus had Eyes. Ariadne, the Daughter of Minos, King of Crete or Candia, by Pusiphae. When Thescu was sent to Candia by the Athenians, to be de∣vour'd by the Minotaure, she instructed him how to get out of the Labyrinth in which this Monster was enblos'd, by giving him a Clue of Thread, which succeeded so well that after he had killed the Monster, he got out of the Labyrinth, though the escape was ve∣ry difficult by reason of the many turnings and windings that were in it. After his Escape he forgat his Benefactress, and aban∣don'd her in the Isle of Chio or Naxos, where she married Bacthus, who plac'd the Crown she had then upon her Head amongst the Stars. ARICIA, a little of City Latium in Italy, which was built by Hippolius the Son of Theseus, in Memory of his Wife, who had the same Name, as Martial tells us, B. 4. Her Name was also given to a Forest, wherein Diana concealed Hippolytus, after he was rais'd from the Dead by Aesculapius; as an ac∣knowledgement for so great a Benefit he ere∣cted a Temple, to him whose Priests were to be fugitive Slaves. Hard by there was a Fountain sacred to the Nymph Egeria, where King Numa, having learned Hydromancy, or the Art of Divination by Waters, boasted that he had frequent Conversation with that Nymph, that he might the more firmly establish his Empire, raise his own Reputa∣tion to a higher Pitch, and conciliate greater Authority to his Laws among the common People. olims and Cassius Hemina, think that the City of Aricia, was built by Archilacus the Sicilian, in the Year 425. from the buil∣ding of Rome. It obtain'd the Priviledge of the Roman Freedom, and was at first a Municipal City, and afterwards a Roman Colony, as Florus tells us, Marius Anttum, Ariciam & Lavinin colonaias devastavit. It was the Place of the Nativity of Accia, the Mother of the Emperor Augustus. ARIES, a Ram a Warlike Engine us'd by the Ancients. It was a great Beam of Wood strengthned with Iron at the end,
which represented the Head of a Ram, where∣with the Ancients were to batter the Walls of Cities, there were Three sorts of them, one was hang'd upon Ropes, another run up∣on Wheels, and a third sort was born up in the Arms of those who made use of it. This Machine was first invented after this manner; when the Carthaginians laid Siege to Gades, they thought it convenient imme∣diatly to demolish a Castle which they had taken, but having no proper instruments for that purpose, they made use of a great Beam of Wood which many Men bore up in their Arms, and striking the top of the Walls with the end of this Beam by their redoubled blows, they made the uppermost Stones to come down, and so descending lower from one Lay of Stones to another, they batter'd down the whole Fortification. After this a Carpenter of the City of Tyre, call'd Pephas∣menos, taking the hint from the former Expe∣riment, hang'd one Beam upon another like a Balance, which being thrust forward with great force, by many repeated blows he beat down the Wall of the City of Gades. Cetras the Caelcdonian was the 1st. who made a Carr of Wood which moved upon Wheels. Upon the Carr he laid many pieces of Tim∣ber, whereof some stood upright, and others lay athwart, which he join'd together and made a Hut of them, in which he hung up a Ram, and then he cover'd it with Ox-hides to secure those who play'd the Engine for battering down a Wall: And this Hut was called a Snail to the Ram, because it moved but very slowly. Polydus the Thessa∣lian at last perfected the Engine at the Siege which King Philip the Son of Amyntas laid to Bizantium. This is what Vitruvius tells us B. 10. Ch. 17. But Athenaeus in his Book De Machinis, thinks that Geras the Cartha∣ginian was the Inventor of this Engine: He says also, that this Architect did not sling his Ram in a Hut, as Vitruvius ex∣plains it, but that it was carried by several Men who push'd it forward by the strength of their Arms. ARIES a Ram, the first sign of the Zodiack. This was the Ram according to the Fable of the Golden Fleece, which car∣ried Phryxus and Helle through the Air, and which Jupiter plac'd among the Signs of the Zodiack. This Sign to this Day makes the Ver∣nal Equinox; although Vitruvius, tells us that when the Sun has reach'd the 1st. part of the Sign Arles, it makes the Vernal Equinox. Colu∣mella gives the reason why the Solstices and Aequinoxes among the Ancients were not at the entrance of the Signs, but at the 8th Part: This came to pass, says he, because then sol∣low'd the Festivals which had been appion∣ted about that time of the Year, at which, Endoxus, Meto, and other ancient Astronomres thought that the Points of the Aequinoxes and Solstices happen'd, though they were at the beginning of the Signs, as Hipparcus shew'd afterwards. Aries, the Ram with the golden Fleece, so famous in fabulous Stories Strabo relates the Expeditions of Phryxus or Jason, and the Argonautes into Calches, for seizing and carry∣ing off the great Treasure that was there, and chiefly the great Mass of Gold which was gather'd out of the Sand of a River by the straining it through a Ram's Fleece; and from thence he concludes that all which the Poets have said of it, is nothing but a true History, either from the Nature of these Places, or from the successful Voyages which have been made thither at divers time. Pliny gives a strange account of the Riches of Colches, and he forgets not the golden Fleece, because the best Gold is that which is gather'd out of Rivers by the help of Fleeces which gave occasion to the Fable. Bochart thinks, that when the Poets ex∣press the Riches of the King of Colchos by-golden Fleece, it may proceed from the Ama biguity of the word Gasa, in its original Lan∣guage which is Syriac, for it signifies a Trea∣sure, and also a Fleece, and in allusion t∣this, the Poets took occasion to Pun. Heo adds as a probable Conjecture that the two Bulls which guard the Treasure are nothing else but the two Walls which encompass the Castle wherein it is kept, because the Syriac word Sour signifies a Bull and a Wall; and that the Dragon which guarded the Trea∣sure, was nothing else but the Iron Gate of the Castle, because Nachas signifies both a Dragon and Iron. ARION, a Native of Methymna in the Isle of Lesbos, an excellent Player upon the Harp, and a Lyric Poet, growing rich, and being desirous to return into his own Coun∣try, says Phaedrus, that there he might shew great Riches. Having therefore embark'd in a Ship, the Seamen, a faithless and inhu∣man sort of People, having a mind to throw him into the Sea, that they might take his Riches to themselves, he pray'd them that be∣fore they did it, they would give him leave to make his own Funeral Oration, and to sing an Elegy to his Harp: After that when he threw himself into the Sea, with the most precious things that he had about him, the Dolphins which came running to the Ship, being charm'd by the sweetness of his Mu∣sick saved him from drowning, and one of them carried him upon his Back as far as Te∣nara,
whence he went to Periander, who be∣ing acquainted with his Story, caus'd all the Seamen to be hang'd in the Place where the Dolphin had set him on Shore: For some∣time after the adventure of the Dolphin, it happen'd that the Ship on which Arion had embark'd, was by a Storm cast upon the Coasts near Corinth, and then Periander caus'd all the Seamen to be brought before him; and having enquir'd of them what was become of Arion, they answer'd him that he was dead and they had buried him: Whereupon im∣mediately he caus'd them to be carried away to a place near the Monument he had erected to the Dolphin, which died after it had car∣ried Arion a shore: And there he made them swear that Arion was dead, and then brought forth Arion before them, in the same kind of Habit which he had when he threw himself into the Sea to avoid their Fury, and he caus'd them all to be hang'd near the Monument of the Dolphin. The Gods also to recom∣pence the Friendship of this Dolphin and eternize its Memory, plac'd it among the Stars. ARISTAEUS, the Son of Apollo and Cyrene, who was desperately in Love with Euridice the Wife of Orphaeus: She died of the Bite of a Serpent, as she fled from the amorous pursuit of Aristaeus; the Nymphs enraged at this Misfortune killed all Ari∣staeus's Bees, but he by the advice of his Mother consulted Proteus about this Loss, who or∣der'd him to sacrifice 4 Bulls and 4 Heifers to appease the Ghost of Euridice, which be∣ing done, immediately there came forth Swarms of Bees out of the Entrails of the slain Victims. 'Tis said that he first inven∣ted the way of extracting Hony from the Wax-combs which the Bees make, and of making Oyl out of Olives, and of curdling Milk. He was plac'd among the Number of the Gods after his Death, and ador'd by the Shepherds. The Education of Bacchus was committed to Aristaeus, according to the Traditions of the Lybians, which are related by Diodorus Siculus. The same Author elsewhere gives us an Account, that Apollo transported into Lybia a Grecian Virgin call'd Cyrene, and built there a City of her Name by whom he had a Son call'd Aristaeus; and caused him to be nurs'd up in a Wilderness by the Nymphs, who taught him the Culture and the Use of Olives, of Bees, and Milk-meats, as Butter, Cheese, &c. which he in process of time communi∣cated to Mankind. After divers Voyages at length Aristaeus came into Sardinia and Si∣cily, and having pass'd over from thence in∣to Thracia, he was there initiated by Bacchus into his Mysteries, who taught him many things useful for human Life. At last Ari∣staeus died near Mount Hemis, and was there honour'd as a God, not only by the Thracians but also by the Graecians. Herodotus, relates a Story of Aristaeus, in which Apollo is very much concerned. He was of Preconnesus, where it was commonly thought that he was dead; but he appeared again at Cyzicum as one return'd from the dead: He disappeared yet once more, and 340 Years after he shewed himself again to the Metapontines in Italy, whom he affirmed to be the only Persons of all the Italians, whom Apollo had honour'd with his Presence. enjoin'd them to erect a Statue to him in the Temple of Apollo, near that of Apollo himself. The Metapontines consulted the Ora∣cle about it, which commanded them to obey him, and so they did. ARISTANDER, a famous Divi∣ner, who foretold a Victory to Alexander, having seen an Eagle fly round about him, Quint. Curt. B. 4. and 7. ARISTARCHUS, a Grammarian of Samothracia, who was the Disciple of Ari∣stophanes. He methodiz'd the Verses of Ho∣mer by the command of Pisistratus the Tyrant of Athens, and took the Liberty of rejecting some of them as did not please him. From hence came the Custom of calling any one by the name of Aristarchus, who is a critical and severe Censurer of other Men's Works. Aelian says that he wrote more than a 100 Commentaries. He flourish'd in the time of Ptolemaeus Philometor, to whose Son he was Praeceptor. ARISTIDES, surnamed the Just, who was the Son of Lysimachus. He restor'd Aristocracy, or the Government of the Gran∣dees in Athens, and upon that account by the perswasion of Themistocles who maintain'd the Popular State, he was banish'd by Ostra∣cism. He maintain'd always an even and unimitable Temper of Mind, in Pros∣perity as well as Adversity. The evil Treatment which he received from his Ene∣mies, never made him in the least depart from the Rules of Justice, and he neither go∣vern'd himself by Passion, nor by Prejudice. He had so great a Love for Poverty, that when he died the Publick was obliged to In∣ter him, leaving nothing behind him. Lucian in his Description of Calumny, says, that as just as he was yet he conspir'd against Themistocles, being Jealous of his Glory; for the best Men have their Faults and their Passions. ARISTIPPUS, a famous Debau∣chee, who led an effeminate idle Life, in sen∣sual
Pleasures and Feasting. He was very in∣genious in the Art of Luxury, and was al∣ways maintain'd at Athens, or the Court of the Kings of Siciy, who esteem'd him high∣ly, because he understood good eating, would dance after drinking, and knew exactly how to make the best Sauces and Ragoo's. He shew'd himself so excellent in this Art, that the Princes Cooks would come to take Or∣ders from him, and he would not receive them unless he was in the humour, says Lu∣cian. ARITHMETICA, Arithmetick, a Science which teaches the Art of accom∣pting, and all the Powers and Properties of Numbers. The 4 first Rules of Arithmetick are Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication, and Division. There was a Digital Arithmetick, which is more ancient as well as more Natural; for this way of reckoning by the Fingers seems to have been instituted by Nature, which has given us this Expedient as more easy than any of the rest. The Fingers are limited to 10. which is a mysterious Num∣ber, and represents any thing that is most perfect and compleat: Thus we plight our Truth to one another by joining our two right Hands together. Ten is also compos'd of the 4 first Num∣bers. 1, 2, 3, 4. Which Plato commends at the beginning of his Timaeus; for these Num∣bers being join'd together make the Number 10. And when we arrive at that, we begin again at one, for 10 and 1 make 11. 10 and 2 make 12, and so forwards Pliny tells us, that the Ancients reckon'd no further than to 100000. Those who in Progress of Time invented the Cypher, and the Arithmetical Figures which we now make use of, have given us no more than 10 of them. And the Pytha∣goreans, after the Jewish Cabbalists, maintain that all Tens are full of Divine Mysteries, which gave occasion to the Institution of Tenths as due to God, by which we pay him Allegiance and Homage for all the Fruits which the Ground produces by his Benediction. Besides this digital Arithmetick is very an∣cient, Nicarchus in a Greek Epigram tells us of an old Man, who begun again to reckon his Years upon his left Hand. St. Jerom in∣forms us as to this matter, that the number of a 100 was carried on from the left Hand to the right, and was reckon'd upon the same Fingers, but not on the same hand; upon which account Juvenal speaking of the happy old Age of Nestor, tells us, that he reckon'd hi∣therto the number of his Years upon his right Hand. Numa erected a Statue to Janus, according to the Relation of Pliny, whose Fingers of its right Hand were so dispos'd as to sig∣nifie the number 300, the Thumb and Fore-finger standing out at the full length, while the other Three were bended towards the Palm of the Hand, and the Fingers of the left Hand signified 55. the Thumb and mid∣dle Finger being bended inwards, while the 3 other stood streight. Beda treats of the same thing in the 1st. Book Of the Nature of things, but after a different manner. It will not be impertinent to our present Subject to relate a Discourse which Francis the 1st. had one Day at Dinner as it is set down in Vigenere. A Discourse was begun in Praise of Augu∣stus, whose custom it was to keep always in his Chamber two great Registers, one in which were entred the Receipts; and the other, in which were the Expences of so vast an Em∣pire. As to my self, said the King, I have likewise 2 Registers which I never part with Night nor Day, viz. my 2 Hands, where∣of the Left represents to me my Receipts; for the Thumb, which is the strongest of all the Fingers, signifies my Demains, which is also the most solid and lawful Re∣venue that a good Prince can have; the Fore-finger signifies my Aids and Subsidies, the middle Finger, which is the Iongest, de∣notes the Taxes, the Finger next to it, the casual Forfeitures; and lastly, the little Fin∣ger, the Salt and Excise. The right Hand represents to me my Expence in general; the Thumb signifies the Maintenance of my House, the Salaries of my Menial Servants, the great and little Equeries, and the Trea∣sury, the fore Finger signifies the Fund re∣served for the Necessities of the State, the middle Finger, a Fund for the Armies by Land; the Ring Finger, or the 4th. the Payment of all the Officers of the King∣dom, and particularly of the Judges in the Courts of Justice, which bought to admi∣nister Gratis to my Subjects, and the little Finger a Fund for the Armies by Sea. The Romans mark'd their numbers by Let∣ters, which they disposed after this manner. 1 I One 5 V Five 10 X Ten 0 L Fifty 100 C a Hundred 500 D Five Hundred. 1000 M a Thousand 5000 ↁ Five Thousand 10000 ↂ Ten Thousand 500000 {roman 50000} Fifty Thousand 100000 {roman 100000} a Hundred Thousand
These are the Figures of the Roman Num∣bers together with their signification and value; for as Pliny observes, the Ancients had no Number above a 100000, but when they reckon'd higher, they set down this Number twice or thrice, from whence also comes the Custom of counting, by these Phrases, Bis, ter, quater, quinquies, decies centena millia. For the better understanding the Roman Numbers we must consider. 1st. That there are but 5 different Figures which are the 5 first, and that all the rest are compos'd of the I. and the C, yet so that the C, is always turn'd to∣ward the I, whether it be before or after, as is easy to be seen. 2dly. That when ever there is a Figure of less value before another which is of greater value, the former signifies that you must take so much off from the latter: As IV. Four, XL. Forty, XC. Ninety. From hence it appears, that there is no Number which may not be express'd by the Five first Figures. 3dly. That in all these Num∣bers the Figures encrease gradually. 1st. By a quintuple Proportion, and then next by a double of the last before it: Thus the 2d. is 5 times as many as the 1st. and the 3d. is twice as many as the 2d. the 4th. is 5 times as much as the 3d. and the 5th. twice as much as the 4th. and so of all the rest. 4thly. That the Figures begin always to multiply on the right side, after such a manner that all the Ɔs which are put on that way are counted by Fives, as those which are on the other side are counted by Tens: And so we may easily find out all sorts of Numbers how great soever they are. Thus when an Author of the last Age, in a List of the Roman Em∣pire, had set down the names of its Citizens, in the following Figures contrary to the Cu∣stom of the Ancients CCCCCCCIƆƆƆƆƆƆƆ--IƆƆƆƆƆƆƆ. CCCIƆƆƆ. CC∣ƆƆ. taking the C next to the I on the left Hand for a 1000. or the first Ɔ which is on the right Hand for 500. and so going on to the end by a decuple Progression in each Figure, on one or on the other side, I perceive quickly that there are here in all, one Million, Five Hundred Millions, a Hundred and Ten Thousand Citizens: Which may be thus express'd in the Arabic Figures, 1500110000. Now if we reflect upon this way of ac∣compting, we may easily understand, that it had its original only from hence, that Men having begun at 1st. to reckon upon the Fin∣gers, they counted till it came to five upon one Hand, and then having added the other to that Number, they made of them both Ten, which is the double of the former: And this is the true Reason why the Progression in these Numbers is always from one to five, and then from Five to Ten. All the Roman Figures themselves are also owing to the same original. For what can be more natural than to say, that the I is the same thing as if a Man shew one by holding forth one Finger only, andthat the Figure V. is the same thing as if a Man catching the 3 middle Fingers, should hold forth only the little Finger and the Thumb, as containing the whole Hand, and that if you add to these the same two Fingers of the other Hand, join'd to either at the top, they will make as it were two V's, whereof one will run across under the other, and so make an X, which signifies Tin. Manutius shews also that all the other figures are deriv'd from the first, because an V is no∣thing else but two 1's join'd at the bottom, so an L is nothing but two I's, whereof the one is perpendicular and the other horizon∣tal, and if to these you add a third at the top [then they signifie an Hundred by that Figure, in Lieu of which the Transcribers for the greater ease made use of a C. If a fourth I be join'd to the other three so as to make a square thus, □ this Figure signi∣fied five Hundred, in lieu of which they us'd afterwards, 1st. the IƆ, and then the D. At last by doubling this Square, □□ they made their Thousand, instead of which the Copiers either for Ornament or better Convenience, began first to round the Figure, and make it with one stroke of their Pen thus. ∞ and after that, thus, ω, from whence it comes to pass, that we often meet with an Eight, made horizontal, or a Greek Omega, to signifie a 1000. But afterwards they mark'd it thus, CIƆ, and then thus, CD. and at last, because this has a great Affinity with the Gothic M. they us'd a simple M. to denote a. Thousand, as the C. a Hundred, and the D. for Five Hundred. And from hence it comes to pass, that there are just Seven Letters which are us'd for these sort of Numbers, viz. C. D. I. L. M. V. X. unless you will add to them the Q. also, which some have us'd for five Hundred, according to Vossius. We must also observe there are some who maintain, that when there is a line—above the Figures, this makes them stand for so many Thousands, as V. is Five Thousand. X. is Ten Thousand. I know not whether any ex∣amples of this can be found among the an∣cients; but as it is certain that the way of accompting maintain'd by Priscian, who thought that for signifying the Tens of Thou∣sands, we must place an X between C thus, CXƆ is altogether false and contrary to Anti∣quity, and that his Error proceeds only from
his Ignorance of the true original of this way of reckoning, which he had a mind to accommodate to our present way, which en∣creases always by a decuple Progression. But if at any time there be found an L between two C's thus CLƆ, or the like, 'tis only a Fault of the Transcribers, who finding in these Cases the I to be commonly bigger than the C, mistook it for an L. A GENERAL TABLE Of Characters for Numbers. The ARABICK. GREEK. ROMAN. 1 One. αʹ. or Ι I Unum. 2 two. βʹ. ΙΙ II duo. 3 three. γʹ. ΙΙΙ III tria. 4 foure. δʹ. ΙΙΙΙ IV quatuor. 5 five. εʹ. Π V quinque. 6 six. Ϛʹ. ΠΙ VI sex. 7 seven. ζʹ. ΠΙΙ VII septem. 8 eight. ηʹ. ΠΙΙΙ VIII octo. 9 nine. θʹ. ΠΙΙΙ IX novem. 10 ten. ιʹ Δ X decem. 11 eleven. ιαʹ. ΔΙ XI undecem. 12 twelve. ιβʹ. ΔΙΙ XII duodecem. 13 thirteen. ιγʹ. ΔΙΙΙ XIII tredecim. 14 fourteen. ιδʹ. ΔΙΙΙΙ. XIV quatuordecim. 15 fifteen. ιεʹ. ΔΠ XV quindecim. 16 sixteen. ιϚʹ. ΔΠΙ XVI sexdecim. 17 seventeen. ιζʹ. ΔΠΙΙ XVII septemdecim. 18 eighteen. ιηʹ. ΔΠΙΙΙ XVIII octodecim. 19 nineteen. ιθʹ. ΔΠΙΙΙ XIX novemdecim. 20 twenty. κʹ. ΔΔ XX viginti. 30 thirty. λʹ. ΔΔΔ XXX triginta. 40 forty. μʹ. ΔΔΔΔ XL quadraginta. 50 fifty. νʹ. [Δ] L quinquaginta. 60 sixty. ξʹ. [Δ]Δ LX sexaginta. 70 seventy. οʹ. [Δ]ΔΔ LXX septuaginta. 80 eighty.. πʹ. [Δ]ΔΔΔ LXXX octoginta. 90 ninety. Ϟʹ. [Δ]ΔΔΔΔ XC nonaginta. 100 a hundred. ρʹ. Η C centum. 200 two hundred. σʹ. ΗΗ CC ducenta. 300 three hundred. τʹ. ΗΗΗ CCC trecenta. 400 four hundred. υʹ. ΗΗΗΗ CCCC quadringenta. 500 five hundred. φʹ. [Η] D, or, IƆ quingenta. 600 six hundred. χʹ. [Η]Η DC sexcenta. 700 seven hundred. ψʹ. [Η]ΗΗ DCC septingenta. 800 eight hundred. ωʹ. [Η]ΗΗΗ DCCC octingenta. 900 nine hundred. Ϡʹ [Η]ΗΗΗΗ DCCCC noningenta. 1000 a thousand. ͵. Χ M, or, CIƆ mille. 2000 two thousand. β͵. ΧΧ MM, bismille. 3000 three thousand. γ͵. ΧΧΧ MMM ter mille. 4000 four thousand. δ͵. ΧΧΧΧ MMMM quater mille. 5000 five thousand. ε͵. [Χ] VM, or IƆƆ quinquiesmille. 6000 six thousand. Ϛ͵. [Χ]Χ VIM sexies mille. 7000 seven thousand. ζ͵. [Χ]ΧΧ VIIM septies mille. 8000 eight thousand. η͵. [Χ]ΧΧΧ VIIIM octies mille. 9000 nine thousand. θ͵ [Χ]ΧΧΧΧ IXM novies mille. 10000 ten thousand. ͵ Μ XM. or CCIƆƆ decies mille. The year 1696. one thousand six hun∣dred ninety six. Annus. (M DC XC VI) millesimus, sexcentesimus no∣nagesimus sextus.
ARISTOTELES, the Son of Ni∣chomachus a Physician, and Phestia. He was ve∣ry deformed; but he was one of the greatest Genius's of his Age. He studied 20 Years un∣der Plato the Philosopher, and was Praeceptor to Alexander the Great, by whom he was ve∣ry much esteem'd. He was the Author of the Sect of Philosophers, called Peripateticks: He died at 63 Years of Age, and some think that he threw himself into the Straits of Eu∣rippus, out of Vexation because he could not comprehend the Cause of its Flux and Reflux He is call'd the Genius of Nature, and Plato nam'd him the Philosopher indeed. His Books lay a long while conceal'd at Athens, and were not transported to Rome, till after the taking of that City by Sylla; this Treasure was preserv'd and brought to Light by the means of Tyrannion the Grammarian, and An∣dronicus the Rhodian. Lucian rails at him in his Dialogue of the Dead, and introduces Alex∣ander speaking thus to Diogenes. Why dost thou weep poor Fool, says Diogenes, did not Aristotle teach thee, that all this is but Va∣nity? Alexander answers him, what dost thou say, Diogenes, of him who was the ba∣sest of all my Flatterers; pray do not force me to publish his Faults, and to tell thee how he hath abused my good Nature, and the extreme Passion I had for Learning. Sometimes he cajol'd me for my Beauty, some∣times for my Riches, which he was so har∣dy as to rank in the Number of good things, that he might neither be ashamed to ask nor receive them. This is what I learn'd by his Instructions. To take these things for good which are not so the Loss of which does now afflict me. The same Author tells us also, that Aristotle, did only give a rude Draught of the Art of Parasites.His Do∣ctrine which is now in the Schools, has met with various Entertainment, sometimes good, and sometimes bad: On this Subject the Rea∣der may consult. Mr. de Lannoy de varia Ari∣stotelis Fortuna. Arithmetica, see before Aristoteles. Arma, Arms, which Men made use of, either for attacking others, or defending themselves. 'Tis certain that the Arms of the ancient Heroes, as well Defensive as Offensive, were of Copper or Brass. This is what the Poet Lucretius tells us. The first Arms says this Poet, were Hands, Nails, Teeth, Stones, and Sticks: Afterwards some invented Arms of Iron or Brass; but those of Brass, were 1st. us'd. Arma antiqua manus, ungues, denes{que} fuere. Et Lapides, & item silvarum fragmina, rami; Postriut ferri vis est aeris{que} reperta. Sed prior aeris erat quam ferri cognitus tisus, Lucr. l. 5. v. 1282. Tubal-Cain, one of the Posterity of Cain, according to the Scripture, was the Master and Father of the Smiths, and of all those who work'd in Iron and Steel, Tubal-Cain fuit Malleator & Faber in cuncta opera area & ferri, Gen. 4. 8, 22. Now this Tubal-Cain was the Vulcan of the Pagans, as Diodorus Siculus tells us, [A Vulcano fabricationem aeris, auri, ferri, argenti, & caeterorum omnium quae ignis opera∣tionem rejiciunt inventam.] lib. 5. p. 341. Jose∣phus says that Moses was the first who arm'd any Troops with Iron, and that he gave them in Aegypt the Buckler and the Head-piece. Plutarch relates in the Life of Theseus, that Ci∣non, the Son of Miltiades having a mind to carry the Bones of this Hero from the Isle of Scyros to Athens, found the Point of a Lance which was of Brass, together with a Sword of the same Metal. 'Tis certain also from the former Passage of Lucretius, that Arms of Iron and Steel were used among the Greeks and Romans, both for their Cavalry and In∣fantry. They divided their Infantry into those that were heavy arm'd, and those that were light arm'd, whom they call'd Velites, and who had casting Weapons: Such were the Slingers who threw Stones, the Darters who cast the Javelin, and the Archers who shot with Bows; these had their Head covered with a Murion; carried a little round Buckler up∣on their Arm, and a short dagger by their side. Under the Emperors, Trajan, Adrian, and Antoninus Pius, these Velites, or Skirmi∣shers wore a Corslet of Iron, or a Curiass, adorn'd with Scales resembling Fishes, like that of the Archers: But the Slingers were clad in nothing but their usual Habit, having the lappet of their Coat tuck'd up to put Stones in it: The Archers, or such as drew the Bow, were armed with a Helmet upon their Head, and Armour adorn'd with Scales, having on their right side a Quiver furnished with Arrows, on their left a Dagger, or Sword, holding a Bow in their Hand, with which they shot their Arrows. As to the Souldiers which were heavy arm'd, their Head was guarded with a Casquet or Helmet of Iron, which came down very low before, and behind descended as far as their Shoulders: Their Body was arm'd with a Coat of Mail, together with Knee-Pieces and Bracelets. They carried on their Arm a Shield 2 Foot broad, and 4 Foot long strengthened with an Iron Plate that went round about it: In the middle was an Iron∣boss jurting out very serviceable to keep off Blows [or glance of Darts and Stones.] They had also a Sword by their left Side, and a Dag∣ger which cut with two edges. Besides all
this they were armed with a Dart, and two Spears 4 Foot long, having Iron Spikes at the top. The Greeks were not so heavy arm'd; they carried long Pikes, or Sarissa's [a peculiar sort of Spear which was used by the Macedo∣nians] which were Staves 18 Foot long, wherewith they forced their way across the Battalions of their Enemies. Dio, in the life of Antoninus Caracalla the Son of Severus, re∣lates that the Macedonian Phalanx [being a Four-square Army consisting of 8000 Foot∣men set in close Array] in the time of Alex∣ander the Great, made use of a Salade or Head-piece made of the raw Hide of an Ox, and had their Body cover'd with a Jacket, or Coat of Mail, made of Flax or Hemp twisted into Cords, and 3 times doubled [which were cal∣led Thoraces trilices, from the number of Cords fix'd one upon another] Homer in the 3d. Book of his Iliads, arms thus the famous Paris: He first put on his Greaves, or the Armour of his Legs; then he clothed himself with the Coat of Mail, tied his Sword by his Side, took his Shield, and armed himself with a Helmet adorn'd with Feathers of divers Colours. Now follow the Arms of the Roman Caval∣ry. A Horseman carried a Lance in his right Hand, and a Shield on his left (which was an ancient kind of offensive Weapon, made in the form of a light Buckler, which the Horse of the Houshold who fought with a Lance, in former times carried on their Arm) his Body was cover'd with a Coat of Mail (which is a piece of Armour made in the Form of a Shirt, and wrought over with ma∣ny rings or little marks of Iron) which came down as low as his Knees: His Hands were cover'd with Gantlets (which were large Gloves of Iron for arming the Hard of a Horseman) and his Fingers covered with thin Plates of Iron, join'd together in the Fashion of Scales; and his Arms with Bracelets (a Piece of defensive Armour which cover'd the Arms) as also his Knees with Greaves (a kind of Boots, or Armour for the Legs) on his Head he wore a Morion with a Crest adorn'd with Plumes of Feathers and various Figures of Beasts-upon it. Their Horse were arm'd with a Coat of Mail and Plates of Iron. The light Horsemen carried a Javelin, or Half-Pike in their right Hand (which Jave∣lin was 5 Foot and a half long, and had a Head of Iron with three edges which was sharp-pointed) and in their left Hand they held a great Shield, and wore a Casque upon their Head. There were also some Throwers of Darts which were light arm'd. They carried on their Back a Quiver full of Arrows, and had a Bow out of which they were to shoot them: They wore a Sword on their left Side, and some of them had a Dagger on the right side; their Head was arm'd with a Casquet, and their Legs with Greaves. The ancient Names of the Greek and Roman Arms and Weapons with their Explication. A Slinger was one who threw Stones with a Sling. The Slingers were a part of the Roman Militia. 1. A Sling is an Instrument made up of two Strings, having a little Pouch like a Net in the middle for holding the Stones that are thrown out of it. 2. A Dart is a missive Weapon, made of Wood, that is arm'd with a sharp pointed Iron at the end, which is thrown with the Hand. 3. A little Shield, or a kind of a round Buckler, wherewith the Infantry in former times was arm'd. 4. Pilum, The ancients called any Shaft of Wood armed with Iron by this Name, and so all sorts of Arrows and Darts which they let fly were called Pila 5. A Dagger is a large Ponyard, which an∣ciently they us'd in fighting. 6. A Salade, is a slight covering for the Head, which the light Horsemen wore It differs from a Helmet in this, that it has no Crest, and is hardly any thing but a Wea∣pon. 7. A Morion, is the Armour of a Souldier being a Pot which he wore upon his Head to defend it: It was used by Foot Soul∣diers. 8. A Curiass, is a defensive Armour made of a Plate of Iron very well beaten, which co∣vers the Body from the Neck down to the Wast, both before and behind. 9. Greaves, a kind of Boots or Armour for the Legs. 10. A Bracelet, a piece of defensive Armour which covers the Arm. 11. A Pavice, is a Piece of defensive Ar∣mour which the ancients wore in the Wars, it was the largest sort of Bucklers, whose two sides bended inwards, like the Roof of a House, or a shed of Boards for Souldiers; and so it differ'd from a Target. 12. A Target, in Latin, Pelta, is a Buckler us'd by the Romans, which was bended in the Form of a half Moon, and of an oblong Fi∣gure. 13. A Coat of Mail was a piece of Armour made in the Form of a Shirt, and wrought over with many little Rings of Iron.
14. A Jacket is a short Coat which the Ca∣valry in ancient times wore over their Ar∣mour and Curiasses; it was made of Cotton or Silk stitch'd between two light Stuffs; and sometimes also of Cloth of Gold. 15. A Head-Piece, is a Piece of defensive Armour for covering the Head and Neck of a Cavalier, which is otherwise called a Hel∣met. The offensive Arms or Engines which the Romans made use of in attacking Places. 1. A Rhalestra, a great Engine for throwing of Darts; the Invention of it is attribu∣ted to the Phaenicians. Vegetius says that in his time Scorpiones, which M. Perrault has transla∣ted Arbalestres were called Manubalista, to di∣stinguish them from their great Balistae or Cata∣pultae which were not portable, after the same manner as our Harquebusses and Pistols are distinguished from Cannon. 2. Balista, an Engine which the Ancients made use of for throwing Stones; it differ'd from the Catapulta in this, that the latter threw Darts, but both of them let fly after the same manner. 3. Aries, the Ram, was a vast long Beam, strengthned at one end with a Head of Iron, which was hung on two Chains, wherewith they us'd anciently to batter the Walls of Ci∣ties. There were 3 sorts of them, one was hang'd upon Ropes, another run upon Wheels, and a 3d. Sort was sustain'd by the Arms of those who plaid it. When the Carthaginians besieg'd Gades, they judg'd it expedient sud∣denly to demolish a Castle which had been taken, but wanting proper Instruments for that purpose, they made use of a Beam which several Men bore up with their Hands, who thrust forward the end of it with so great Violence against the top of the Wall, that by their redoubled Blows they beat down the uppermost Lays of Stone, and so descending from one Lay to another, they at last demo∣lish'd the whole Fortification. After this a Carpenter of the City of Tyre, called Pephas∣nos, taking the hint from this first Experi∣ment, hang'd one Beam to another, like a Ba∣lance, and by the force of the many great blows which the Beam gave while it was play'd, he batter'd down the Wall of the Ci∣ty of Gades. Cetras the Chalcedonian was the first who made a Car of Wood which was driven up∣on Wheels, and upon this Car he rear'd up many Posts standing upright, and Beams ly∣ing a-cross, whereof he made a Hut, and ha∣ving hang'd a Ram in it, he cover'd it over with Ox Hides, to secure those who play'd the Engine for battering down the Wall. Since that time this Hut was call'd a Tortoise to the Ram, because it advanc'd but very slowly. Such were the first Essays of this kind of Engine; but Polydus the Thessalian im∣prov'd them to the highest Perfection at the Siege which King Amyntas laid to Byzantium, who invented also many other sorts of them, which might be made use of with very much ease. Athenaeus, in his Book of Machines, says that Goras the Carthaginian was the Inventor of the basis of this Engine, and he adds, that this Architect did not hang the Ram up in it, as Vitruvius explains it, but that it was born up by many Men who thrust it forward: He says also that some others suppos'd it to run upon Wheels; besides, Turnebus had reason to think, that Vitruvius took from Athenaeus the greatest part of what he relates here of War∣like Engines, though Casaubon holds that Athe∣naeus liv'd a long time after Vitruvius, and grounds his Opinion upon the relation of Trebellius Pollio, who says that the Emperor Galienus caus'd many Cities to be fortified by Byzantine Architects, whereof one was called Cleodamas, and the other, Athenaeus. Vossius follows the Opinion of Turnebus, because Athe∣naeus's Book is dedicated to Marcellus, who liv'd before Vitruvius. 4. Catapulta, a Warlike Engine, which the Ancients us'd for casting the larger sort of Darts and Spears upon their Enemies. Some hold that the Catapulta was invented by the Syrians. 5. Corvus Eversor, the demolishing Crow, which was also called the Crane. It does not appear by the Descriptions we find in the Ancients, of the Engine called the Crow, that it could be of any use for demolishing; J. Pollux and Polybius speak of an Engine which is called the Crane, and another called the Crow, but both the one and the other were made for hooking in, drawing too, and taking away by Force; for the Crane of Pollux was us'd on the Theatre for raising Weights, and the Crow of Polybius was employ'd for grapling the Ships of the Enemies in a Fight. 6. Sambucus or Sambuca: This Engine is so call'd from a Greek Word which signifies a Triangular Instrument of Musick, made in the Form of a Harp, for this was a Triangle composed of Strings that made one of its Sides, and of the Body of an Engine, which made the other Two. The Warlike Engine of this Name was the same with that which we now call a Portable-Bridge. When this Bridge of the Sambuca was laid down, it was supported by Ropes, and thus the Besiegers made use of it for passing over from their
Turrets of Wood unto the Walls of the Besieg'd. 7. Scorpiones, were the larger sort of Balista's, which the Ancients made use of for attack∣ing and defending Walls; they were Engines made up of unequal Circles, and were called Scorpions, either upon the account of the ef∣fect they produc'd, which was to wound with little Arrows, like a Scorpion which wounds with a small Sting, or else upon the account of the Figure of their Bow, which represented two Arms bending backwards like the Feet of a Scorpion. After this man∣ner Ammianus Marcellinus describes the Scor∣pion, which he supposes to resemble a Balista, rather than a Catapula, for he says, that the Scorpion was made for throwing Stones by the help of a Wooden Beam which he calls Sty∣lus, and which was join'd in the Ropes that were fasten'd to the two bended wooden Beams, (which are like those that are us'd in the Engine for sawing) after such a manner that the Stylus being drawn back by 4 Men, and after that let go, it throws out the Stone which was in one of the Slings fasten'd to the end of the Stylus. 8. Helepolis, was a Turret which destroy'd Ci∣ties. King Detrius, who was called Polioctetes; upon account of his resolute Attacks for ta∣king of Cities, caus'd Epimachus an Architect to build an Helopolis against the Rhodians: It was 125 Foot high, and 40 Foot broad, cover'd with Hair-Stuff, and Hides lately flead off. Diognetus rendered this design of it ineffectually against Rhodes, and freed the City. He brought the Helopolis into the City, and set it up in a publick Place with this In∣scription; Diognetus made this Present to the People of the Spoils of their Enemies. 9. Testudo, a Tortoise, is an Engine which the Ancients made use for undermining and battering of Places. It was a Fence made of Wood that run upon Wheels, which serv'd to cover the Souldiers when they were at work. Facere Testudinem was a kind of scaling us'd among the Ancients, which was done by the Souldiers when they stood close toge∣ther, and cover'd themselves with their Buck∣lers, for so they made a kind of Ladder for their Companions by which they might climb up upon the Walls. The Invention of this Testudo is attributed to Artemon the Son of Cla∣zomenes. 10. Malleoli, or Pyroboli, according to Non∣nus and Vegetius, were Engines set on Fire by a mixture of combuslible Matter where∣with they were besmear'd, and which being clos'd at the end, according to the Descri∣ption of Ammianus Marcellinus, were shot cut of a Bow, to set on Fire any military En∣gines or Ships on which they lighted. Cae∣sar in his Commentaries says, that the Gs fir'd the Camp of Q. Cicero, by throwing into it with Slings such Balls of Earth as were kindled before they were thrown. Armisalii, a sort of Dancers in Armour, who danc'd the Dance called Pyrricha, which is perform'd with Arms, by keeping time while they strike their Swords and Javelins against their Bucklers. Arquites, Archers, who shot Arrows out of a Bow. Ars, an Art, is a Collection of Precepts, Rules, Inventions and Experiments, which being observ'd give success to our underta∣kings in any Affairs, and render them use∣ful and pleasant. In this Sense Art is divided into two Branches, whereof one compre∣hends the Liberal, and the other the Mecha∣nick Arts. The Liberal Arts are the Sciences, such as Poetry, Musick, Painting, Philosophy, Ma∣thematicks, Architecture Civil and Military, Physick, Geometry, Arithmetick, &c. The Mechanical Arts are those which re∣quire more the Labour of the Hand and the Body, than of the Mine. Thetzes says, that in the time of Noah a cer∣tain Aegyptian call'd Vulcan found out Fire, and invented those Arts in which Fire is em∣ployed, and that the Greek Poets having been Educated in Aegypt, transported them into Greece, and attributed the whole Glory of these Arts to their own Nation. 'Tis certain that Noah was the first Inventor of all Arts, as well as of the cultivating of the Vine; yet it cannot reasonably be deny'd, but that during the Sixteen Ages which pass'd between the Creation of the World and the Deluge, Men had invented many Arts and Sciences which Noah could not be ignorant of, having liv'd Six Hundred Years before the Deluge; these therefore he restor'd after the Deluge, or else invented some of these Arts a new. Artemisia, was the Wife of Mausolus King of Caria: When he was dead and his Body burnt and reduc'd to Ashes, Artemisia mix'd these Ashes with sweet-scented Waters, and drank them up, because she thought she could not better restifie the extreme Love she had for her Husband, than by drinking his Ashes, and making her self by this means his Sepulchre. Yet she built him a stately Monu∣ment in the City of Halicarnassus, enrich'd with Images of Marble, which was accounted one of the Wonders of the World, and a Master-Piece of Architecture. This Work has so
far merited the approbation of all Ages, that all the magnificent Monuments of Kings and other Heroes are nam'd from it, Mausolea. Artemisia died 2 Years after her Husband, for grief that she had lost him. We must not here conceal a brave Action which she did after the Death of Mausolus, which was this. Having taken upon her the Govern∣ment of the Kingdom, the Rhodians could not endure that a Woman should reign over all Caria, and therefore they equipt out a Fleet to make themselves Masters of the Kingdom. But Artemisia being inform'd of it, gave orders that a Fleet of Ships should he hid in the little Harbour which the King had caus'd to be cut, toge∣ther with Gally-Slaves, and such Military Men as had been accustom'd to fight at Sea, and that the rest should appear open∣ly upon the Ramparts. Then the Rhodians approaching with their Fleet very well equipp'd, as it was just ready to enter into the great Harbour, the Queen gave a sig∣nal from the Walls to give them to under∣stand that the City would surrender. Whereupon the Rhodians left their Ships and went into the City, and immediately Artemisia caus'd the little Harbour to be open'd, out of which came the Fleet, and went into the great Harbour, where the Rhodians had left their Ships; these her Fleet carried away with them into the open Sea, after they had furnish'd them with Seamen and Souldiers; and at the same time the Rhodians having no means left of escaping were all kill'd in the publick Place wherein they were found shut up. Nevertheless the Queen went streight to the Isle of Rhodes with the Ships of the Rhodians; and the Inhabitants seeing the Ships return crown'd with Laurel, receiv'd their Ene∣mies, whom they took for their own Peo∣ple returning Victorious: But Artemisia pos∣ses'd her self of their City. Vetruvius, from whom I have taken this History, says that the Mausoleum was built in the City of Halicarnassus. Although Mauso∣lus, says he, was born at Mylassus, yet he resolv'd to fix his abode at Halicarnassus, seeing that was a Place of a very advanta∣geous Situation, and very convenient for Commerce, as having a very good Har∣bour. The Place on which it stood, was bending after the manner of a Theatre; and in the lower part of it which was near the Harbour he design'd to build a pub∣blick Exchange, but in the middle of the Decsivity of the Hill, he made a great and wide Street, in which was built that excellent Work called the Mausoleum, which is one of the 7 Wonders of the World. There is a Medal of Queen Artemisia; which on the Reverse has the Figure of the Pyramid of the Mausoleum which she built for her Husband: It is of Silver and well cut. On one side of it there is the Face of the Princess, having her Hair encompassed with a Royal Diadem; on the other there is the Pyramid of the Mausoleum, and on the top of it there is a Man standing upright leaning upon a half Pike, and upon the lowermost Leg of the Pyramid there is the Greek Letter Φ. to signifie the Affection which Artemisia had for her Husband, together with these words . There is also another sort of Medal of Brass on which there is the perfect and entire Figure of the Mausoleum. ARTEMISUM, a Temple in Italy, in the Forest of Aricia, whose Original was as follows. Pylades and Orestes having suf∣fer'd Shipwrack when they were just ready to be Sacrific'd, kill'd those that guarded them, and massacred K. Thoas; and after that carried away captive the Priestess of Diana. and the Goddess her self to whom they were to be offered in Sacrifice: They landed in Italy, and built a Temple to Diana, which was called Artemisium, or Dianium, where Slaves are sacrific'd to that Goddess, and whose Priest ought to be a fugitive Slave. ARVALES, the Fratres Avales, so cal∣led ab arvis, i. e. from the Fields, because they Preside over the Sacrifices that were offered to Bacchus and Ceres for the Preservation of the Fruits of the Earth. Ful∣gentius gives the following Account of their Original. The Nurse of Romulus called Acc Laurentia, had a custom of offering every Year a Sacrifice to desire of the Gods a plentiful Crop, and in doing this she was accompanied with her 12 Children: But one of them being dead, Romulus who was very willing to countenance this De∣votion of his Nurse, put himself in his stead to fill up the number of Twelve, and gave this Society, the Name of the Twelve Arval Brethren, which they have kept ever since. They held their Assemblies commonly at the Capitol in the Temple of Concord, or in a Wood consecrated to the Goddess Dia, about 5 Miles distant from Rome, and which lies in that way which now is called Via Campana. They wore a Crown made of Ears of Corn tied up with a white Ribbon. Those who were promoted to this Dignity were made Noble, and exempted from all Offices in the City and from Taxes. Some Authors have thought that they had the Authority
of determining the Limits of Lands and Inhe∣ritances; but others attribute this Authority to certain Persons who are also called Arvales Sacerdotes. ARUSPEX, One that divin'd by Inspe∣ction of the Entrails of Beasts, which the An∣cients kill'd in Sacrifice to the Gods, from which they drew Prognosticks of future E∣vents. ARUSPICINA, Divination by the Entrails of Beasts slain to the God's. This sort of Divination is very ancient, and was practis'd by the Chaldeans, Egyptians, Greeks and Africans, and afterwards by the Tuscans, who became most excellent in it. From them the Romans learn'd this Science; Romulus at first instituted Three Aruspices, one for each Tribe, into which he divided his People; af∣terwards the Senate ordain'd that a certain number of Young Men of a noble Family should be sent to Tuscany, to be better in∣structed in this Science. Cicero limits the Numbers to Six, Valerius Maximus makes 10 of them, and some others 12. 'Tis said, that Tages the Son of Genius and Grandson of Jupiter taught the Tuscans this Art, and Cicero in the 2d. Book of Divination relates to us something of the Fabulous Story of this Tages. viz. That when a Peasant was tilling the Ground, the Coulter of his Plough happen'd to cut deeper than was usual; and then he saw a Clod assume the Figure of a young Infant, whom the Inha∣bitants called Tages, and that this Tages instructed the Peasant presently how he might predict things to come by Animals: This is also confirm'd by Ovid. Indiginae dixere Tagem, qui primus Hetrus∣cam. Edocuit gentem casus aperire futuros,Ovid. lib. 15. Metam. v. 558. This Art took its Conjectures of things future, either from the Motions of the Ani∣mal which was to be sacrific'd, or from its Entrails which were pull'd out, or lastly, from the Fire into which they were thrown after they had been carefully examin'd. It was observ'd whether the Animal went without struggling to the Sacrifice, whether it did not make unusual Noises at the time of Immolation, or whether he did not get away out of the Hands of those who led it. After this the Entralls were examin'd which the Aruspex pull'd out, such as the Liver, the Heart, the Spleen and the Reins, their Colour was carefully consider'd, and strict enquiry made whether there was any Spot or Blemish in them. After this these perts were cast into a Fire newly kindled, and then the Divinor look'd carefully whether the Smoke and Flame ascended together like a Globe, and whether they parted, one going to one side, and the other to another. From all these Signs they took Prognosticks good and bad which moved them either to pursue or desist from any Undertaking. Presages also were taken from conse∣crated Wine or Water wherewith the Victim was sprinkled, and it was observ'd whether the Wine of which the Libation was made, did not lose its Colour or Tast; as it hap∣pen'd to Dido, who at the time of sacrificing found the Wine chang'd into black Blood, that it was corrupted in the Vessel into which she had put it, as Virgil relates, Latices ingressere sacros. Fusaque in obscenum se vertere vina cruorem. Aeneid. l. 4. v. 455. And thus it happen'd also to Xerxes, who on the Eve before he attack'd the City of Sparta, saw the Wine which was pour'd out for him to drink, three times chang'd into a very bad Blood, as Valerius Maximus tells us, [Infusum nempe paterae ejus vinum, in sanguinem, nec semel, sed iterum ac tertio conversum.] We must not think that Wisemen among the Romans gave credit to these foo∣lish Fables about the Inspection of Entrails, which were believ'd only by the ignorant People, as Cicero tells us in his 2d. Book of Divination. [Aruspicina ego Reipublicae causa communisque Religionis colendam censeo, sed soli sumus.] Princes made use of it to keep the common People and Souldiers in their Duty: So did Age∣silaus, according to the Relation of Plutarch; For he being in Aegypt, and perceiving the Souldiers to be wavering in their Duty, thought fit to confirm their staggering Faith by writing on the Palm of his Hand in great Greek Characters, NKH, which signifies Victory; and after this having slain a Victim, he took its Entrails reeking hot in∣to his Hand, and held them there so long till these Characters were imprinted upon them, and then having shown them to all the Army he remov'd their Fears and gave them fresh Courage, by this word which appear'd upon the Entrails of the Victim, for now they all believ'd that the Gods did promise them Victory. At, is deriv'd from Aes according to Varro, and formerly Assis was us'd for the Nomina∣tive: It signifies the weight of a Roman Pound, which was only 12 Ounces. As, a piece of ancient Roman Money, made at st. of Copper in a Lump which weigh'd a Pound, and which did not begin to be stamp'd till the time of Servius Tatla, and
did always retain its weight of a Pound un∣til the 2d. Punick War against Carthage, when they began to coin six Asses out of a Pound, each weighing 2 Ounces, according to the Testimony of Pliny; and because the weight of an As was different at several times, when Authors would express the Asses of a Pound-weight, they say, Aes grave, which is not the same thing with Rude, as  thought, for Rude is oppos'd to Signatum, which signifies Money, whereas Grave re∣spects only the weight, and cannot agree both to one and t'other. Now because at first they weigh'd their Money, from thence came the Words Impen∣sae, Expences, Dispensator a Steward, and Libri∣pens a Treasurer. 'Tis not easy to know certainly when the Romans first began to make use of Silver Mony: Pliny writes that it was five Years before the first Punick War, and Varro thinks that Servius Tullus was the first that brought it into use. An As according to our Money at present is in Value a Half-penny-farthing, as may be seen in the Tables annex'd to the laze Cam∣bridge Dictionary. An As is us'd also for any entire thing, which is divided into twelve parts, as an In∣heritance, an Estate, in which case the parts are called Ounces: Which Observation will help us to understand many Expressions scatter'd in Latin Authors, as Haeres ex asse, a general Heir, or an Heir to all the Goods; Eaeres ex besse, an Heir to two Thirds; Hares ex semisse, an Heir to one Moiety; Haeres ex dadrante an Heir to 3 Fourths, and so of the rest which may be easily understood by the following Table. As, call'd also Libra and Pondo, 12 Ounces. The whole and entire thing divisible by 12. Deunm, 11 Ounces, so call'd because there wants an Ounce. Eleven Twelfths. Decunx, 10 Ounces, that is to say decem Utiae. Ten Twelfths. or Five Sixths. Dodrans, 9 Ounces, because deest quadrans. Nine Twelfths or Three Fourths. Besses or Bessis 8 Oun∣ces, because deest triens, according to Varro. Eight Twelfths or Two Thirds. Septunx, 7 Ounces as much as to say sep∣tem unciae. Seven Twelfths. Semissis for Semiassis; six Ounces. A half Pound or Six Twelfths. Quineanx, 5 Ounces. Five Twelfths. Triens, 4 Ounces, i. e. the third part of in As. Four Twelfths of One Third. Quadrans, 3 Ounces. One Fourth. Sextans, 2 Ounces. One Sixth. Sescunx, for Sesqul un∣cia, 1 Ounce and a half. One Eighth. Uncia an Ounce. One Twelfth. ASAROTA, a sort of Floor. Pliny says, that painted Pavements, wrought artist∣cially, came from Greece, and that among the rest, the Pavement of Pergamus, which was done by Sesus, was the most Curious. This word Asarotos, signifies that which is not swept away. [ab a Privative & ] and, this Name was therefore given it, because they saw upon the Pavement the Crumbs, and other things which fell from the Table while they were at Meat, so lively represented, that they seem'd to be Realities, and that the Ser∣vants took no Care to sweep the Rome clean. This Pavement was made of small Shells painted with divers Colours, and that which was most admir'd in it, was a Döve drink∣ing, whose Head cast a shadow upon the Water. Monsieur Perrault rejects this opi∣nion of Pliny about this word, and thinks it more probable, that these black Pavements which by reason of their driness drank up all that was spilt upon them, should rather be call'd  either because it was neither convenient to sweep them, or wipe them with Spunges, as they did other Floors, or else because they appear'd not to be sweps at all. ASBESTOS, i. e. Incombusible, is a sort of Stone, of which Cloth was made which would not burn, though it was thrown into a great Fire. Pliny mentions a Fla that grew in the Indies, which he calls As∣bestum. Some think that the dead Bodies of the Romans which were burnt, were wrapp'd up in this Cloth to preserve their Ashes. But Pliny assures us, that it was kept for the Kings of those Countries upon the account of its scarceness. Strabo and Plutarch relate that the like Cloth was also made of the Stone Amiantus, and that some at that time had the secret of Spinning it, which is not incredible, as many perswade themselves, since it is a Stone that may be all drawn out into Threads. ASBOLUS, a Centaur which Hercu∣les hang'd upon a Gibbet. ASCANIUS, the Son of Aeneas and Creusa, who came with Aeneas his Father into Italy. After the Death of Aeneas, Ascanias was besieg'd in Lavinium by Mezutius after
such a manner that he saw he could not long defend himself: Whereupon he sent to him to sue for Peace, which was offer'd him in∣deed, but upon very dishonourable Terms: and therefore he resolv'd to use his utmost endeavour to oppose him by a vigorous Sally: But before this was put in Execution, he ob∣serv'd a good Omen; for having made a Di∣vision of the Heavens, a clap of Thunder pass'd from the right to the left in a serene Day, which gave him great Encouragment to execute his design. Having therefore for this end made choice of a very dark Night he made some false Attacks upon the weakest of the Enemies Quarters, but his chief assault was upon the Place of the greatest strength, which was less carefully guarded. This Stra∣tagem succeeded very well for him, for his Enemies were defeated, and Mezentius his Son lost his Life upon the Place. After this Vi∣ctory Ascanius went and built the City of Alla lenga 30 Years after Lavinium, in the Place which was mark'd out to him by the 30 little Boar-pigs of the white Sow. He reign'd 38 Years. Sub Ascia dedicavit. Monsieur Spon in his Antiquities of the City of Lyons, Chap. 4. Says, we have hitherto said nothing of this Phrase, sub Ascia dedicare, which we meet with so often in Inscriptions upon the Tombs of the ancient Pagans. Monsieur Chorier, who has describ'd the Antiquities of Vienna, ex∣plains it very ingeniously: , says he signifies in Greek a Shadow, from whence comes the word , and in Latin Ascia, which signifies a Place without a Shadow; and it was usual with the Ancients to set up their Tombs in an open Place, or in a Place without a Shadow. 'Tis true the generality of Antiquaries use the word Ascia for an Instrument, wherewith they cut and polish'd the Stone which was to be laid upon Graves: From whence it comes to pass that in the Laws of the 12 Tables we have this Clause. Rogum Ascia ne polito, that we should not polish the Monuments of the dead. But this Law was disus'd and the Romans growing more powerful and rich, would not lose their Pomps and Vanities even after their Death: Witness the many stately Mausolca, which are to be seen in all Italy and other Provinces of their Empire. Some think that a certain Figure made in the form of an Ax, which we often meet with upon ancient Inscriptions, is that Ascia whereof we are now speaking. Gaichard in his first Book of Funerals, speaking of these words tells us, that the Law of the 12 Tables forbad to polish the Wood of the Funeral Pile, but that this Law was not at all observ'd; and that every one caus'd the Wood of the Funeral Pile to be po∣lish'd, and adorn'd it with Pictures made of Wax of divers Colours;  which Custom adds he, we may refer these 3 Words sub Ascia dedicare. I do not think continues he, that the Romans added at the end of their Epitaphs these words to shew that the Ma∣ble had been polish'd, for as much as the Ax which is there represented is not a Tool proper for polishing Marble or Stone, espe∣cially seeing that part of the Stones where these words, and that Figure is to be found, are rough and unpolish'd. ASCLEPIADES, a Greek Physician, of whom we read this Inscription at Rome. L. ARUNTIO SEMPRONIANO ASCLEPIADI. Imp. Domitiani Medico. T. F. L. In Fronte P. XX. In Ag. P. XX. Authors mention two of this name who were Physicians: He who was Physician to Domitian possibly was the last of the two, and he who was Cicero's Friend, the first. But here we must observe, that these Greek Phy∣sicians when they came to Rome, took upon them a Praenomen, the name of a Family, and a Surname, although in their own Country they had only one Name or Surname. And the Reason of this was, because their Free∣dom being given them at Rome, they were in∣corporated into the Tribes, and adopted in∣to the Families of the Republick. Thus As∣clepiades, who according to the Custom of the Greeks had but one name, assumed here 3 pre∣ceeding Names, Lacius Aruntîus Sempronlands, that of Asclepiades continuing still as an Ag∣nomen or 2d. Surname. Reinesius, in his Inscriptions publish'd a lit∣tle while ago, makes this Asclepiades diffe∣rent from him, who is mention'd by Au∣thors as famous for the Books he wrote about Medicaments; and he thinks that he who is meant in this Inscription was the Son or Grandson of Aruntius the Physician, to whom 250 Sestertia magna, were given as Pliny tells us as a Reward, Book 9. of his History. There is a 3d. Asclepiades according to an Inscription which we find at Arignan. C. CALPURNIUS ASCLEPIADES. Prufa ad Olympum Medicus, Parentibus & sibi fratrib. Civitate VII. à divo Trajano imperavit. Natus III. Nonas Martics, Domitiano XIII. Cos. eodem die quo & uxor ejus VERONIA CHELIDON. cum qua vixit an. LI. studiorum & morum causâ.
probatus à viris clariss. adjedit Magistratibus Pop. R. ita ut in aliis & in Prov. Asi Custodiar—in urna Iudicum Vixit ann. LXX. CAIUS CALPURNIUS AS∣CLEPIADES, a Physician of the Ci∣ty of Prusa at the Foot of mount Olympus, obtain'd of the divine Emperour Trajan, 7 Cities for his Father and Mother, himself and his Brethren; and was born the 5th. Day of March, under the 13th. Consulship of Domitian, on the very same day that his Wife VERONIA CHELIDON was born, with whom he liv'd 52 Years being approv'd by Persons of the first Quality upon the account of his Learning and good Behaviour, he was Assessor to the Magi∣strates of the People of Rome, not only in Asia, but a so in other Provinces. He liv'd 70 Years. This Asclepiades was never made a Free-man, as Reiesins thinks, since he took upon him the name of CAIUS CALPUR∣NIUS ASCLEPIADES, and there is no L, in the Inscription, to signifie that he was Libertus. His Country was the City of Prusa, which is still to this Day call'd Prussa in By¦inia, at the Foot of Mount Olympus. From this Place the 1st Asclepiades originally came, who was Cicero's Friend, and the Author of a Sect which pretended to cure Diseases by a moderate way of living rather than by Me∣dicines; for Strabo and Galienus say, that he was of the City of Prusa in Bythrnia: And if we compute the Times in which these 2 As∣clepiadas's liv'd, he who is meant in this In∣scription, might be Grandson to the former, and inherit his Learning and Reputation; since he obtain'd by the Bounry of the Em∣peror Prajan, probably upon the account of delivering him from some dangerous Disea∣ses, the Possession of 7 Cities, which is a very remarkable particular of History. He was born under the 13th. Consulship of Domitian, which answers to the Year from the building of Rome DCCCXL. and to that of our Lord, LXXXVIII. and be died in the 70th. Year of his Age under the Empire of Antoninus Pius, in the Year of Rome DCCCCX, and con∣sequently he was Physician under Trajan, Hdanus, and Antoninus, and also under ma∣ny Magistrates, which shews that he was in a free Condition and highly esteem'd. Besides these 3 Asclpade who were Phy∣sicians, we find also another call'd TITUS AELIUS ASCLIPIADES, in Gruter, who was made free by the Emperor, and one nam'd PUBLIUS NUMITO∣RIUS ASCLEPIADES, a Freeman and Sextum-vir of Verona, and lastly one LUCIUS FONTEIUS FOR∣TIS, of the Race of the Asclepiades's, or at least of their Profession; for in succeeding times the Name of Asclepiades was us'd for the Title of a Sect, or of Professors of Phy∣sick. ASCOLIA, certain Games in Honour of Bacchus, at which People danc'd upon Goat-skins, which were blown up like Blad∣ders and anointed with Oyl, that so the Dan∣cers might make the Diversion more Pleasant to the Spectators by their Fall. ASPHODELUS, the Daffodil, an Herb which has a strong Smell when it is in Flower. Lucian thinks that a Meadow was planted with these Daffodils in Hell, through which the River of Oblivion runs. ASSA vox, &. ASSATIBIA, The Voice alone: One Fiute alone, without being accompanied with the Voice. ASSARIUS or ASSARIUM, the same with As among the Ancients, says Charisius. Dionysius Halicarnasscus also says, that Assarium was a piece of Money of Cop∣per, of a Pound-Weight: Yet Hisychius ex∣plains it to be , a little piece, and according to Suidas  are , little Pieces of Money of Copper. Agricola in B. 2. de pond. takes it for the half of an As, which he confirms by Iosephus and Wascrus; but of an As minted, and reduc'd to half an Ounce, so that this would be no more but the 4th. part of an Ounce. 'Tis certain that it was a very little Piece, and so much its Termination sufficiently shews, that it is only a Diminutive from Assis ASSEUM, a Stove or Bagnio, a Place where the Air only is heated to make People sweat. ASTARTA, or ASTARTE, The Goddess Astarte is call'd in Scripture, Ashtaroth, which signifies Sheep or Flocks. Sca∣liger thinks that this Name was given her up∣on the account of the Multitude of her Vi∣ctims, dea Sydoniorum. Sanchoriathon says that the Goddess Astarte is Venus-Ʋrania, or the Moon, which is the same with Venus-Urania, or Caelestis; Astarten Venerem Phaenices praedi∣cant: They say also that she has the Head of a Bull, as a token of her Sovereignty, which agrees to the Crescent or New Moon. This made Bochart believe, that she was Io the Goddess of the Greeks, which was trans∣form'd into a Cow. Ciccro in B. 3. Di Natura Deorum would have her to be Venus, and having distinguish'd many Venus's, he says, that Venus of Syria, or Tyre, was Astarte,  Venus Syriâ  concepta, quae Astarto
vocatur. This is also the Opinion of Suidas: But St. Austin on the contrary thinks that Astarte was Juno, which he proves from the Judgment of the Carthoginians, who could not be ignorant of the Religion of the Phaeni∣cians, & servicrunt Baal & Astartae; These are the words of Scripture which this Fa∣ther explains of Jupiter and Juno, in Lib. Jud. 9. 16. Lucian, on the contrary says that Astarte is the Moon, although he relates that the Phae∣nicians made her pass for Europa, the Daugh∣ter of King Agenor, who was carried away in∣to Candia by Jupiter when he was transform'd into a Bull. There is also a great Temple in Phanicia, among the Sidonians, which is dedicated to Astarte, whom I believe to be the Moon; although a Priest of the Temple told me, that she was Europa, the Sister of Cadmus and the Daughter of Age∣nor, who disappear'd I know not how; and that afterwards the People of the Coun∣try built her a Temple, and gave it out that Jupiter had ravish'd her for her Beauty. She is still to be seen engrav'd upon their Money, sitting upon a Bull; but there are some who do not believe that she is the Person to whom this Temple is dedi∣cated. There is some Ground to conjecture that in this Case we have an Example of the Cu∣stom of the Phaenicians mention'd by Philo, the Interpreter of Sanchoniathon, viz. that they gave to the Stars the Names of their Kings, and so they paid Religious Worship to them as well as to the Stars. They might then attribute to the Daughter of King Agenor the Temple built in Honour of Astarte, i. e. according to Lucinn, to the Moon. Josephus speaks of the building of the Temple of Her∣cules, and of that of Astarte at Tyre, whose Names are manifestly deriv'd from this Di∣vinity; such as, ARISTARTUS, BELOA∣STARTUS, i. e. BELUS ASTAR∣TUS. ASTRA, the Stars, Luminions Bodies, which move in the Heavens above the Ele∣mentary Region. Porphery had reason to say, that the Ancients admiring the extraordinary Beauty and Splendor of the Star Venus, thought that by her Influence she contribu∣ted very much to Generation, which mov'd them to represent her under the Figure of a Woman of extraordinary Beauty. This Pla∣net Venus is also call'd the Star of the Shep∣herds. It is call'd Lucifer or the Morning Star, when it goes before the Sun, and Vesper, when it follows him. Mercury is another Pla∣net which scarce ever parts from the Sun, upon which Account he is rarely visible, and the Ancients confounded him sometimes with the Sun, and said that this Planet was as it were his Soul and Intelligence, for which reason they made him the Teacher of Wis∣dom and Knowledge. From whence it appears that the Gentiles look'd upon these Stars living and intelli∣gent Beings, and that they managed their Influences by their Intelligences. Horace calls learned Men Viros Mercuriales, as being more plentifully enrich'd with the Gifts and Influences of Mercury. In this Sense we must understand the beginning of the first Book of Manilius, where he says that the Stars know and work our Destiny by their Wisdom and Influences. Hesychius says, that the Babylonians call'd the Star Mercury, Sechez. The Western Nations were no less perswaded that Mercury was a Star that had Dominion over Reason, Discourse and Understanding. The Gaules mention'd by Caesar in his Commentaries, regarded more the Fabulous History of Mercury, than the Nature of the Star that goes under that Name. From the same Principle it was, that the ancient Re∣presentations of Mercury had neither Arms nor Legs, to give us to understand, if we may believe Plutarch in this Case, that the Wit and Wisdom of the Mind alone can compass all things, without the help of the Senses, and the Members of the Body: [Propterea Mercurios seniores sine manibus & sine pedibus fingunt, hoc obscuras quasi per Aenigma inducentes haud qua∣quam à senibus requiri ut corporis ministeria obe∣ant, dummodo oratio sit efficax & facunda. ASTRAEA, the Daughter of Jupiter and Themis, the Guardian of Justice. The Poets have feign'd that she descended on Earth in the Golden Age; but when Men in succeeding times became corrupt and perfi∣dious, this Divine Woman re-ascended into Heaven, and was plac'd in the Zodiack in the Sign Virgo. ASTRAGALUS, a Greek Word, and a Term of Architecture, is a little Round Monlaing wherewith the top and bottom of Pillars are adorn'd, which is made in the form of a Ring or Bracelet: Sometimes it is cut in the Shape of little Beads, from whence it has the name of a Chapter. ASTROLABIUM, an Astrolabe, is a Mathematical Instrument that is flat after the manner of a Sphere describ'd upon a Plain. It serves chiefly at Sea, for observing the height of the Pole and of the Stars; it hangs upon a Ring, and hath an Alhidade, or move∣able Rule furnish'd with little Pins, which shews the heights upon the Circle which are
on its sides being divided into 360 Degrees. There is a hole within its Limb, wherein di∣vers Plates are, on which are, mark'd the Azi∣muths and other Circles, for making various Observations; and that at the top which is pierc'd through, and is therefore call'd Ara∣nea, serves to make many Observations on the Stars. ASTROLOGIA, Astrology, a Con∣jectural Science, which teaches us to judge of the Effects and Influences of the Stars, and which pretends to foretell all sorts of Events. It is a very vain and uncertain Science. ASTRONOMIA, Astronomy, which treats of the Nature of the Heavens and the Stars The Aethiopians, as 'tis said were the first who discover'd this Science, because their Air is very clear, and they have not such change of Seasons as we have: Besides that this Nation is very subtil and surpasses all others in Wit, and Knowledge. Afterwards they improv'd this Science with great Application of Mind, for they measur'd the Course of each Star, and distinguish'd the Year into Months and Seasons, regulating the Year by the Course of the Sun, and the Months by the Motion of Moon. Moreover they divided the Heaven into 12 Parts, and represented each Constella∣tion by the Figure of some Animal, from whence proceeds the Diversity of their Re∣ligion and Gods, for those who more parti∣cularly observ'd the Proprieties of the Ram ador'd it, and so on of all the rest. The Chaldeans were above all others addi∣cted to this Science, insomuch that they would be esteemed the Inventors of it. As for the Greeks they learn'd it from Orpheus, who gave them the first Light into it, though but ob∣scurely, and under the Veil of many Myste∣ries and Ceremonies: For the Harp upon which he celebrated the Orgia [i. e. the Bac∣chanalia] and plaid Hymns and Songs, was compos'd of Seven Strings which represent the Seven Planets, upon which Account the Greeks plac'd it in the Heavens after his Death and have called a Constellation by its Name. And therefore he is painted sitting upon a Harp, encompass'd with an infinite number of Animals, which are a Representation of the Celestial Fires. In the time of Atreus and Thyostes the Greeks were arriv'd to great Knowledge in Astrono∣my; and the People of Argos having decreed that their Empire should be given to him who was most skilful in it. Thyestes discover'd to them the Proprieties of the Ram, from whence some took occasion to say, that he had a Ram or God: Atreus observ'd the Course of the Sun to be contrary to that of the Primum Mibile, which caus'd him to be preferr'd before his Ri∣val. The same Judgment is to be given of Rellerophon, for 'tis not believ'd that he ever had a winged Horse, but only that his Mind soaring up into Heaven, made many nice Observations about the Stars. The same is to be said of Phryxus the Son of Athamas, who is said to have gon through the Air upon a Golden Ram. Dadalus and his Son were like∣wise very learned in Astrology, for one of them confounding himself in this Science perhaps gave Occasion to the Fable: Also Pasiphe, hearing her Father discourse of the Celestial Bull and the other Stars, fell in Love with his Doctrine, which occasion to the Poets to say, that she was enamour'd with a Bull. There are some who have divided this Sci∣ence and assigned to each Astronomer his dif∣ferent part. Some have observ'd the Course of the Moon, and others the Motion of the Sun, or of some other Planets, with their different Influences. Thus it was with Phae∣ton and Endymion, whereof the former left us this Art imperfect by his untimely Death, and the latter perform'd his Part so well that he is said to have lain with the Moon, and enjoyed her Love. From hence it is that the Poets make Aeneas to be descended of Venus, Minos of Jupiter, Ascalaphus of Mars, Autolycus of Mercury, because they were born under these Planets, and because they always retained something of that Planet which was ascen∣dant at their Birth, therefore Minos was a King, Aeneas was a beautiful Man, Ascala∣phus was valiant, and Autolycus theivish. Nei∣ther must we imagine that ever Jupiter did chain up Saturn, or throw him down head-long into Hell, as ignorant People believed, but the former part of the Fable was feign'd upon the account of his slow, and sluggish Motion; and the vast distance of the Aether in which he moves, from this Earth, was taken for the Abyss of Hell. All that the Po∣ets say of the Adultery of Mars and Venus, and the manner of discovering it, is taken from Astrology; for the frequent conjunction of these 2 Planets gave occasion to these Fictions. Lycurgus, the great Lawgiver of the Laco∣demonians, fram'd his Common-wealth upon this Model of the Stars, and forbad his Ci∣tizens to march out to Battel, before the full Moon, because then its Body is more vi∣gorous. The Arcadians are the only People who would not entertain Astronomy, because they were such Pools as to think that they were born before the Moon. ASYLUM, , a place of Safety where none durst seize a Criminal that flies to it,
Some pretend that the first Asylum of Greece was that which was design'd by the Oracle of Jupiter Dedonaeus, mention'd by Pausanias, who assures us that the Athenians obey'd the Oracle, and granted their Lives to all those who fled for Refuge into the Areopagus to the Altars of the Goddesses. The same Pausanias tells us, that the Phlia∣sians very much rever'd a Temple of the Goddess Hebe, to which this Privilege was granted, that all Criminals should find there the Pardon of their Crimes, without any Ex∣ception whatsoever; and that they fasten'd their Chains to Trees which were before the Temple. This Author elsewhere mentions a Temple of Minerva in Peloponnesus, where Criminals were so strongly protected, that none durst so much as demand them back again: But this Historian has also given us what is more remarkable concerning the Antiqui∣ty of Sanctuaries, or Places of Refuge: For he says, that because Neoptolemus the Son of Achilles had put Priamus to Death, although he retir'd near the Altar of Jupiter Her∣cienus, yet he was kill'd near the Altar of Apollo of Delphos; from whence it is called the Punishment of Neoptolemus, when one suffers the same Mischief which he had done to ano∣ther. Thus the Asyla of Altars and of Tem∣ples was ancient in his time. About the time of Solomon, and of the Foundation of the Temple of Jerusalem; there is an Asylum men∣tioned in the Book of Kings. But the Asylum of the Altar among the Is∣raclites is far more ancient than that of the Temple of Solomon, and the time of Homer or the Trojan War, for it is mentioned in Exo∣dus, as a thing establish'd in Moses's Days. The Asylum of the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, was one of the most Famous. Strabo tells us, that several Princes allowed it some∣times a larger, and sometimes a less extent be∣yond the Temple itself. There were whole Cities of Refuge among the Israelites, which were counted Asylum's; also the League of the People of Smyrna, with King Seloucus shews us, that that King granted the Privilege of being an Asylum to the whole City of Smyrna. The whole Island of Samothrace likewise enjoyed the same Privilege according to Ti∣tus Livius. Herodotus assures us, that from the Trojan War there was a Temple of Hercules in Aegypt, whither Bond-slaves fled, and after they had received the Marks or Badges of that God, to whom they had devoted themselves, they could never be retaken by their Masters. Statius has made a curious Description of the Asylum, and Altar of Clemency, foun∣ded by the Posterity of Hercules, who were particularly careful of that Protection. Sic sacrâsse loco commune animantibus agris Confugium, &c. There are some Authors, that attribute Asyla's to Cadmus, who invented that Expe∣dient to People his new City of Thebes, which Romulus imitated, when he built Rome, for he left a place cover'd with Wood o purpose, between the Capitol and the Tarpeian Rock, which he promised to make a safe Asy∣lum to all Persons that fled thither, whether Slaves, or Freemen, as Ovid tells us in his 3d. Book of his Fasti. Romulus ut saxo lucum circumdedit Alto Cuilibet huc dixit, confuge tutus eris, v. 431. This Asylum at Rome remained sacred, and was not violated till the Reign of Augustus, and Tyberius, who seeing its abuses, abo∣lished it. For the Liberty of Asylum's, as Tacitus reports, Lib. 3. of his Annals, was come to so great an height, that at Rome, and in the Cities of Greece all the Temples were full of Debtors, Fugitives, and Cri∣minals, so that the Magistrates could not regulate them, nor stop the Fury of the People, who defended these Superstitions, as the most sacred Mysteries. Upon which account it was resolved that the Provinces should send their Deputies to the Se∣nate. The Ephesians came first in, and represen∣ted, that Apollo and Diana were not Born in the Isle of Delos, as the ignorant People be∣lieved, but that they had in their Country a River, and sacred Forest, where Latona be∣ing big with these Deities, was happily deli∣ver'd; that Apollo had fled into that place to avoid the Anger of Jupiter after he had con∣quer'd the Cyclops, and that Bacchus having vanquished the Amazons did pardon all those who had escaped to the Altar. That Her∣cules being Master of Lydia did enlarge the Immunities, and Privileges of the Tem∣ple. Then the Magnesians were heard, who pleaded that Scipio after the Defeat of An∣tiochus, and Sylla after the Victory ove: Mithridates, had rewarded their Fidelity and Courage with an inviolable Asylum. in the Temple of Diana Leucophryna. The People of Aphrodisium and Stratonice, alled∣ged their Privileges granted them by Cae∣sar, and confirmed by Augustus for the Ser∣vice they did their Party, and were pub∣lickly commended for continuing con∣stant in their Alliance during the Par∣thian Invasion. The Deputies of Hierocaesa∣rea derived their Asylum's higher, and said, that their Temple consecrated to the Per∣sian Diana was built by Cyrus, and honou∣red
by Perpenna Isauricus, and several other Captains, who had enlarged the Privilege of it two Miles round on every side. The Inhabitants of Cyprus maintained the Glory of the Goddess of Paphos, and Amathusia, of whom they had two Temples in their Island, they defended also the Privilege of that of Jupiter of Salamis built by Teucer, when flying from the Anger of his Father Tela∣mon, he took Sanctuary in their Coun∣try.The Senate says Tacitus retrenched this Privilege, and ordered that these Decrees should be graven upon Brazen Tables, and put in their Temples to preserve the Me∣mory of this Regulation, and to prevent any Attempts for the Future, contrary to the Determinations of the Senate under a pretence of Religion.Afterward it was discovered, adds Taci∣tus, which was concealed with much Grief, for the more Vitious tock the Liberty to reproach the Virtuous, and to stir up envy against them, by embracing the Statue of the Prince. The Magistrates themselves upon this account were afraid to offend their Slaves and Freemen, which ob∣liged Sestius to declare in a full Senate, that Princes were like the Gods, but the Gods would not hear wicked Mens Prayers, nor allow a retreat into their Temples to the Feet of their Altars, or to the Capitol, for Criminals to abuse them. These Declarations were the cause that these words were set and engraven upon ma∣ny Statues, à servo tangi ne fas est, as I have seen these words written upon a Statue of Mars. Mavortio sacrum hec signum; à servo tangi ne fas est. At last Asylum's would protect only those who were guilty of small Faults, for noto∣rious Offenders were taken by force from the Altars and Statues of the Gods, and often burnt, as Plautus teaches us in his Comedy, entitled RUDENS, where he makes La∣brax speak thus to the Old Daemons. LA. Mihi non liceat meas Ancillas Veneris dè arâ abdacere? DAe. Non licet, ita est Lex apud nos. LA. Imo hasce ambas hic in arâ ut vivas comburam, &c. Ast. 3. Sc. 4. ATALANTA, the Daughter of Schae∣neus, King of the Isle of Scyrus, who being of an extraordinary Beauty, attracted several Lovers to her, whom after she had overcome in a Race she put to Death, for as she excel∣led all in her time for swiftness, so she resol∣ved to marry none but him, that should ex∣cel her in running. Hippomenes the Son of Mars entred the Lifts, with her and gained the Victory, by casting three Golden Apples, which Venus had given him out of the Garden of the Hesperides in her way, for she stopping to take them up, her Eyes were dazled with their shining, and he overcame her by this Stratagem, and enjoyed his Love, but lying with her in the Temple of Cybele, the God∣dess was angry at the action, and metamor∣phosed them, the one into a Lion, and the other into a Lioness. ATE, a Prophetess or Goddess, accor∣ding to Plutarch, In his Banquet of the seven wise Men, whom Jupiter cast down headlong from Heaven to Earth at the Birth of Hercules, wherein Juno deceived him. Homer makes Ae the Daughter of Jupiter, who was sent to Men to be the Source of all Evils, in the Company of the Litae the Daughters of Jupi∣ter, who comfort them, but because they are very old, lame, and blind, they come of∣ten very late. Homer also makes mention of Ate, whom he af∣firms to be a Goddess for midable to Men, Gods, and even to Jupiter himself, although she is his Daughter. And after he has related the Sur∣prize that Juno put Jupiter in, when she cau∣sed Eurysthcus to be born before Hercules, which gave him Power over Hercules, he says, that Jupiter being angry with Ate cast her down headlong from Heaven to Earth, swearing that she should never return thither again. So that Ate concerns her self wholly with humane Affairs. Illico corripuit Aten, & jura∣vit firmum juramentum, nunquam in Olympum, & Coelum stellatum redituram Aten, quae omnes infor∣tunio afficit, , sic fatus ejicit à Coelo stellato, manu rotans fulgur, mex autem per∣venit ad opera hominum. It is evident, that the name of this Goddess comes from , nocco, who if Homer makes the Daughter of Jupi∣ter, 'tis because no Evil happens to us, but by the permission of Providence; that if this Goddess was heretofore in Heaven, and was banished out of it, 'twas because the Division among the Angels was but once made, when they became Evil of Good, as they were created, and by their own Sin separated them∣selves from the Company of Blessed Spirits. The Banishment of Ate to the Earth signifies nothing else but the terrible Effects of di∣vine Justice, which shews itself only upon the Earth, because that's the only Theatre of In∣justice. ATELLANAE COMOEDIAE, Atellan Comedies, or Farces, which were acted at the end of Comedies to divert the People. The Original of these Farces was as Atella, a City of Apulia in Campania, between Capua and Naples, whose Inhabitants were very Sa∣tyrical, and full of filthy, and obscene words.
These Farces were acted by the Youth in Masquerade, as Festus observes, and Titus Li∣vius adds, that the Atellans would not suffer any to act their Farces that were Stage-players or Comedians, for they were not re∣moved from their Tribe as infamous, nor prohibited from going to War, as other Comedians were. Tertia species est fabularum latinarum, quae à civitate Oscorum At-llâ, in quâ primum caeptae Atellanae dictae sunt. Diomedes the Grammarian, Quod genus ludorum ab Oscis acceptum tenuit juventus, nec'ab histrionibus pol∣lxi passa est; oinstitutum manet ut actores Atel∣lanarum, nec tribu moveantur, & stipendia, tan∣quam expertes artis ludicrae, faciant. ATELLANI VERSUS, Ver∣ses, of which these sorts of Farces were com∣posed, which were very free, and a little lascivious. ATHAMAS, King of Thebes, and Son of Aeolus. He married Nephele, by whom he had two Children, Phryxus and Helle, Nephele being turned mad by Bacchus, Athamas di∣vorced her, and married Themisto the Daughter of Hypsaeus, by whom he had Sphincius, and Orcho∣menus, but being also divorced from her, he married Ino the Daughter of Cadmus, by whom he had Learchus and Melicrtus. Themisto being very angry to see her self so supplanted, re∣solved to put Ino's Children to Death, and hiding her self in a Place of the Palace, she slew her own Children instead of her Rivals, be∣ing deceived by the Cloaths which the Nurse had put on them. This cruel Mistake made her slay her self: Ino being thus rid of Themisto's Children, contrived to take off Ne∣pheles's Children, whom she hated, and to that end procured a Famine in her Country, being advised to parch the Corn, and not sow it, which caused a Famine and a Plague. Athamas sent to consult the Oracle at Del∣phos, how he might be delivered from these Evils, but his Messengers being bribed by Ino, told him that the Oracle had ordered that he should sacrifice his Son Phryxus, who offered himself voluntarily to Death, not∣withstanding Athamas was against it. But as they went to sacrifice him, the Accomplices discovered to Athamas the Malice of Ino, who immediately delivered her, and her Son Meli∣certus to Phryxus to be revenged on her, but as he was going to put them to Death, Bac∣chus whom she had nursed delivered them, by covering them with a Cloud. Athamas was punished with Madness by Jupiter, and slew his Son Learchus, whom he took for a Lyons Whelp. Ino escaped with her Son Melicertus, and cast her self head long into the Sea, where Neptune Deifyed them; Ino under the name of Lothea, or the Mother Mutata, and Meli∣certus under the Name of Palaemon or Por∣tunus. ATHENAEA, Feasts at Athens dedica∣ted to the Honour of Minerva, of which some were kept every Year, and others every Five Years, according to the Institution of Eri∣cthonius, King of Athens, as Pausanias says. ATHENAEUM, a Place at Athens consecrated to Minerva, where the Greek Po∣ets went to make an Offering of their Works, as the Latins consecrated them in the Tem∣ple of Apollo. This Place was like a publick School, where they taught the Liberal Arts. ATHENAE, Athens, the most famous City of Greece, situated in that part of Achaia, which lies upon the Coast, from whence it was called Acte and after Attica. The first Founder of it was Cecreps in the time of Moses, from whence it was called Cecropia or Ionia, from Ion the Son of Xuthus, and afterwards Athens from Minerva, for  in Greek signifies Minerva. This City was famous for Learning, and Eloquence, and the Defence of all Greece. says Lucian in his Praise of Demosthenes. I might, adds he, speak of the Gods, to whom it owes its beginning, their Amours, Decrees, Dwellings, Presence and Myste∣ries. I might speak of its Laws, Decrees, Assemblies, Colonies, Victories and Tro∣phies, which are so great and many, as well by Sea, as by Land, that he must be more eloquent than D mosthenes, which can sufficiently describe them. It was governed by Kings, for the Space of 460 Years, of whom the first was Cecrops, but their Power degenerating into Tyranny, the People shook of the Regal Yoke, which ended in Codrus. They were governed for a long time after, by 500 Magistrates, named PRYTANES, who ruled by turns, 50 at a time, and after by Nine Magistrates, of whom the Chief was called ARCHON. This Government did not continue above 460 Years, and their Commonwealth or some∣what like it being often interrupted by Ty∣rants, who assumed an absolute Authority. This City anciently so great is now redu∣ced to a small Castle, and a few Fishermens Huts, but the Ruins of it gives us a sufficient Proof of its Antiquity. Varro gives this Account of the Original of the word Athens, An Olive Tree, says he, growing up out of the Earth on a sud∣den in a certain Place, and a Spring of Water rising in another, these Prodigies astonished the King, who sent to Apollo at Delphos to know the Signification of them, and what he should do. The Oracle an∣swered that the Olive Tree signifyed Mi∣nerva,
and the Water Neptune, and it be∣longed to them to see from which of those two Gods they would name their City. Hereupon Cecrops assembled all his Citi∣zens, as well Men as Women (for the Wo∣men at that time had a Voice in their Councils.) When then they came to vote, all the Men were for Neptune, and all the Wo∣men for Minerva, and because there was one Woman more, Minerva carried it, and the City was named Athens, which is taken from that of Minerva, whom the Greeks call . Neptune being incensed at it depo∣pulated the Country of the Athenians with his Waves, and to appease him says the same Author, the Women suffered 3 sore Punish∣ments. First, that from that time they should never have a Voice in their Coun∣cils, the 2d. that none of their Children should bear their Name, and lastly, that they should not be called Athenians but Atticks. Varro gives us also an historical and not fabulous Reason of the Name of Athens, and tells us that there happened so great a Difference between Neptune and Minerva about it, that Apollo durst not be an Arbi∣trator between them, but left the Decision of it to Men, as Jupiter did that of the three Goddesses to Paris, and adds, that Minerva carried it by the number of Votes. ATHENIENSES, the Athenians, a People of Attica, whose chief City was Athens, very civilized and polited by Learning, and being brought up in the Poverty of Philoso∣phy, were such Enemies to Luxury, that they reformed even Strangers who came a∣mong them, so far were they from suffering themselves to be corrupted by them. They particularly honoured the Goddess Minerva, to whom they built a Temple, where certain Virgins kept Celestial Fire near the Image of the Goddess, and their Money, as also their Banners bore her Image. They also gave a special Worship to Ceres, appoin∣ting a Feast to her, during which time the Women were not allowed to marry, and ab∣stained from eating, lying upon the Ground Nine whole Days. They put Malefactors to Death, by making them drink the juice of Hemlock. We read in the Discourse of Philostratus, Of the Nativity of Minerva. That the Rhodians wanting fire for the Sacrifices, the God∣dess left them, and went to the City of Athens, to which she gave her Name. The Inhabitants having a fine and polished Mind gave her a particular Worship, building her a Temple in their Castle, under the name of Parthenos, which signifies a Vir∣gin, where they set her Image of Gold and Ivory made by the Hands of Phidias, 39 Foot high, who engraved on her Shield, or Buckler, the Battel of the Amazons, with the Athenians, as also that of the Giants with the Gods, and upon her Slippers the Fight between the Centaurs and Lapi∣thae. The Athenians, says Elian, wore Purple Gar∣ments, having their Hairs tyed with Ribbons of Gold and Silver, adorned with golden Grashoppers. Thucydides in the beginning of his History, calls the Athenians,  that is to say, Wearers of Grashoppers, and the reason he gives for it is this. He says 'twas to distin∣guish Free-men from Slaves. Lucian tells us the same thing. Tretzes teaches us, that the Grashoppers which the Athenians wore, were to shew, that they were great Speakers, and very prolix in their Discourse. ATHLETAE, Wrestlers, or Combatants, courageous and strong Men, who addicted themselves to bodily Exercises, as running, fighting and others of like Natures, among the Greeks, and Romans, and for whom the Ancients appointed Prizes. These Athletae were in great esteem among the Greeks but were infamous at Rome, for some time Ulpian the Lawyer freed them from the Marks of Infamy. This is the way, by which they were matched in the Plays of the Cirque. They took an Earthen Pot, into which they put certain Balls about the bigness of a Bean, on which was set an A, or a B, or some other Let∣ter, and always two Letters alike. Then the Champions come forth one after another, and made their Prayer to Jupiter, before they drew, and then put their Hands into the Pot, but the Herald of the Plays stretch∣ing out of his Rod hindered them from read∣ing their Tickets till they were all drawn. Presently one of the Judges, or some other Person took every ones Ball, and joined them together who had the same Letters; If the Number of the Athletae were odd, he that had the single Letter was to fight with the Conqueror, which was no small Advan∣tage, because he came fresh to the Com∣bate with him who was weary.Their Food was Barly Bread, which was the Reason they were called Hordearii, i. e. Barly-eaters, and al∣so another sort of Bread, called Coliphia, of , Membra, and , Robusta, because it made their Bodies strong and robust. Some fed them with soft Cheese, and Dromeus was the first who fed them with Meat according to the Testimony of Pausanias in his Eliaca, who gives us the History of Four famous Athletae
of extraordinary Strength, of whom the first was POLYDAMAS the Thessalian, who in his Youth encountred and slew a Lion of a vast Bigness, which harboured in Mount Olympus, and infested the whole Country round about. Another time he took a fierce Bull by the hinder part, and pulled off both his Feet, and with one hand he stopped a Cha∣riot in its full Course. The 2d was Milo of Crotona, who knocked down a Bull with a Blow of his Fist, after he had carried him a long way upon his Back. The third was THEAGENES the Thasian, who took a Brazen Image off its pedestal, and car∣ried it a great way. The 4th. was EUTHI∣MUS a Native of Locris in Italy, who fought against an evil Spirit, which very much di∣sturbed the Inhabitants of Themessa, and con∣quered him, insomuch that he married the Damosel, who was carrying to be sacrificed to it, and freed the Country from that mischie∣vous Daemon. ATHOS, Mount Athos, situate between Macedonia and Thrace. Xerxes cut a way through it to make a Passage for his Army, when he went into Greece. Lucian relates that the Ar∣chitect Dinocrates, who was in the Army of Alexander, offered him to cut Mount Athos into the Shape of a Man, who should hold in his left Hand a great City, and in his right Hand a Cistern which should receive the Wa∣ters of all the Rivers which fell from that Mountain, and to convey them into the Sea. Alexander commended his curious Design, but did not allow of the Place, because there were no Fields about the City to furnish the Inhabitants with Corn for their Subsi∣stance. ATIS, a Young Man of Phrygia, of extraordinary Beauty, who was passionately loved by Cybele the Mother of the Gods. The Poets make her run in a Fury to Mount Ida, being transported with Love, and searching the Forests and Rocks for him, riding in a Chariot drawn by Lions, and followed by the Corybantes, who make the Mountain resound her Cries, and Revellings; she made him Overseer of her Sacrifices upon condition that he should preserve his Virginity, but having violated it, Cybele to punish him for it, made him so mad that he wounded and would have slain himself, if that Goddess had not changed him into a Pine-tree. There is a Temple in Syria, saith Lucian, dedicated to Rhea, or Cybele, by Atis, who first taught Men her Mysteries, for all that the Lydians, Phrygians, and Samothracians knew of them, came from him who was a Lydian. After Rhea had made him an Eunuch, he lived like a Woman, and assumed that Ha∣bit, and in this Garb he went over the World, and divulged her Ceremonies, and Mysteries. When he came into Syria, and saw that the Temple on this side of Euphrates would not entertain him; he stayed there, and built a Temple to the Goddess, as is to be ob∣served from many things for her Statue stands upon a Chariot drawn by Lions, she holding a Drum in her Hand, being adorn'd with Towers, as the Lydians paint her. By the Fable of Atis the Favourite of Cy∣bele, who was afterwards made an Eunuch died, and was raised again. Julius Finicus under∣stands Corn, and the other Fruits of the Earth, which are cut with an Hook, or Sic∣kle, die in the Granary, and rise again by the Seed which is sown in the Earth. ATIS, or CAPETUS SYLVI∣US, or AEGYPTUS. Dionysius named him, Capetus; Eusebius, and Livy call him on∣ly Atis, and Cassiodorus terms him, Aegyptus, a King of the Latins, over whom he reigned 39 Years. ATLAS, King of Mauritania, who be∣cause he was much addicted to Astronomical Observations, gave occasion to the Fables, which will have Atlas hold up the Heaven, and that Hercules took his Place for a Day to ease him, because Atlas being the first, who taught the Course of the Sun and Moon, the setting and rising of the Stars, and all the Motion of the Heavens, which he had disco∣ver'd with much Ingenuity and Labour. The Painters and Carvers in Memory of it have represented him as holding up the Heavens upon his Shoulders. Ovid tells us, that Atlas was changed into a Mountain by Perseus, at his Return from his Expedition against the Gorgens, for refusing to entertain him, but Hyginus says, that Atlas having sided with the Giants in the War against Jupiter, when he had overcome them, the God con∣strained Atlas for favouring them to bear the Heavens upon his Shoulders. Indeed there were 3 Atlas's, the 1st. King of Italy, the Father of Electra the Wife of Co∣rytus. The 2d. was of Arcadia, the Father of Maia, of whom Mercury was born. The 3d. of Mauritania, Brother of Prometheus, of whom we have already spoken. Herodotus knew no other Atlas, but a Moun∣tain in Africa, which seemed to touch the Heavens by its heighth, so that the neighbou∣ring People called it the Pillar of Heaven, and derived their Name from it. But Dio∣dorus Siculus tell us, that in the furthermost Parts of Africk, Hesperus, and Atlas two Bro∣thers had Flocks of Sheep with red Wooll, from whom the Poets took occasion to make
these red Sheep to pass for golden Apples, because the Greek Word  signifies Sheep and Apples. Hesperides gave his Daugh∣ter Hasperis in Marriage to Atlas, who had 7 Daughters by her, who were called Hespe∣rides or Atlantiades, who Busiris King of Aegypt stole, but Hercules travelling through Africk conquered Busiris, recovered Atlas's Daughters, and restored them to their Fa∣ther. Atlas to require this Favour taught Hercules Astrology, in which he grew famous, and gave him a Celestial Globe. Hercules carried this Science and Knowledge into Greece, and the Greeks feigned that Atlas sup∣ported the Heavens, and was released from it by Hercules. ATLANTIDES, the Daughters of Atlas, whom the Greeks call'd Pleiades, and the Latines, Vergiae, were plac'd among the Stars. They shew the convenient time for putting to Sea, and are a sign of the Spring. ATREUS, the Son of Pelops, King of Mycenae and Argos. He made his Brother Toyestes eat two of his Children at a Feast, viz. Tantalus and Plisthenes, to be avenged of him. Tayestes made an escape fearing the Cruelty of his Brother Aireus. The Poets tell us, that the Sun abhorring so great a Wickedness, hid himself, and retreated back into the East. Aegysthaeus, the natural Son of Thyestes re∣venged the Death of his Brother upon Atreus, whom he slew with his Son Agamemnon, at his Return from the Siege of Troy, by a cor∣respondence with Clytemnestra his Wife. ATRIUM, is generally taken for all the inward parts of the House. Virgil uses this Word in the same Signification as Vitru∣vis when he writes. Porticibus longis fugit, & vacua atria lustrat. Aeneid. lib. II. v. 528.Apparet Domus nitus, & atria long a patescunt. Ibid. v. 483. For 'tis easy to see, that Virgil in that Place understands by Atria, all that can be seen with∣in the House, through the Gate when it is open, as the Courts and Porches. Vitruvius applies to all the kinds of Atriums two Ranks of Pillars, which make two Wings, that is to say, three Walks, one large One in the middle, and two narrow Ones on each side. ATROPOS, one of the three Desti∣nies, which cut the Thread of Mans Life. See PARCAE. ATTALUS, King of Pergamus, who at his Death made the People of Rome Heirs of his Kingdom, and of all his Wealth by Will, which raised a great Disturbance at Rome, and caused a war in Asia, for Tiberius Gracchus Tribune of the People, demanded that the Goods of Attalus might be distribu∣ted among the People. The Senate opposed this Demand, and ordered the Consul to put Gracchus to Death, which he refused to execute, but Scipio Nassica Chief Priest of Jupiter, throwing his Garment upon his Head, said, they that love the Good and Preservation of the Com∣mon-wealth, let them follow me, and going immediatly up to the Capitol, he was follow∣ed by the Senators, who slew Gracchus and all his Parties in their Seats in the Capitol. Aristonicus, who affirmed himself to be the Son of Attalus, and in that Quality thought to enjoy the Estare, which the Romans claim∣ed as Legatees of the King, was an occasion of a 2d war in Asia. ATTELLANAE, See ATELLA∣Ae. ATTILIUS REGULUS, a Ro∣man Consul, who won many Victories against the Carthaginians. He slew with a Stone ost out of a Balista, a Serpent of a very great bigness and sent the Skin to Rome, which was 26 Foot long. The Carthaginians sent an Embassy to Sparta to desire a General, who sent them Xanthippus, who defeated the Ro∣man Army, and took Regulus Prisoner. But after they had lost a Sea Fight, and suffered several other misfortunes, they sent their Em∣bassadours to Rome, with Regulus their Priso∣ner, to desire a Peace, but he disswaded them from it. This generous Roman would return to Carthage to keep his word; the Carthaginians being angry with him, because he had not obtained a Peace for them, put him to death by a new kind of Punishment. They drove an Hogshead full of great Nails, and having put him into it, rowled him a∣bout so long, till he died with the repeated Blows. There was one Marcus ATTILIUS, a Duum-vir, whose Office it was to keep the Books of the Sibyls, whom Tarquinius caused to be thrown into the Sea, sow'd up in a Lea∣thern Bag, because he had permitted Petro∣nius Sabinius to copy out these Books, and this manner of Punishment was afterward infli∣cted on Parricides. Et justissimè quidem, quia pari vindicatâ parentum, ac Deorum violatio, expian∣da est. It being just that an Offence against Parents should be punished after the same manner as an Offence against the Gods. ATYS, see ATIS. AVENTINUS, Mount Aventine, at Rome, which was 13300 Foot in Compass. Authors give us several Originals of the Word. Naevius will have the Name Aventius to come ab avibus from the Birds of Prey of
Tyber, and the adjoining Marshes, who roost∣ed there at Night. Virgil seems to confirm this Opinion speaking of it. Dirarum nidis domus Opportuna volucris. Aeneid. Lib. VIII. v. 233. Titus Livius maintains that this Mountain was called Aventine from AVENTI∣NUS, King of Albany who was buried there. Others think 'twas called Aventine, ab adventu, from the great concourse of People, who came thither to sacrifice to Diana, who had a Temple built there. This Mountain had se∣veral other Names according to Festus, it was called MURCIUS, or MURCUS, Fabius Pictor calls it also REMURIUS, from Remus, to whom Romulus consecrated it after his Death, not permitting any Persons to dwell upon it, because the Auguries were not favourable to his Brother. It was also called the Hill of Diana, because of her Tem∣ple that stood upon it. Ancus enclosed it with Walls and gave it to the Latins for their Habitation, but it was not reckoned within the Precincts of Rome, till the time of the Emperor Claudius, about 800 Years from the Foundation of it, contrary to the Judgment of the Diviners, who held that Place as un∣fortunate, because of that which happened to Remus, who was buried there, and because of the Birds of Prey that lodged there. Upon this Mountain stand, besides the Temple of Diana, those of Bona Dea, Victo∣rious Hercules, Queen Juno, Luna, Victoria, Libertas, and an Altar to Jupiter Elicius. AVERNUS, the Lake Avernus in Cania near Baiae and Putoli. This Lake sent forth such ill Vapours, that a Bird could not fly over it but it died, Fabulous Anti∣quity hath dedicated this Lake to Pluto, and believed that it was the Entrance into Hell. AVERRUNCUS DEUS, the God which averts Misfortunes, and evil Acci∣dents. The God to whom the Romans pray∣ed to avert, and remove any Evils that threatned them. Apollo and Hercules were of the Number of these Gods among the Greeks, as Castor and Pollux among the Romans, and they were from hence called , that is to say who turned away Evil. AVES, Birds, which the Sooth-sayers consulted in all Undertakings of the Com∣mon-wealth, observing their Chirping, Fly∣ing, and the manner of their feeding, and from hence they foretold, the good, or ill Success of their Attempts. There were some Birds of a good and happy Omen, and others which they called Oscines from whose chirping they presaged, and others called, Praepetes, whose flight they observed. An Eagle flying on the right Hand was an happy Omen, on the contrary, if a Vulture happen to overturn an Eagles Nest, and tread upon the Eaglets, this signifies Trouble and Dis∣grace, as it happened to Tarquinius Superbus, and to Dionysius of Syracuse, who lost his Kingdom after an Eagle had taken a Javelin by Force out of the Hands of one of his Souldiers and cast it into the Water. But I shall speak of this more at large under the word AUGUR. AUFEIA, a Fountain, whose Waters were excellent to drink. It has its Rise in the Mountains of Abruzzo, and runs up to Rome, after is has passed through the Country of the Marsi. And the Lakes Celanus. Ancus Martius brought it to Rome, and for that rea∣son 'tis called after his Name, Aqua Mar∣tia. AUGEAS, or AUGIAS, King of Elis, rich in great Cattel, having Stables, in which he kept continually 3000 Oxen, inso∣much, that the Dung and Filth which was heap'd together for several Years, filled the Air with Infection. Augeas agreed with Hercules to cleanse his Stables, allowing him the tenth part of his Flocks. Hercules perfor∣med it by the means of the River Alpheus, by turning an Arm of it, and making it run through the Stable, it carried away all the Dung. This made the Stable of Augeas to become a Proverb, to describe an infamous Man full of all sorts of Vices, as Lucian has done in his false Prophet. According to the Example of Hercules I will labour to cleanse the Stable of Augeas, and I will shew you some Filthiness, by which you may guess how great a Quantity of Dung there was which 3000 Oxen had raised in the space of several Years, but I fear we shall be both ashamed, I for discovering so many Villa∣nies, and you for inviting me to it. Augias not making a graceful Acknow∣ledgment of the Service that Hercules had done him, and refusing to make good his Word, Hercules slew him. AUGILES, a People of Cyrene in Afri∣ca, who worshipped no other Gods, but dead Mens Ghosts, whom they invoked in all their Affairs, and in all their Underta∣kings, and by whom they swore sitting upon their Sepulchers. AUGUR, a Sooth-sayer, which comes ab avium garritu, the Chirping of Birds. Ne∣vertheless this word is of a more large Signi∣fication, being taken for all those, that foretel things to come by the Heavens, or the effects of Nature. This Art is very ancient, for it is forbid∣den by Moses in Leviticus, Chap. 17 and in
Deut. Chap. 18. It was in very great esteem among the Chaldeans, who made it a particu∣lar Profession, the Greeks learned it of them, and afterwards the Tujcans became very expert at it. The Romans valued it so highly, and thought so well of this Science, that by a Decree of the Senate it was expresly ordered, that the ad∣vice of the Augurs should be exactly followed, without the least deviation from it, as we learn from Cicero in his 2d. Book de Legibus AUGURI PARENTO, Romulus did not begin to build Rome, till after he had consulted the Augurs, and the other Kings so lowed his Example in this, having for that end sent for the most skrful Augurs of Heturia, to instruct the young Ro∣man Nobility in that Science, for they did not think it fit to make the Art common, least it should become contemptible, and mercenary, as Cicero tells us, Nè ars tanta prop∣ter  hominum à Religionis Autoritate ab∣durtur ad mercedem, atque quaestum. Romulus made a College of 3 Augurs only taken out of the 3 Tribes, into which he divided the People of Rome at first. Servius Tullus added a 4th. They were all of the Linage of the No∣bility, to the Year 454, when under the Cousulship of Q. Apulius. and M. Valerius Cor∣vinus, the Tribunes of the People demanded that the Commonalty should be raised to the Dignity of the Augurs, which was granted af∣ter some Contest, and five of the People were ad∣vanc'd to that Office, and so the College of Augurs was made up of nine Persons till the time of Sylla, who increas'd the number to  according to Florus, and Titus Livius, and according to others to 24. They were gover∣ned by a Person who was called Magister Col∣lecti Augurum. Besides the publick Augurs the Emperors had some peculiar to themselves, which had their dwelling in their Pa∣lace. The Augurs were at first chosen by the Peo∣ple divided into Curtae or Parishes, yet we find that when any one of them died, two of the most ancient chose one of those who stu∣died the Science of Augury, and presented him to the whole College, who received him af∣ter Examination, and consulted an Augury upon that account to know the Will of the Gods. Nevertheless we have an Example in Titus  of an Augur chosen by the People, but some say it happened only because there was a Contest among the Augurs about the Ele∣ction, for 'tis evident, that the College had Right to choose till the Year 651, when Ma∣rius being Consul the third time, and Lucius Aurelius Ocestes, . Domitius Aenebarbus, Tri∣bune of the People being angry with the Au∣gures, because they did not choose him to that Dignity, caused a Law to be made cal∣led Domitia, which gave the right of choo∣sing the Augurs, Chief-Priests, and other Priests to the people of Rome assembled by their Tribes, that he might make the grea∣ter Confusion, and satisfie his own Passion the more, as Cicero speaks in his 2d. Book of the Agrarian Law. This was easy for him to do in the Consul∣ship of Marius, who owed his Dignity and Fortune to the Tribunes of the People. Sometimes after Sylla repealed the Domitian Law, and restored to the Auguros the Right of Ele∣ction, but Titus Atticus Labienus Tribune of the People under the Consulship of Cicero and Antonius, repealed this last Law, and re∣stored the Domitian, which he effected by the Solicitations of Julius Caesar, who thought that if he restored to the People who loved him, the Liberty of choosing Chief-Priests and Augurs, he should himself be infallibly chosen Chief-Priest, which accordingly hap∣pened after the Death of Metellus Pius, when Caesar was dead, Antonius being Consul, he ab∣rogated the Domitian Law a second time, and received Sylla's, that he might have M. Aemi∣lius Lepidus chosen Chief Priest, whose Son he had married to his Daughter. The Face of Affairs soon changed again, and the Domitian Law was restored by a De∣cree of the Senate, which nulied all the Acts of Antonius made on that account, in the Consul∣ship of C. Vicius Pansa, and Aulus Hirtius. but Augustus having put an end to the Civil Wars, abolished the Domitian Law for ever, and re∣siored the ancient Privileges to the Augun and other Priests, till at last the Emperors assuming an absolute Authority, took to themselves the right of making Chief-Priests and Augurs, which continued till the Empe∣ror Tcodosius as is evident in Pliny Junior, who requested of Trajan that he would plse to honour him with the Dignity of one of the 7 Eplones, which were a sort of Priests, of whom we shall speak in their proper Place. The Person who was chosen to be an An∣gur, ought to be of a blameless Life, and fair Reputation, as well as without any bodily Defect. The Ordination of an Augur was not to be reversed, and he could not be de∣prived of the Dignity upon any account whatsoever. He made a Magnificent Feast at his Entrance upon the Office, to all the rest of the College called Caena Auguralis. Their Authority and Power sufficiently appears by this Constitution taken out of the Law of the XII Tables, where it is expresly oered, that nothing should be undertaken without them, and whatever they approve of
condemn shall be approved or condemned. Quae Augur injusta, nefasta, vitiosa, dirave dix∣erit, irrita, infestaque sunto, quique non paruerit capitale esto They had Power to dissolve As∣semblies and remove Magistrates, as Levy re∣lates in several Places. Cnsuli Augures vi∣tiosum Dictatorem pronunciarunt. The Judgment of one Augur only was not to be depended on, but all the College being met, was to pronounce the Judgment together, upon the matter propounded, as Alexander ab Alexandro says. Sed tamen soli Auguri sine Collegio auspicia interpre∣tari non licuit, totum enim Cellegium censere, & sen∣tentiam ferre decebat. Which was enacted to pre∣vent any Inconvenience that might arise, by the Ignorance or Malice of a single Person, who might be corrupted. The Senate might meet in no Place, but what was consecrated by them, and if while it was assembled, they observed any Sign of ill Luck, they had a Power to dismiss it, as also to depose any Magistrate, when his Ele∣ction was made contrary to the Solemnity of their Auguries. There were several Sorts of Auguries, and diverse Ceremonies observed in taking of them. To understand this, we are to know, that the Word AUGUR, taken in a general Signification, comprizeth Divination by the Entraits of Beasts, which they slew; but to take it in its proper and natural Signification, it signifies only, a Prediction by Birds, of which there are three Sorts, AUGURIUM, AUSPICIUM, and TRIPUDIUM SOLISTIMUM, When the Auguries favoured any Action, they called them Prospera, and the Augures being consulted, answered id aves addicunt; but when they opposed it, they termed them ad∣versa, infausia, & piacularia, and the Augur answered, id aves abdicunt. If the Auguries presented themselves before the Augurs sought them, they were called Ob∣lativa, but if they appeared not till begged, they were termed impetrita The Auguries which were taken from cer∣tain Appearances in the Air, were the most considerable, and solemn of all others, as not being capable to be reiterated the same Day, and dissolved Assemblies, if a Magistrate de∣sired to prevent an Assembly of the People, or put it off to another time, he would set up in the Cross-ways that he observed the Signs of the Heavens that day, and so 'twas wholly put off; allo die dixerit, But the Senate perceiving the Abuse, which that Custom had brought in, ordered, that notwithstanding these Notices, an Assembly summoned in due form, should not desist from sitting. This Sort of Augury, which they called Augurium de Caelo, or, servare de Caelo, was ta∣ken from extraordinary and sudden Signs, which they observed in the Heaven. Now among these Signs there were some called Bruta, or Vana, which soreshewed no∣thing, others were called Fatidica, which por∣tended Good or Evil, and of these last, some were called Consiliara, which happened when they were deliberating about any Affair, and seemed to advise it, others Auctoritativa, or Au∣thoritatis, which came after the thing done, and confirmed or approved it. Lastly, there were others called; Postularia, which obliged to repeat the Sacrifices, and other Monitoria, which admonished what to avoid. All times, and every Day of the Year were not proper to take Auguries. Plutarch tells us, that Metellus the Chief-Priest, for∣bad to take Auguries after the Month of August, because the Birds shed their Feathers at that time: Or in any Month of the Year imme∣diately after the Ides, because the Moon then began to decrease, or on any Day after Noon. The Place on which an Augary was taken, was a rising Ground, and for that Reason was called, Templum, Arx, or Auguraculum, ac∣cording to Festus. There was a Field set apart for it a little distance from Rome, called Ager effatns, as Servins upon Virgil observes. When all things were fitly disposed to take an Augury, and after all Ceremonies were performed, the Augur entred into his Tent or Pavilion, cloathed with his Augural Robe, called Laena or Trabea, holding in his right Hand his Augural Staff called Lituus, crooked at the top much like a Bishops, or Abbots Crosier, where being ser down, he casts his Eyes round him, and divides the Heaven in∣to Four Parts with his Staff, drawing a Line from the East, named Antica, to the West, named Postica, and another Cross it from, South to North, called Dextra and Sinistra. This Ceremony being performed he sacri∣ficed to the Gods, making this Prayer to them, as it is related to us by Livy, at the Election of Numa. Jupiter Pater, si est fas hunc Numam Pompi∣lium cujus ego caput teneo, Regem Romae esse, ut tua signa nobis certa & clara sint inter eos fines quos feci. This Prayer being made, the Augur re∣turned to his Seat and ooked about very at∣tentively to observe from what Part, and in what manner the Sign from Heaven ap∣peared. There was a deep Silence for that time, every one joining his Prayers and Vows to the Prayers and Vows of the Augur. This
shews us the meaning of that Latin Expres∣sion, sedere Augurem, which is as much as to say to attend the Augury, or some sign from Heaven to know the Will of the Gods about any undertaking. When he saw any Lightning appear, or heard any Clap of Thunder from the left Side, that was taken for a favourable Pre∣sage, as Virgil teaches us. Audiit & Coeli genitor departe serenâ. Intonuit Laevum, Aeneid. lib. IX. v. 630. Donatus explaining these Verses assures us, that what they heard from the left side came from the right of the Gods. Quia sacrificant is Latus laevum, dextrum est ejus, qui postulata lar∣gitur. If there appeared nothing but a Wind, they took notice from what Quarter it came, supposing that the Winds were the Mes∣sengers of the Gods, which discovered their Will to Men, as Statius teaches us, &c. —Ventisque aut alite visa Bellorum proferre diem— Which is confirmed by Luctatius, who tells us that the Augurs knew future things, by the blowing of the Wind. Solent Augures vento∣rum flatibus futura cognoscere. When the Augur had received some favou∣rable Presages, he came down from the Place on which he stood, and declared it to the People in these Words. Id aves addicunt, the Gods approve it, the contrary is, id aves abdicunt, the Gods disallow it. They observed, that the Gods confirmed a Presage by some new Sign, as Virgil makes Aeneas speak to Anchises. Da deinde auxilium Pater, atque haec omnia firma. Aeneid. Lib. II. v. 691. All that we have said about taking Auguries from the Signs of Heaven, is likewise pra∣ctised in the Auguries taken from the chirp∣ing or flight of Birds. The Augur distin∣guishes with his Augural Staff the Regions of the Heaven and Earth, in which compass he intends to take an Augury, having first made a Prayer to the Gods. This Augury is cal∣led Oscinum, and they that take it Os∣cines. The different manner of the flying of Birds, makes them sometimes be called Sinistrae, an ill Omen, sometimes Funebres or Arculae, Fatal, and which prohibit any Action; sometimes Deviae; which shew a Difficulty in the Execu∣tion; sometimes Romores, which hinder it, and sometime Inebrae, which betoken some Impediment, and lastly, sometimes Alterae, when a second Presage destroys the first. The Ancients were so much addicted to these Superstitions, that they never would undertake any thing without taking a sign from the Birds. In the great Affairs of the Common-wealth, they consulted the Signs of the Heavens, in those of Wars, the chattering, and flight of Birds, and their manner of eating their Meat, and for that end they fed Poultry in Coops, which they called holy Pullen, and which they fetched commonly from the Island of Eubaea, and he that had the keeping of these Poultry, was called Pullarius, saith Cicero. The Consul gave him Notice, who had the Care of this Poultry to get all things ready to take the sign; then he flung Corn to the Poultry, if they eat it greedily, moving fast with their Feet, and crowding about, this was a favourable Omen, but if on the con∣trary, they refused to eat or drink, it was an unfortunat Sign. This is the Form which they used in taking a Sign. They always consulted some skil∣ful Persons in those sorts of Divinations. Quinte Fabi, te volo mihi in Auspicio esse, or in Auspicium adhibere, dicito si silentium esse videtur. Quintus Fabius, I desire that you would assist me in taking a Sign; tell me, if all the Ceremonies used in the like Case, have been exactly observed, and if the Sign be not defective: He answered, Silentium esse videtur, nothing is wanting. DICITO, si pascuntur Aves? quae? aut ubi? Attulit in cavea pullos Pullarius. Tell me, whether the Birds eat or no? They eat and the Poultry keeper hath brought the Pullen into the Coop. The Veneration for Auguries, was so strong∣ly imprinted on the Minds of the Ro∣mans, that they looked upon them as Impious Persons, who contemned or derided them, attributing the Misfortunes which happened to Claudius Pulcher, to the Anger of the Gods, who seeing that the Poultry would not eat, threw them into the Sea, saying in Raillery, They'l drink at least if they will not eat. There was a College of 300 Augurs, at Lyons. AUGUSTUS, Octavius Caesar surna∣med Augustus, by the Senate, an Epithet, which the Romans gave to their Gods, as well as Emperors. He was the Son of Octavius the Praetor, and Accia, great Grand Child of Ju∣lius Caesar who adopted him. Observe what Vitruvius says in his Preface to his Six Books of Architecture, which he dedicated to him. When I consider, Sir, that by Ver∣tue of your divine Genius, you are become Master of the whole World, that your in∣vincible Valour has vanquished all your Enemies, and gloriously protected your Subjects, for which all Nations pay Hom∣age to you, that the People and Senate of
Rome do build the Assurance of the Peace which they enjoy, upon the Wisdom of your Government only. When I reflect upon the large Extent of your Mind, whose cares are not confined to the Affairs of State, but has regard to the most minute advantages of the publick, I observe, that you are not content to make the City of Rome the Mistress of so many Provinces, as have submitted to her, but you make her admirable for the excellent Structure of her great Buildings, and that you will have their Magnificence to equal the Majesty of your Empire. Indeed there never was a Prince, that was more Magnificent in his Buildings, or more Liberal than Augustus, having built many Temples to the Gods, it Rome and else∣where. He composed several ingenious Works, which discover his Personal Learning, but they are lost through the Injuries of Time, As his Exhortations to Philosophy. 13 Books of his Life, the Funeral Orations of Julia his Aunt, Octavia his Sister, Drusus Marcellus and Agrippa, his Treatises of Government, a Po∣em on Sicily, the Tragedies of Ajax and Achil∣les, and several other Greek and Latin Works, which he read, says Suetonius, in the Senate, and before the People. Being Consul the sixth time, and seeing his Power established by the Defeat of Lepidus and Autonius, which put an end to that cruel Tri-umverate, he abolished the Laws which he had made in his Usurpation, and made others, says Tacitus, by which the People might live in Peace under his Empire: He died at Nola in the 67th. Year of his Age, and left only one Daughter, and she very loose and wicked. His Will was brought to the Senate by the Vestal Virgins; he made Tiberius and Livia his Heirs, adopting him into the Family of the Caesars, and giving her the Ti∣tle of Empress. He gave to the People of Rome, 43500000 Sesterces, a 1000 to every Souldier of his Guards, and 300 to them in the Legions. His Body was carried to the Fire upon the Senators Shoulders, and burnt in Mars's Field, which he had appointed for his Burial. He refused the Dignity of Dicta∣tor and King, and was content with a more modest Title, the Prince of the Senate. His Funeral being performed, Temples, and Di∣vine Honours were appointed him, not only at Rome, but also almost in all Places with Sacrifices and Priests. A Society of 25 Priests was instituted in Imitation of that, which Titus Tatius introdu∣ced long before at Rome, to preserve some∣thing of the Religion of the Sabs. This Society consisted of 21 of the chief Men of the City, which were chosen by Lot, and Ti∣berius, Drusus, Glaudius and Germanicus were added to them. One Month in the Roman Calendar, which before was called Sextilis, was named from him, Augustus. He was the first that bore the name of Pater Patriae, according to the Te∣stimony of Pliny, which Title also Ovid gives him. Sancte Pater Patriae, tibi plebs, tibi Curiae nomen, Hoc dedit. Fast. Lib. II. v. 127. Tiberius his Successor began to build him 2 Temple at Rome, which was finished by Cali∣gula, and repaired by Antoninus Pius, as his Me∣dals shew. AUGUSTALES, and SODALES AUGUSTALES. Augustines, or a Society of Priests, instituted in Honour of Augustus, after the Romans in Flattery had ranked him amongst the Number of the Immortal Gods. It was the Emperor Tiberius, who founded this So∣ciety or College, which he called AUGU∣STALES, to offer Sacrifices in the Tem∣ple he had built for him, appointing a Reve∣nue for their Subsistance. This was not on∣ly done at Rome, but also in the Provinces of the Gauls, and chiefly at the City of Lyons, where he had a Magnificent Temple built to him at the Expence of Twelve Cities, in which was a Statue for every Province, to to shew to Posterity; that they all had contributed to the adorning of that Tem∣ple. 'Tis credible, that that Temple stood where now is the Abby of Aisnay at that Place, where the Saone and the Rhone join, for there are yet some Ruins of it, which are Cast Pillars, as is justified by a certain an∣cient Marble, which is to be seen at Lyons in the Church of St. Peter belonging to the Nuns. JOVI OP. MAX. Q. ADICINNIUS URBICI FL MARTINUS SEQ. SACERDOS ROMAE ET AUGUST. Ad aram ad Confluentes Araris, & Rhodani FLAMEN  VIR IN CIVITATE SE∣QUANORUM. Thus Flattery and Superstition increasing, Communities of Priests were at length insti∣tuted in Honour of the Emperors whom they deified after their Death, and called them by the general Name of Augustales, or by the Name of the Emperor to whose Service they were consecrated, as FLAVII, ADRIAN ALES, AELIANI, AN∣TONINI.
But that which made these Societies more eminent and famous was this, that the new Em∣perors themselves entred among them in Imi∣tation of Tiberius, who entred himself into the number of the Priests of Augustus, and caused Drusus Germanicus and Claudius to do the like. Nero also did the same, and therein was fol∣lowed by other Emperors. AUGUSTALIA, Feasts, celebra∣ted Octob. 12. for the happy Return of Au∣gustus to Rome, after he had settled Sicily, Greece, Syria, Asia, and Parthia in Peace, and to that end an Altar was built with this Title, Fortunae Reduci. AUGUSTALES, Plays instituted in Honour of Augustus. The publick Plays, says Tacitus, newly consecrated to the Memory of Augustus were interrupted at the first Show by the Emulation of the Actors. This Prince had before shewed, that he was much pleased with these sorts of Diversions in Favour of Maecenas, who was passionately in Love with a Mimick, named Batillus. AURELIUS, Marcus Aucelius, the Roman Emperor, who was adopted by Anto∣ninus. His Medals represent him with a grave and modest Countenance, which the Philosophers affected. He imitated them with their long Beard, and was surnamed the Philosopher, to honour him for the Incli∣nation which he had for their Learning and way of living. The title of the Speech of Athenagoras who was sent to this Prince to make an Apology for the Christian Religion, is in these Terms. TO THE EMPE∣RORS MARCUS AURELIUS ANTONINUS, AND LUCIUS AURELIUS COMMODUS, ARMENIANS, SARMATIANS, AND WHICH IS MORE, PHI∣LOSOPHERS. And the beginning of the Life of Marcus Anrelius written by Capitolinus is in these Terms. MARCO ANTONINO IN OMNI VITA PHILOSO∣PHANTI VIRO. He also often re∣peats this Sentence of Plato. That those Sates are most flourishing where Philosophers ru∣led, or where the Rulers studied Philosophy. He was a meek Prince, a Wise, Prudent, Sober, Liberal, and great Captain. He was sickly through his Application to Study. AURELIA PORTA, the Aure∣lian Gate, above the Janiculus, so called from one Aurelius, a Person who had been Consul. 'Tis called at present, St. Panecace Gate AURELIANUS, an Hungarian, (some assign Dacia or Mysia for his Country) a Man of an obscure Birth. He was raised to the Throne by the Legions, after he had passed through all the Offices of the Army with Honour, which was the Reason that the Senate and People received him with great Applause. He subdued the Scythians and Marcomanni, after which Victory he exercised great Cruel∣ties at Rome, upon all Sorts of People. Ne∣vertheless he did one Act of Clemency, when he took the City of Tyana in Cappadocia. He met with so great Oppositions, that he swore in his Wrath, he would not leave so much as a Dog alive. He got into the City by the Treachery of One of the Inha∣bitants, and when the Souldiers began to plunder, and put all the Citizens to the Sword, according to his Resolution he told them, that he would allow them to kill all the Dogs. He made War with Zenobia, who kept the Eastern Empire after her Husband Odenatus. The Queen knew all the Oriental Languages perfectly, and spoke the Greek and Latin in their Purity. Trebellius Pollio says, she was the fairest and most valiant of all Women, she made the whole East to tremble, beat the Leiutenants of the Emperor Gallienus, and maintained a stout War against the Romans, in which the Emperor Aurelian conquered herand carried her Captive to Rome. Seve∣ral blamed him for this Action, but he wrote a Letter to the Senate and the People of Rome to excuse himself, and in it gives such a Commendation of this unfortunate Princess, as if she were one of the most formi∣dable Enemies, that the Empire ever had. After this famous Victory, Aurelian built a Temple for the Sun at Rome, and enriched it with the Spoils of the Palmyrians, and the Images of the Sun and Belus which he brought from Palmyra, as Herodian assures us. He wasslain between Byzantium and Heraclea, as he went to the War against the Persians, by the most valiant Men of his Army, who believ'd this a false Slander of his Secretary, named Menestheus, that he sought their Lives in the 6th, or 7th year of his Reign. AURIGARII, AURIGAE, AURIGATORES, Coach-men, who in the publick Plays of the Cirque disputed with the Competitors, with whom they contended in driving the Chariots for the Prizes, which were proposed. They made up certain Colleges, or Societies, which are distinguish∣ed by Colours, of which we read the 4 Prin∣cipal in Geuters Inscriptions, viz. Russatam, the Red, Prasinam, the Green, Venetam, the Blew, and Albatam, the White. The Anci∣ents thought that the 4 Seasons of the Year were represented by them, in which Nature takes a new Habit, or as we now speak, eve∣ry Troop representing one of the Seasons by
its colour, the Green, the Spring, the Red, the Summer, the Blew the Autumn, and the White, the Winter, because it is covered with Snow and Ice. AURORA, the Mother of Memnon. The Poets have feigned her to be the Day-break, which gives notice of the rising of the Sun above our Hemesphere, as Orpheus speaks, . She was the Daughter of Hyperion, and Thia, as Hesiod tells us in his Theogonia, and according to others of Titan, and the Earth. Some give her the Epithet of , Torch bearer, because of the Light she imparts to the Earth, as also , clear shining, because of her Brightness. The Poets represent her drawn in a Chariot, having her Fingers dropping with Dew. The Fable is that having one Day at the rising of the Sun cast her Eye upon Ti∣thonus the Brother of Laomedox, a young Prince of singular Beauty, she fell in Love with him, and carried him into Aethiopia where she had Memnon by him. AURUM, Gold, a yellow Metal, the most shining, ductile, heavy, and precious of all Metals. It is taken out of the Mines in 3 Forms. 1. Of Grains, of which some are round, others bod and long. 2. In a kind of Stone. 3. In Dust, or Sand. The most famous Country for finding of Gold is Cari∣bana in Peru, and Vallivia in Chili. Pliny says, that Gold was brought into the indies by flying Aunts; but he was misinformed. The Poets have feigned Autmn to be the Son of the Sun, as being its best Production. Pin∣dar says, that Gold is a bright Fire that shines in the Night. Homer compares it to the Graces, for there is nothing so agreeable and welcome as Gold, which Jupiter himself makes use of to gain the Favour of his Mistresses, as he did to Danae, by changing himself into a shower of Gold. Gold was very scarce at Rome at first, but it became more common afterwards. Appian tells us, that ulius Caesar brought from the Gauls to Rome 200 Markes of Gold in 2822 Crowns by the Victories which he had gained there, and this Gold was called Aurum Coronarium. The Gold which the Consul Cepio took out of the Temple of Jupiter at Tholouse, amount∣ing to 9000 0 of Gold, but it proved un∣lucky to him, being defeated by the imbri, whence came the Proverb, AURUM THOLOSANUM, to signifie a fatal Thing, which brings Ill-luck. AUSPICIUM, it was a kind of Au∣gury amongst the Ancients, when they consi∣dered the Fright and Chirping of Birds, to know whether any Undertaking which they were about, would prove Happy, or Unfor tunate. Pliny attributes the Invention of Au∣spicium to Tiresias the Thiban, who studied the Flight of Birds, ab avium aspectu; and of Augur to Caras, ab avium garritu, from their Chirping, and Chattering. Clemens Alexan∣drinus will have the Phrygians to be the first who observed the Flight of Birds, which they called, Praepetes, as those were call'd O∣scines, who observed their Chirping, and man∣ner of Eating. In this Sense we must understand this Verse of Horace, lib. III. Od. 27. Oscinem corvum prece suscitabo Solis ab ortu. The Three most considerable Birds, were the Raven, the Crow, and the Owl, as also the Eagle, Vultur, and Kite. Romulus instituted Auspicia at Rome. AUSPEX, he that took the Auspicium by the flight of Birds, see AUGUR. AUTUMNUS, Autumn, the 3d. Sea∣son of the Year, when they gather the Grapes, and Fruits. Heyrod in his Theogonia makes the Seasons the Daughters of Jupiter, and Taemis, and counts but three, as Orpheus does, in which Phidias follows him, having carved but 3 Statues of these Goddesses. The Aegyptians owned by three, Spring, Summer, and Au∣tumn, allowing each 4 Months, and repre∣senting them by a Rose, an Ear of Corn, and an Apple, or Grape. Nonnus about the end of the Eleventh Book of his Dionysiacks, reckons 4 Seasons in the Year, as does Philo∣satu, Winter, Spring, Summer, Autumn. The Seasons say h, have Eyes of this Colour of dryed Roses, the Daughters of the incon∣stant Year, swift of Foot, as a Storm of Wind. There is at Medon an Autumn of Marble, made by one r. James a Native of Angoulesme, under the Figure of a young Man Crowned with Vine Branches, and Grapes, which he made at Rome in the Year 1550. B. IS the 2d. Letter in the Alphabet in all Languages, the Hebrews call it Beth, and the Greeks, Beta, and the Latines, Be, as the English do, and its Pronunciation imitates the Cry, or Bleeting of Sheep. This Letter is in the number of those Con∣sonants, which we call Mutes, because they have a Sound more low, and indistinct than others. B. and P. have so near a Relation one to a∣nother, that Quintilian tells us, that in obti∣nuit, Reason Requires, that we write a b, but the Ears can hear nothing but a poptinuit. This is the cause that in ancient Inscriptions, and old Glossaries; these two Letters are of∣ten
put one for the other; as apsens, for ab∣sens, obtimus, for optimus, pleps, for plebs, pop∣licus, for publicus, and the like. Hence it is, that we still write suppono, for subpono, oppono, for obpono, and several Nations often pro∣nounce one of these Letters for the other, as the Germans, who say, ponum vinum, for bonum vinum, and the like. The Greeks often change these two Letters, one for the other, and Plutarch assures us, it was usual with the Priests of Delphos to say, , for , and , for . From whence it comes to pass, that as often as it follows an S. we still change b into p. scribo, scripsi, as the Greeks say, , &c. B. says, Priscian, can never be put before S. in any Syllable. 'Tis in conformity to this use that the La∣tins have taken pasco, from , papae, from , buxus from , pedo, from , puteus, from , and the like; as the Greekes have taken  Turris, from the Phaenician word Bourg. 'Tis also common to these two Letters to creep into words without occasion; as ab∣sporto, for asporto obstendit, for ostendit, obstentui for ostentui, and from hence it comes, that from urere, we say comburero, and according to Non∣nius, celebre is used for celere. B, has also a great similitude with V con∣sonant, and hence it is, that when Words are changed into another Language, they are often taken one for another, as , vivo, , vis, , volo, . venio, , vado, , vescor, , vox, , vorax, , voveo. From hence also it comes, that the Greeks sometimes translate those Latin Words, by a B, that begin with V, as , for va∣lre. But this affinity of B with V, does but little favour the Pronunciation of the Spa∣niards, and Gascoiners, who alway pronounce V for B, and B for V. And although this Error be no small one, yet 'tis more ancient, than it is commonly thought; for not only Adamantius speaks ve∣ry particularly of it in Cassiodorus, but we meet with many Examples of it upon Old Marble, as BASE for VASE, CIBI∣CA, for CIVICA, and in like manner V is put for B, VENEFICIUM for BENEFICIUM; SIBE for SIVE. And in the Pandects of Florence, Av eo for ab eo, VOBEM, for BOVEM, VE∣STIAS, for BESTIAS, and the like. But besides this Resemblance that B has with V consonant, it has the same with F, or , for we say Bruges for Fruges, as Cicero observes; from  comes fremo, and on the contrary we say, sifilare for sibilare, from whence come the French word Siffler; af nobis is used for ab nobis, and we still write Suffero for subfero, sufficit for subficit, and suffusio for subfusi. And according to Festus, Album is derived of  asort of white Scurfe, or rough Tettar; and from  comes Ambo. B, among the Greeks is a Numeral Letter, and signifies Two, but when an Acute Accent is set at the bottom of it, it expresses Two Thousand. BAAL, or Bel, is named the most frequently in Scripture of all the False Gods. The Hebrew or Phaenician Word sig∣signifies a Lord. It was commonly used by the Africans in Carthage, as descending from Tyre in Phaenicia, as Servius explains these Words of Virgil. Impleveritque meropateram, quam Belus & omnes A Belo soliti. Aeneid. Lib. I. v. 733. and uses these words. Languâ Punicâ Bal Deus dicitur, apud Assyrios autem Bel dicitur Saturnus, & Sol. All these proper Names, whether African or Assyrian come from it, Annibal, Asdrubal, Adherbal. Servius was not the only Person, that be∣lieved that Baal was Saturn. Eusebius speaks the same in his Chronicon. Tharoe anno XXIX. Assyriorum Rex primus Belus mortuus est, quem Assyrii Deum nominarunt, & alii dicunt Saturnum. Theophilus Archbishop of Antioch, tells us also that the Eastern People worshipped Chro∣nus, or Saturn, Belus or Bal. But if on the other side, Servius says, that Bal is the Sun, he has some that defend his Opinion. Hesychius tells us, that , signifies , &  Phrygiorum linguâ (Rex) The same Author adds, that in Crete the Sun was worshipped under the name of Abelius. The Emperor Heliogabalus seems to have had both the Names of the Sun, , and Bal, or Bel united in his. Selden, from whom this is taken says that Heliogabalus comes from Hagol Baal, id est Rotundus Deus, which agrees with his Image, which was according to He∣rodian a round Stone in shape like a Cone. Eusebius is of the same opinion, or at least as∣sures us, that it was the Opinion of Sanco∣niathon, who says, that it was to the Sun, that the Name of Beelsalsamen, that is to say, the King of Heaven, was given. We must not believe that these two Opi∣nions are contrary to one another, because the Phaenicians take Saturn for the Sun, as Servius tells us in the same Place, Assyrios con∣stat Saturnum, quem eundem & Solem dicunt Junoncmque coluisse. BABYLO, Babylon. The Scriptures gives us this account of the Original of this City.
When Men were multiplied after the af∣ter the Flood, they departed from the East, and found a Plain in the Country of Shinar, where they settled themselves. Then they said one to another, come, let us make Bricks, and burn them in the Fire. Then they took Brick instead of Stone, and Slime in stead of Mortar, and said, let us build us a City, and a Tower, whose top may reach unto Heaven, and let us make our selves spoken of, before we are separated one from another. But the Lord came down to see the City and Tower which the Chil∣dren of Men had built, and said, let us go down, and confound their Language, that they may not understand one another, and from hence it was called. Confusion. This City thus named Confusion is Babylon, and profane History much celebrates it, by which it seems that the Giant Nimrod was the Founder of it. This the Scripture had in∣timated before, saying. That Babylon was the Chief of his Kingdom, although it was not come to that Point of Grandure, which the Impiety and Pride of Men had deter∣mined to bring it. Bodinus and Sabellicus confound it very unfitly with Susa, and others with Bagdat, or Bagdat, or Bagadet in our times, for the one was situate on the Banks of Euphrates, and the other stands on the side of Tygris, some Ruins of it are to be seen at this Day, Forty Miles distant from this latter, as the Authors who have seen it testify. Jose∣phus will have it, that this Work was under∣taken, that they might have a Retreat from an other Flood if it should happen, but that's only the Imagination of this Author. Some make Semiramis the Foundress of this City, but she only increased and beautisied it, having encompassed it with a Brick-wall ce∣mented together with Slime, after she had built several beautiful Aedifices with very pleasant Gardens, in which she set on work more than 300000 Men for several Years. BABYLONICI, Babylonians, a very voluptuous People, who worshipped the Fire. They washed their Bodies after their Death, and wrapping them up in Cerecloth covered them over with Honey. Ninus, one of their Kings, being slain in the Battel which he lost with Zoroastres King of the Bactrians, was bu∣ried in a Tomb, and Old Belus caused himself to be put after his Death into a glass Urn full of Oyl, which he ordered to be inclosed in a Magnificent Monument. BACCHANALIA, Bacchanals, cele∣brated in Honour of the God Bacchas, and which were called Liberales, or Orgiae, or Dionysiaca. The Orgiae, Bacchanals, Liberales, and Dio∣nysiaca are usually taken for the same, but there was a difference between those Pagan Ceremonies, for the Feasts of Liber, or Libera, were celebrated in Honour of Liber or Bac∣chus every Year on March the 17th. when the Young Men between 16 and 17 Years Old, put off their Garment bordered with Purple, called Praetexta to take the Toga virilis from the Hands of the Praetor with a Sur∣name, which made them capable of going to the War, and of the Offices of the Common-wealth. But the Bacchanals were kept every Month, and the Dionysiaca or Orgiae every Three Years, which gave them the name of Trieterica. Macrobius, in the first Book of his Saturnalia, Chapter 18. Having proved by good Reasons that Bacchus and Apollo are but one thing, adds, that the Bacchanals were celebrated eve∣ry two Years upon Mount Parnassus, dedica∣ted to Apollo, and the Muses, where the Satyrs assisted. Authors refer the Institution of the Feast of Bacchus to the Athenians, which passed at first for very honest Plays, and Metriments among the Pagans. They carried a Barrel of Wine wound about with Vine-Branches loaded with Grapes. They drew an Hee-Goat by the Horns, to sacrifice him with a Basket full of Figs and Grapes, having their Heads crowned with Vine Branches, and the Bacchae which were the Priests of that God, held in their Hands Staves twisted with Ivy, dancing and wantonly playing in the Streets, and crying Evobé, that is to say, an happy Life. But these Feasts were in length of time changed into a licentious use of all Sorts of Debaucheries. Varro tells us, that in certain Places of Ita∣ly, these Feasts of Liber or Bacchus were cele∣brated with such Liberty, that they worship∣ped in Honour of him, the Privy Members of a Man, and that not in secret to preserve them∣selves from Disgrace, but in publick, to glo∣ry in their Wickedness; for they placed them honourably upon a Chariot, which they drove through the City, after they had first carried it through the Country. But at La∣vinium there was a whole Month spent in the Feasts of Liber only, during which time the greatest Filthinesses were acted, till the Cha∣riot had crossed the publick Place, and was come to the House where it was appointed, that the thing it carried should be put; af∣ter which, the most honest Matrons of the Ci∣ty, was obliged to go and crown that infa∣mous Depositum before the whole Multi∣tude. The Romans were not more moderate in
these abominable Practices. It was a certain Greek, of a base Birth, a Priest, and Diviner, skilful in the hidden Mysteries of these Sa∣crifices, as Livy says, who first settled this Feast in Tuscany, and from thence it came to Rome. A Company of married Women only, met in the Night to celebrate those Myste∣ries of the God at first, but a Woman named Paucula of Padua, a Stage-Player by Profes∣sion, admitted Girls and Boys of all Ages, and conditions to them, who in the dark∣ness of the Night defiled themselves with all Sorts of Abominations, and Lewdnesses, but at last the Disorder and Looseness of these Feasts grew so high, that the Consuls Spurius, Posthumius, Albinus, and Quintus Martius Phi∣lippus, made secret Enquiry into the Super∣stition of these Bacchanals, which they per∣formed in the Night with such abominable Lascivousness, and utterly abolished them, having found Seven Thousand Persons of that infamous Society. Nevertheless part of those Superstitious Ceremonies were again established according to the Humour of those Times, and an old Woman went about, crowned with Ivy, having a Company of other roaring Women to attend her, who imitated her in her Gate, and las∣civious Postures, who all cried out with a loud Voice, Evohe. She carried a Cake made with Honey, of which she gave a Piece to every one she met. The Athenians also celebrated a Feast to Bacchus, during which the young Maids car∣ried gilt Baskets full of Fruit, and this Feast was called CANEPHORIA, and the Maids CANEPHORAE, from the two Greek Words, which signify to carry a Bas∣ket. The rerinthians put a Serpent into this Basket, for the Celebration of their Myste∣rios, dedicated to the Worship of Bacchus. This is what Catullus would have us to under∣stand by this Verse. Pars obsura cavis celebrabant Orgia Cistis. They had a Cover, that they might pre∣serve the Mysteries of Bacchus, and hide them from the Eyes of those, that were not initiated, whom they treated as Pro∣fans. BACCHAE, Priestesses of Bacchus, Mena∣des, Bassarides, or Thyades, the Ministers of the God Bacchus, who celebrate his Orgiae or Mysteries. The Bacchae, which accompanyed the Troops of Bacchus, took their Name from the Hebrew Word, Baca, which signifies to lament and howl, for Lamentations, Cryings, and Howlings were very common in the Mysteries of Bacchus. They were also called Thyades from the Hebrew word Thaha, that is to say, to cry and run up and down. They are also named Mamallonides, from the Hebrew Me∣mallelar, i. e. Praters and Talkative-Persons. These raving Women were clothed with Tygers and Panthers Skins, with their Hair all loose, throwing their Head backward. They were crowned with Ivy, carrying in their left Hand, a Thyrse, which was a Pine. Staff. Tacitus speaking of one of these Bac∣chae, says, Ipsa orine fluxo thyrsum quatiens, and Sidonius Apollinaris describing the Troops of Bacchus, makes mention of the Thyrse, Ti∣ger-skins, and Drums. They went through the Mountains in the Company of Bacchus, crying out like mad Persons, and often repeating Evohe Bacchae, that is to say, let Bacchus live happily. (An Epithet, which was given him by Jupiter, when in the War with the Giants, Bacchus being transformed into a Lion, vented his Fury on them, and tore them in pieces.) BACCHUS,
the Son of Jupiter and Semele. Apollodorus in his third Book of the Original of the Gods, gives us this Relation of the Nativity of Bacchus. Cadmus, says he, had Four Daughters, Antinoe, Ino, Semele, and Agave, with a Son named Polydorus. Ino married Athamas, Antinoe Aristaeus, and Agave Eehion. As for Semele, Jupiter was in Love with her, and withdrawing him∣self from the Embraces of Juno, he gained the Favour of his Mistress. Juno envying the Happiness of her Rival, disguised her self to cheat her, and taking the Shape of Beroc Semele's Nurse, she informed her that to be assured of the Love of Jupiter, she ought to pray him to shew himself to her, in all his Glory. Jupiter having consented to it, Semele was not able to endure his Splendor and Majesty, but the Fire of his Lightning laid hold on the Roof of the Chamber, and consumed it. All that could be done in this Surprize, was to save the Child (for she had been big some Months) and to put him very hot into Jupiters Thigh, where he fulfilled his time, at the end of which he came out, and was put into the Hands of Mercury, the Messenger of the Gods, and the Confident of their Love, who carried him first to Ino his Aunt, and to her Husband Athamas, to take care to nurse him and bring him up, but Morose Juno, resolving to shew her Displeasure to them, caused Athamas to slay his eldest Son Lear∣chus as he was a hunting, taking him for a Deer, whereupon Ino cast her self into the Sea with her Son Melicerta. Then Jupiter to free little Bacchus from the Fury and Per∣secutions of Juno changed him into an Hee-Goat for a certain time. When he recover'd his first Form, Mercury carried him to the neighbouring Nymphs of the City Nysa in asia to compleat his Education, who na∣med him Dionysius from the Name of his Father and of his Country. Lucian says, that Bacchus assumed the Shape of an Hee-Goat, to surprize Penelope, the Daughter of Icarus, whom he forced in Arcadia, and had Pan by her. The Theology of the Aegyptians, and an∣cient Greeks teaches us, that Bacchus or Diony∣sius is an Emanation or divine Power, and confounds him with Phaebus, Apollo, Pluto, Apis, Anabis, and Osyris. It also confounds him with Janus, and Noah, and represents him by a Triangle, which is a Figure of the Divinity according to the Ancients; and Plutarch undertakes to prove, that Bacchus is the God of the Hebrews, and that all the Observations of the Jews are nothing else but the Ceremonies of Bac∣chus. Homer as well as all the rest of the Greek Poets makes Bacchus the Son of Jupiter and Se∣mele; but Pausanias delivers the rest of his Story after a different manner. The Inha∣bitants, saith he, of the City of Brasias hold that Semele having brought forth Bacchus, Cadmus her Father being angry at it shut up both the Mother and the Child into a Chest, and threw them into the Sea, which cast them upon the Coast of the Brasians, who taking it out of the Water, opened it, and found that the Mother was already dead, but the Infant being alive, they cau∣sed it to be nourished and brought up. They add, that Ino wandring at that time was his Nurse, and they shew a Cave, where she nursed him, which to this Day is called Bacchus's Cave. Upian in Athe∣naeus's Dipnosophistes, after Euhemerus of the sle of Coos, in Book 30. of his History, re∣lates that Cadmus the Grandfather of Bacchus, was Cook to the King of the Sidonians, and having debauched a dancing Maid of that Kings, named Harmonia, he had by her Semele the Mother of Bacchus. Lucian in his Dialogue between Jupiter and Juno makes them speak thus. Juno. I am ashamed, O Jupiter, to have such a drunken and effeminate Son, as this of thine is, who is always in the Company of certain mad Women, and who are more masculine than he. Jupiter. But this effeminate Man has conquered Thrace and Lydia, and subje∣cted the Indies to himself, having made the King Prisoner with all his Elephants; and which is most strange, he did all this with his leaping and dancing among the Wo∣men, at the sound of the Drum and Flute, and for the most part drunk. If any One dare speak of his Mysteries, he will take them in his Chains, and Agave herself, has torn in Pieces her Son Penthius. Is not this Great and Worthy of Jupiter? What will he not do when he is sober, since he does so great things when he is drunk. The same Lucian in Bacchus, relates his Expedition to the Indies thus: Bacchus says he, attempted the Indies, notwithstanding the Raillery of some, and Compassion of others who believed that he would be crush∣ed by the Elephants, if he escaped the Fury of their Arms, for his Army was only made up of Women moved with divine Fury, who instead of Bucklers carried Drums, and Cymbols; for Javelins, Staves twisted a∣bout with Ivy; for Arms, Garlands of the same Tree, and for Armour, Skins of Hinds and Panthers. They were attended with a Troop of Satyrs, who did nothing but leap, and skip like Kids, whose Tails and Horns they have. Bacchus also had Horns and was without a Beard, cloathed with Purple, and gilded Buskins, and ha∣ving Vine Branches loaden with Grapes, woven between his Locks of Hair. He rode in a Chariot drawn by Tygers, which was all he had terrible; his Two Lieute∣nants were, the One a little old Man with a flat Nose, trembling all over, cloathed in Yellow, with large upright Ears, and a great Belly, riding for the most part of his time upon an Ass, and for want of that supported by a Staff, but in all things else a great Captain; the other a Satyr with Horns, his Thighs hairy, with the Beard and Feet of an Hee-Goat, holding in his left Hand a Flute, and in the other a crook∣ed Staff, and runs through all the Plain, leaping and dancing, and much terrifying the Women, for he was hasty and passio∣nate, and when he came near them, they ran with their Hair flying about their Shoulders, crying, Evohe, as acknowledg∣ing him for their Master: Nevertheless these mad Women, among their other ex∣ploits, tore Flocks in pieces and eat their Flesh raw.The Indians seeing such a ridiculous Crew, more fit for a Ball than for a War∣like Encounter, disdained at first to take Arms, and thought to send their Women to fight them, for fear they should disgrace their Valour by such an unworthy Vi∣ctory, but when they understood, that that Army, though ridiculous, kindled a, Fire every where (for Fire is the Dart of Bac∣chus,
which he hath borrowed from the Thunder of his Father) they armed them∣selves in hast, and mounting upon their Elephants came full of Rage and Anger to encounter these Incendiaries.When they came in sight of them, they put themselves in order for Battel, cove∣ring the Front of their Troops with their Elephants. Bacchus also mustered his Army, and set Silene on his right Hand, which is that great flat Nos'd Captain above mention'd; and Pan on his left, and plac'd himself in the middle, after he had dispersed the Sa∣tyrs every where, as many Officers, and Captains, and given them for their word, Evohe. Immediately the Bacchae sounded a Signal with their little Drums and Trum∣pets, and a Satyr having blown his Horn, the Ass of Silene began to bray so terribly, that being joyned with the howling of the Bacchae (who then discovered the Iron of their Thyrses, and the Serpents they were gir∣ded withal) the Indians and their Elephants sied before they were within reach of their Spears, and so they were defeated, and subdued. Diodorus in his second Book of his Antiqui∣ties gives an historical Relation of Bacchus, and tells us, that the most wise of the Indians say, that Bacchus invaded their Country with a great Army from the Western Parts, and that he over ran all the Indies, not finding any City that dare oppose him; but the great Heats of the Country much incommoding his Army, he left the Plains, and retired with his Army into the hollow of the Moun∣tains, which he called the Thigh, which gave an occasion to the Greeks to feign, that Jupi∣ter put him into his Thigh. He taught them afterward how to plant, and dress a Vine∣yard, caused several Cities to be built among them, and furnished them with Laws, and died after he had reigned over them 52 Years. Antiquity has given Bacchus several Names. He is called BIMATER, that is to say, One who had Two Mothers, viz. Semele and Jupi∣ter, in whose Thigh he fulfilled his Time, after he was taken out of the Belly of his Mother. He was named Dionysius, from , from Jupiter his Father, and the City Nysa, where he was nursed. Diodorus places this City in Arabia, or in Aegypt on the Con∣fines of Arabia. Arrian, and Quintus Curtius say 'tis in the Indies, of whose Opinion is Pomponius Mla, thus speaking of it. The fairest and largest of all the Cities in the Indies, is Nysa, where Bacchus was nursed, which gave occasion to the Greeks to feign that he was shu up in Jupiter's Thigh. Pliny speaks of another City called Nysa, which is in Caria. Stephanus reckons Ten of the same Name in several Kingdoms. Some give him the name of Liber, either because he rejoices, and frees the Mind from the Troubles of Life, or because he obtained Liberty for the Country of Baeotia. He is also surnamed BROMIUS , from Fear or  from Thunder, being born of a Mother, who was consumed by Jupiter's Thunder. He is called LYAEUS from the Greek word  to drive away, or because Wine excels Grief. Lastly, some give him the Epithet of Evan, which in the Indian Tongue signifies Ivy, which is consecrated to him. We see him sometimes represented to us in the Shape of a Child, holding in his Arm a Bunch of Grapes, and sometimes in the Form of a Man carrying a Pine-branch. We have a reverse of a Medal of Severus, and Julia, where is the Figure of a Chariot drawn by Two Panthers, in which is set a Young Man holding a Pot in his left Hand, and in the other a Tygers Skin, to shew us, that Bacchus was the Conqueror of the Indies, and other Eastern Countries, because he is pictured in a Tri∣umphal Chariot with a Dart in his Hand. and his Enemy prostrate at his Feet. The Philo∣sopher Albricus tells us, that some have pain∣ted Bacchus with the Face of a Woman, with naked Breasts, and Horns on his Head, crowned with Vine-leaves, and riding upon a Tyger, carrying a Pot in his left Hand, and a Bunch of Grapes in his right. Some picture Bacchus both Male and Fe∣male, as is visible on the Consular Medals of the Cassian Family, which shew us the Fi∣gures of Liber, and Libera, i. e. Bacchus both Male and Female. Orpheus in his Hymn a∣gainst Masae has positively asserted, that Bac∣chus was ever thought to be of both Sexes; as the greatest part of the Gods are. He had a Magnificent Temple at Rome, in which they sacrificed to him Hee-Goats, because they destroy the Vine-branches, and eat the Grapes, as Virgil teaches us. —Baccho Caper omnibus aris Caeditur, Georg. II. v. 380. BACCHUS, the Son of Jupiter and Semele, otherwise called Dionysius, from the Island Dia, now Naxus, after he had over-run all the East with his Army, subdued the greatest part of the Indies, and taught Men the use of Wine, was put by them into the Number of the Immortal Gods; but when the Thebans disputed his Dignity, publi∣shing that he was not the Son of Jupiter,
but of some Man who had left his Mother, he filled their Women with a divine Fury, so that they ran with their Hair flying about their Shoulders loose into Mount Cytheron, crying Evohe. Tiresias and Cadmus were by this Action convinced of his Divinity, and none but Pentheus opposed it, discoursing of the Superstition of the Orgiae, and labouring entirely to abolish them; at which the God being provoked, made him mad also, and drove him into Mount Cytheron, where he was torn in pieces by the Theban Women, who were before turned Furies, and took him for a Lion, and his Mother Agave was the Woman that cut off his Head, not know∣ing who he was. The Tyrrhenians, famous Pirates in the Me∣diterranean Sea, as they were robbing upon the Coasts of the Aegaean Sea, met with Bac∣chus upon the Shore, and having taken him Captive, thought they had got a considerable Prize, whereupon they began to insult over him, and to offer him some Indignities; but the God seeing their ill Designs, changed them into Dolphins to punish them, as we learn from Philostratus in his Character of the Tyrrhenians. Tzetzes thinks that Noab lived at the same time with the Bacchus of the Indians, and Osi∣ris of the Aegyptians, and that he had for his Servant, Mercurius Trismegistus, who was the first Inventer of Learning, and Arts, from the Instructions which he had received from Noah, who had preserved Arts, Learning, and Sciences, which had been invented, and exercised, during the 16 or 17 Ages which pre∣ceded the Deluge. The same Author says else∣where, that near the Mountains of India, are to be seen the Pillars of Bacchus, not of the Bacchus of Thebes in Greece, but of Aegypt, who found out the dressing of Vineyards, who bears the Name of Osiris, and is no other Person but Noah. Propé montes Indiae columnae quaedam constitutae sunt, columnae Dionysi, non The∣bani, sed Vini Inventoris. Vossius shews us the Similitude there is be∣tween the History of Moses, and Fable of Bac∣chus. Moses, says this learned Man, was born in Aegypt, and Orpheus in the Hymns attributed to him, testifies the same of Li∣ber or Bacchus, making him the Son of the Goddess Ists, and saying that he was born upon the Bank of the River Nyle, where Moses was exposed. His Nurses may also re∣present to us the Sister and Mother of Moses, to whom Pharaoh's Daughter entrusted Mo∣ses to be nursed. Moses after his Birth was first exposed upon the Banks of Nile in a little Ark made of Bulrushes woven together. Pausanias al∣so relates that the Brasiatae in Laccdemonia in Greece, affirm that they took their Name from the little Boat, or Ship, wherein Bac∣chus being shut up, was cast upon their Coast, , Incolae ea sermontbus vulgarunt, quae neutiquam alii Graecorum Popu∣li confitentur; Semelem quidem Jovi Liberum pa∣trem peperisse, a Cadino vero deprehensam cum puero recens. Nato in arcam conjectam, eam ar∣can aestu jactatam in fines suos ejectam.The Name of Moses comes from his being taken out of the Waters, (Moses i. e. extratus) Orpheus in his Hymns, or in his Mysteries, gives to Bacchus the name of Moses, and calls him a Person born of the Waters, .Moses had two Mothers, One that bore him, and another that adopted him, and educated and kept him in the Kings Palace 40 Years, and we know the Reason, why Bac∣chus was called. , a Child of two Mothers, because Jupiter compleated what was wanting of his time. Bacchus was educated in a Mountain of Arabia, called Nysa. Diodorus Siculus, and several others make mention of it, and we know, that Moses lived Forty Years in Ara∣bia before he returned into Aegypt to take upon him the Conduct and Government of the Children of Israel. Moses also is well known to have frequented Mount Sinai, which by a small Transposition of Letters, is Nysa, and 'tis possible that Mountain might have those two Names. Vossius also observes, that the Alexandrtan Chronicle speaking of Twelve famous Mountains uses these Words, . Some say that Nysa was a City, which stood upon Mount Meros, which signifies in Greek, , a Thigh, and from thence came the Fable of Jupiter's Thigh. Others think, that Nysa stood upon the side of a Mountain, which the Hebrews call, Jarkere har, crura Montis. Plutarch speaks of the Banishment of Bac∣chus, which is apparently the Flight of Moses into Arabia, after he had slain an Aegyptian, who was about to kill an innocent Israelite. But the Poet Nonnus, who has written the Fable of Bacchus at large, speaks plainly of the Flight of Bacchus towards the Red Sea, . He could not have spoken any thing more positive, nor more exactly like the History of Moses, stripped and freed from the Disguise of the Fable of Bacchus.Moses had many Battles in Arabia, and gained glorious Victories, also Diodorus Siculus relates out of the Poet Antimachus,
how Bacchus found a Potent Enemy there, which was Lycurgus King of Arabia, who had resolved to destroy him, and all his Menades, or Bacchae. The Army of Bacchus, which over-run all Arabia with him, was made up of Men and Women, according to Diodorus Siculus. We know also, that Moses passed through all the Deserts of Arabia, with an Army of 600000 fighting Men, but it was followed with a much greater Number of Women and Children.Orpheus in his Hymns, Euripides in his Bacchae, and Sophocles in certain Verses set down by Strado, say, that Bacchus had upon his Forehead the Horns of a Bull , which agrees with the Horns of Light, i. e. those luminous Rays which came from the Face of Moses, when he re∣turned from Conversing with the Ora∣cle of God. The Hebrews give this Ray of Light, the name of an Horn, Koren, whence comes the , of the Greeks, and the Cor∣nu of the Latins; to which agrees the Latin Translation, quod cornuta esset facies Mosis. Moses struck the Rock which his Rod, and there came out a Stream of Living Water; now Euripides in his Bacchae, says as much of a Baccha that followed Bacchus; Thyrsum autem quaedam arripiens percussit Pe∣tram, aquae processri humor. One of the most faithful Servants of Mo∣ses, is Celeb, who gave such illustrious Proofs of his Courage and Fidelity, when he went to observe and discover the promi∣sed Land, and brought back with the other Spies, that famous bunch of Grapes: In like manner the Poets make a Dog to have been the Companion of Baccbus, the He∣brew word Celeb signifying a Dog. Nonnus relates the Discourse of Bacchus, when he translated his Dog to the Stars, and made a Constellation of it, called Maera or the Little Dog, which contributes to the ripe∣ning of the Grapes.Orpheus gives Bacchus the Title of a Law-giver, , attributing to him a dou∣ble Law, as if he alluded to the Two Ta∣bles of the Law of Moses, or to Deuteronomy which is one of the Books of Moses. Lastly, Vossius observes that 'tis absolutely neces∣sary, to distinguish between the Bacchus of the Indians, and Bacchus of Aegypt and Ara∣bia, which is Moses, and acknowledges that these are, as it were the two Originals, from which the Greeks have taken the Co∣py of their Bacchus of Thebes, who is much later than that of Aegypt, as this Posterior to that of the Indies. Eusebius has observed that Osiris is the same with Bacchus, as well as Diodorus Siculus, who tells us, that Cadmus made the Bastard Son of his Daughter Semele to pass for the Son of Ju∣piter, and for another Ofiris, and how Orpheus brought all the Worship of Ofiris, or Dionysius, and Bacchus into Greece. The same Authors relate elsewhere, that Cadmus was obliged by the Commands of his Father Agenor, King of Phaenicia, to go and find out Europa his Sister, stolen away by Jupiter, and not finding her, he staid in Boeotia, where he built the City of Thebes, and that Semele conceived by Jupiter and had Bacchus by him; but Eusebius tells us at the same time, that the Greeks had done nothing but copied out the Actions of other Nations more ancient than themselves; and Diodorus Siculus owns in the same Place that there was another Bacchus more an∣cient, named SABAZIUS, the Son of Jupiter and Proserpina, whose Mysteries were celebrated in the Night. This BACCHUS SABAZIUS was a Phoenician, and one of the Gods Cabiri, according to the Scholiast of Apollonius of Rhodes. Quidam ferunt Cabiros prius fuisse duos, seniorem quidem Jovem, & Bacchum, Ju∣niorem. We have proved that Noah was the first to whom the Assyrians or Babilonians applyed the History or Fable of Bac∣chus. Cicero mentions five several Bacchus's. Dio∣nysios maltos habemus, primum à Jove & Proser∣pinâ Natum; secundum Nilo, qui Nysam dicitur interemisse; tertium Caprio patre, eumque Re∣gem Asiae praefuisse dicunt, cui Sabazia sunt in∣stituta; quartum Jove & Lunâ, cut sacra Or∣phica putantur confici; quintum Niso natum & Thione, à quo Trieterides constitutae putantur. De Natur. Deor. lib. III. 'Tis not easy to distinguish all these Bacchus's. Diodorus Si∣culus makes but one of the first and third of Cicero, saying, that Sabazius was the Son of Jupiter and Proserpina; the Fourth is the same with that of the Greeks; He that reign∣ed in Asia, may well be that of the Assrians. Cicero had no Knowledge of the Bacchus of the Arabians, which they call URO∣TAL. Diodorus Siculus distinguishes between se∣veral Bacchus's, but allows the greatest An∣tiquity to him of the Indies, where Wine was first found out. Nonnulli tres diversis temporibus extitisse asserunt, & sua cuique faci∣nora attribuunt; inter quos omnium vetustissimus natione Indus sit. Hic quod sponte ob benigni tatem Aeris, & solis temperiem regio illa vi∣tium fertilus est, primus racemos torcularibus pressit, & emolumenta vini observavit. Hic ille Bacchus aiunt, arma per universum orbem
circumtulit, & vineas conserendi rationem edo∣cuit. 'Tis hard not to acknowledge, that this is the History of Noah, who planted a Vineyard in Armenia, which may pass for one part of the Indies, for some give the Name of Indies to all the Eastern Pro∣vinces. Diodorus says, that Bacchus is said to be born twice, because the Vine was be∣fore the Deluge of Deucalion, and grew a∣gain after the Deluge, when all thought it was dead. Philostratus assures us, that the Indians held that their Bacchus came to them out of Assyria, wherefore the first Bacchus was the Assyrian, and so can be no other than Noah. The Lybians according to Diodorus, had also their Bacchus the Son of Jupiter Ammon, and Amalthea, whom they also paint with Horns. They maintain that he was much more ancient than the Aegyptian or Graecian, although Diodorus owns, that the Graecian, though the last swallowed up all the rest, so that their Antiquity was then almost for∣gotten. The Romans never knew any but the Bac∣chus of Greece, the Memory of all the rest being quite lost through their very great Antiquity. Posthumius the Dictator vowed, and built a Temple to Liber and Libera. Nonnus thinks that the several Names of Bacchus are for the most part the Names of the true God, which the Impiety of Idolaters attributed to their false Gods. Dionysius may come from Jehova Nissi, that is to say, Dominus veaeillum mm. IACCHUS may come likewise from Jehova or Jao, for so the Greeks sometime pronounce Jehova. ADONEUS plainly comes from Ado∣nas. ELELEUS comes from El, Elohim, that is to say Deus Deorum. HYES comes from hu es, i. e. ipse ignis. ATTES comes from atta cs, i. e. tu ignis, for Bacchus was born according to the Fable among the Fires of the Thunder of his Father Jupi∣ter. Bacchus is often represented by the Poets under the Form of a Bull, because God is often called in Scripture, Abbir, which signifies the Strong, and a Bull. EVO∣HE is a Term, which the Scripture uses in speaking of Drunkards. Cui vae, tui evohe, iis qui vino immorantur. BASSAREUS comes from Batsar, which signifies, to gather the Vintage. DITHYRAMBUS comes from the Syriack, dithert abban, which is the same with  i. e. who hath Two Fathers. IACCHUS come from the Syriack Janko or Jacco, which is the same with Puer La∣ctens, and such is Bacchus often represented. 'Tis feigned that he was born of Jupiter's Thigh, because 'tis a Phrase used among the Hebrews to express ordinary Generation. Nasci de faemore Patris. If some say he was, born upon the Mountain Merus, , 'tis because the word signifies a Thigh, or rather because the Hebrew Tongue calls those parts of Mountains, J Jarkete, Thighs, which we call the Sides. If Bacchus has been called BRISAEUS, and BRESSAEUS, it comes from the Syriack bres cubsa, that is to say, lacus mellis, for all the Ancients have made Bacchus the Inventor of Honey. As to the name LIBER, Bochart beiieves, that it is an Imitation of the Hebrew Word Her, hurim, which signifies Noble and Free Persons, as in Ecclesiastes, Filius Hurim, is the same with Filius Heroum. BAETYLIA, rough and shapeless Stones, which were the first Statues, which Men began to adore. This Name comes evidently from Bethel, which was the Name which Jacob gave a Stone, upon which he laid his Head to sleep, and which he dedicated in the Morning to God, pour∣ing out Oyl upon it, in Memory of the Vision he had been of a Mysterious Lad∣der. BALISTA, a Sling, a Warlike En∣gine, which the Ancients used to cast Stones with Slings, says Vitruvius, were made af∣ter diverse manners, though all used to the same Purpose. One sort was framed with Levers, and Bars, another with Pul∣lies, another with a Crane, and others with a toothed Wheel. This Engine was made much like a Cross-Bow, which cast Bullets. BALNEAE, or BALINEAE, Baths, to bath and wash in, very common among the Greeks, and Romans. Two things are understood by this word, the Buildings, in which these Baths were inclosed, called Balnearia, and the Tubs wherein they bathed. 'Tis not certainly known, who brought in this Custom of Bathing, but 'tis plain that the Greeks used it before the Romans. We also find that the Carthaginians had some Baths for Persons of Quality, and others for their common People. The Romans at first used Baths, very sel∣dom, contenting themselves to wash their Feet, Arms, and Hands every Day after Travel, unless on Feasts, when they washed their whole Body. In these early times when Luxury had not disordered their Manners, they did not aim at any Magnificence, or Pleasure in
building Baths, but afterwards things came to such an excess, that in the time of Sylla, a certain Man named Sergius Orata built a Bath hanging in the Air, at great expence. Hic est Sergius Orata, qui primus Baineas pen∣siles habuit. M. Agrippa to gain the good esteem, and favour of the People of Rome, caused an 170 publick Baths to be built in that City, with all the Ornaments and Magnificence imaginable. But the most extravagant Expences in building Baths, was in the time of the Em∣peror Augustus, when they appeared as so many Cities for their vast extent, and for the Variety of Apartments which they con∣tained, the one being for Summer, and the other for Winter. The most famous Baths were those of M. Agrippa, Nero, Domitian, Alexander Seve∣rus, Vesoasian, Titus, Gordian, Aurelian, and Trajan, but that of Autoninus Caracalla, which was built at the Foot of Mount Aventine and that of Dicclesian, did much excel all the rest before mentioned, in Grandeur and Beauty. The Romans went into the Baths for their Health, conveniency, and often for their Pleasure only, for they thought that the Bath conduced very much to their Health, by provoking Sweat, and helping Digestion, so that when they found their Stomachs over-charged with Meat, they went to the Bath, as we learn from Juvenal's First Satyr, where he inveighs against those who having gorged themselves with eating, were for∣ced to go into the Baths to relieve them∣selves. Poena tamen praesens, cum tu deponis amictus Turgiáus, & crudum pavonem in Balnea portas. v. 142. Then found also, that a Bath was good to refresh themselves after some considera∣ble Fatigue or Travel, as Celsus the Phy∣sician tells us, which makes Plautus say, that all the Baths in the World were not sufficient to remove the Weariness he felt, Nunquam aedepol omnes balincae mihi hanc lassitu∣ eniment. The Bath in like manner was very con∣venient to cleanse the Body from Fifth, and any Nastiness, which stuck to it; the Romans having not the use of Linnen, they made their Limbs, more supple and vigorous, being rubbed and anointed, af∣ter they had left the Bath. In fine, nothing was more surprizing, than the largeness and costliness of these Buildings; 'tis too little says Ammianus Marcellinus to compare them with Cities, because they equalled whole Provinces, Lavacra in modum Provinciarum extru∣cta. These stately Buildings contained Por∣ches, Walks, Groves, Fish-Ponds, Tennis-Courts, Halls, and infinite Variety of A∣partments, some to undress in, others for sweating, and others to be rubbed and anointed in with the most costly Per∣fumes. The most rare and precious Marbles were used in building these Places; in them they raised many Pillars and several Figures of Jasper, Alabaster, and Porphyry; Gold, and Azure shined from all parts. The Floors, and Ceilings were of inlayed, or Mosaick Work; Arabian Perfumes filled those Pla∣ces with their Odours; the Waters fell by degrees, and by their Fall made very plea∣sant Cataracts to the sight, which were af∣ter received into Cisterns covered with Sil∣ver, and went away through Pipes of the same Materials; the Roofs were of Stone, and the Walls were plaistered over in the side with a Cement, called Maltha, from whence the Walls were called, Malthati parietes. The Water was carried into these Baths through Pipes, which came from the Aquae∣ducts of the City, and fell into spacious Cisterns, which they call by a general Word Baptisteria, lavacra, lavabra, & alvei. There were three sorts of them, One for hot Wa∣ter, another for warm, and another for cold. These Baths were so large, says Lipsius, that in those of Antoninus Caracalla 1800 Persons might bath themselves without any Inconvenience. Lucian gives us the Description of a Bath which Hippias, an excellent Architect, made, which I think fit to set down here. It was built upon a very sleep Ground, which he had levelled at the bottom, with a Foundation suitable to the largeness of the Building, which was well joined from top to bottom for long continuance. The building answered to the extent of the Place, and agreed very well with the plat Form in all its Proportions. At the entrance of it was a large Porch, into which they ascended insensibly by broad Stairs. Through this they passed into a great Hall, which would hold all the Ser∣vants very conveniently: On the left Hand were Chambers for Pleasure, ha∣ving in them private places very conve∣nient, and very lightsome. Then were
Apartments for Persons of Note, which had on their sides Wardrobes to undress in. In the middle was a lodging very lofty, and open, where were set Three Baths of cold Water; it was lined within with La∣conick Stone, and adorned with ancient Statues of Marble, of which, One repre∣sented Health, and the other Aesculapius; from thence they went into an Oval A∣partment, where they at first felt grateful Heat, which increased by little and lit∣tle. From hence they passed to the right Hand into another lightsome One to anoint themselves, which had Privacies on both sides, to receive those that came from the Exercises. Farther was another Apartment, more beautiful and conve∣nient than all the rest, as well to stand, as to lie down or sit in. Then there was an hot Anti-Chamber, lined with Numidian Stone, which led into the last Apart∣ment which shined on all Sides. This had likewise Three Baths of hot Water, from whence they might pass into the cold Baths through a Stove, without going through the Places by which they came in. Thus ends the Description of the Bath of Hippias. Some have reckoned Six Hundred and Seventy publick Baths at Rome, and Eigh∣ty Two private Ones. Publius Victor counts Eight Hundred and Sixty Publick Ones. Besides the Water-Baths to wash in, there were dry Stoves in an Hall, whose Roof was made in a Semicircle, in the middle of which was an Hole to let in the light, with a Buckler hung up in it, by means of which they could encrease or lessen the Heat, by letting it down, or raising it. This Place was called LACONICUM, because the Lacedemonians were the Inven∣tors of these dry Stoves for sweating, using them ordinarily from the time that Apollo∣nius Tyanaeus forbad, by the advice of the Ephori hot Baths, which were of little use, unless to make Men lazy and esseminate. Seneca the Philosopher calls these Paces, Sudatoria, and sometimes Sphaerifleria, from their Spherical and round Figure, as Sueto∣nius calls them in the Life of Vespsian. Cicero names them Assa, and Cornelius Cesus, Assas sudationes; they were very profitable for Digestion, and by sweating to drive out a Quantity of Water from all parts of the Body, which made them more active, and better disposed. There were in the Both diverse Cham∣bers for several uses, as there were also in the Stoves. Some were for undressing called by the Greeks , and by the Latines, Spoliatoria, that is to say, Chambers of Spoil; others for wiping and drying the Body, after having been in the Baths, and others for rubbing and anointing, named in Greek, , and in Latin, Unctuarta. Vitruvius describes to us the manner of making these Stoves. Hot, and warm Stoves says he, ought to have their Windows out of the reach of the cold, or if the Place will not bear it, turned to the South, because the time for bathing according to Custom, is from Noon to the Evening. It should be con∣trived that the hot Bath for the Men, and that for the Women, should be near one another, that they may both heat with the same Furnace. There must be placed up∣on this Furnace, three large brazen Ves∣sels, One for hot Water, the other for warm, and the third for cold, and these Vessels so ordered, and disposed, that that which holds the warm Water, shall go so far into that which contains the hot, as to take its heat from it, and in the like Proportion shall the cold Bath go into the warm; the Under-part of the Baths shall be heated by one Furnace only. This Bath ought to be lightsome above, that it be not darkned by those that are about it. The Seats about the Bath should be so large, as to hold those who wait, till the first Comers who are in the Bath come out of it. Although Baths were built for the pub∣lick, yet there were some, at which certain Fees were paid for bathing in them, which for that Reason were called Balneas merito∣rias, but what they gave was but a small Matter, viz. the Fourth part of an Assis, quadrans, which was paid to the Keeper of the Baths, which gave Occasion to Seneca to call the Baths, Rem quadrantariam, and Horace to say, Lib. 1. Sat. 3. Dum tu quadrante Lavatum Rexibis.— Only Infants under 14 Years of Age paid nothing, as Juvenal teaches us in this Verse Nec pueri credunt, nisi qui nondum aere lavantur. Sat. 2. v 152. It was not permitted to go into the Bath at all Hours of the Day, but only at certain fixed Hours. The Emperor Adrian published an Edict, forbidding to open the Baths before Two a Clock in the Afternoon, Mess in case of Sickness, ante octavam horam in publico no∣minem, nisi agrum lavare jussum est. (Now
the Eighth Hour was our two a Clock in the Afternoon, because they began the Day from our Six a Clock in the Morning, or thereabouts.) The Hour for going into, and coming out of the Bath, was made known by the Sound of a Bell, which was called, Tintin∣nabulum, as these Verses of Martial testi∣fie, Redde pilam, sonat aes Thermarum, ludere per∣gis? Virgine vis solâ lotus abire domum. Give over playing at Ball, the Bell sounds for the Bath, for if you hold on your Play ye cannot bath your selves unless in the cold Bath, called Virgo. (which was a Wa∣ter that came to Rome.) Marc. lib. XIV. Epigr. 163. From hence we learn, that the Romans did not go into the Baths, till after Noon ordinarily, unless upon the Account of Sickness, because then they were more free, and less troubled with Business, for they al∣lotted the Morning to wait upon, and court the Favour of the Grandees of Rome, and to follow their own business, after which they eat soberly, and then either took their Ease, or went to some Exercise, and to take their Pleasures. From whence they went into the Bath to dispose them for their Supper, as Persius testifies in this Verse. His mane edictum post prandia Callirhoén do. I allow, says this Poet, these loose Fel∣lows to go in the Morning to the Prae∣tors Court to hear the Judgment there, and after Dinner I permit them to court the Women, for Callirhoe was a famous Harlot, or rather (according to another Inter∣pretation of this Verse of the Persius) I per∣mit them to go into the Bath, because Cal∣lirhoe was a famous Fountain of Athens, and so by an usual Figure common among the Poets, Callirhoe is taken in general for a Bath. Pers. Sat. 1. v. 134. After they had bathed, they had their Bo∣dies rubbed, and the Hair pulled off with Pincers, or small Twitchers of Silver, and them rubbed them with a Pumice Stone to smooth the Skin, which they anointed with a perfamed Oyl, pouring it out by Drops, out of a small Vessel, which they called Gutrus, Glans, Ampula, or Laecythus. They often made a Collation of Fruits, and talked of things pleasant, and diver∣ring, from whence it came that the Baths were called Garrla Balnea. BALNEARII SERVI, the Ser∣vants belonging to the Bath. Some were ap∣pointed to heat them, which were called For∣nacatores; others were called Capsarii, who kept the Cloaths of those that went into them; others were named Aliptae, whose Care it was to pull off the Hair, and others were called Uactuarii, who anointed and perfumed the Body. BALSAMUM, Balm, a Shrub of In∣dia, which is of great use in Medicines. When the Boughs of it are full of Sap, they make an Incision with a Flint or Pot∣sherd (for it will not endure Iron) and there distils out of it a thick Juice of a Plea∣sant Smell, and it is used in the Cure of several Wounds, and some Distempers of the Body. BALTEUS, a Belt, a large Girdle of Leather used to carry a Sword, and a Dagger inset with Bosses of Gold, Silver, or Copper. BAPTAE, Athenian Priests of the God∣dess Cotytto, who was the Goddess of La ci∣viousness, and whose Feasts and Sacrifices were kept in the Night, with all the Beast∣liness imaginable. Eupolis was thrown into the Sea by the Priests, for having made a Comedy in which he discovered the filthy Actions, and lewd Conversations. BARBA, the Beard, the Hait that grows on the Face. The Romans for a long time wore it without shaving or cutting, and the time is not exactly known, when they began to do it. Titus Livius seems to tell us, that this Custom was in use from the Year 369, for speaking of Manlius Capitoli∣nus who was taken Prisoner, He relates that the greatest part of the People being troubled at his Imprisonment, changed their Cloaths, and let their Beards, and Hair grow.If this were so, then we may infer that out of times of Mourning they had their Hair cut and their Beards shaved. Nevertheless Varro speaks clearly, that the first Barbers came out of Sicily to Rome, in the Year 454, and that a Man called Ti∣cimus Menas brought them. From that time the Young Men began to have their Beards cut, and Hair, till they came to be 49 Years old; but it was not allowed to be done above that Age, says Pliny. Scipio Africa∣nus had himself shaved all his Days, and Augustus did the same in Imitation of him. The Young Men did not begin to shave themselves, till they were Twenty or Twen∣ty one Years of Age, as did Nero and Caligu∣la, but Augustus did not do it, till he was Twenty five Years old. The Day wherein they were shaved the first time was a Day of rejoicing, and they
were careful to put the Hair of their Beard into a Silver or Gold Box, and make an Offering of it to some God, particu∣larly to Jupiter Capitolinus, as Nero did, accor∣ding to the Testimony of Suetonius. Only the Philosophers let their Beards grow, and wore them very long, without cutting, or shaving. BARDI, Bards, ancient Poets among the Gauls, who described in Verse, the brave Actions of the great Men of their Nation. They were so called from one BARDUS, the Son of Druyis, who reigned over the Gauls. There were Four sorts of Men compri∣zed under the general Name of DRUI∣DES, viz. The VACERES, who at∣tended upon the Mysteries of their Religion; the EUBAGES, who were employed in judging of Prodigies; the BARDES, who celebrated in Verse the Heroical Actions of their great Men; and the SAR∣RONIDES, who administred Justice, and instructed the young Gauls in the libe∣ral Arts and Sciences. BASILICA, a Greek Word that sig∣nifies a Kings Palace; it was a publick Buil∣ding at Rome, magnificently raised, in which they administred Justice. It was covered, and by that a Basilica was distinguished from the FORUM, which was a publick Place open to the Air. In these Basilica's were large Halls with Roofs, and Galleries raised upon rich Pil∣lars. On both sides of these Galleries were Shops, where the finest Wares were sold. In the middle was a large Place for the Conveniency of Men of Business and Mer∣chants, as is at a little distance from the Palace at Paris. The Tribunes administred Justice there, as well as the Centum-viri. In them were also Chambers built, where the Lawyers and Pleaders maintained by the Common-wealth resided, to answer to all Points of Law, when they were consuited. This is doubt∣less, what Cicero means, Epist. 14. lib. 2. ad Att. Basilicam habeo, non villam, frequentia formia∣norum, because Men came from all parts to con∣sult him in his Country-house, as if he were in a Basilica. The principal Basilica's at Rome were these, Julia, Porcia, Pauli, Sisimini, Sempro∣nii, Caii, Lucii, & Argentariorum, the Ban∣kers. Others were also built for the Conve∣niency of Traders, and Merchants near the great Roman Place. The Scholars went thither to make their Declamations, that they might appear, and have the more Audi∣tors to hear them, according to the Testi∣mony of Quintilian. Lib. 12. Chap 5. Large and spacious Halls were first called Basilica's, because they were made for the People to meet in, when Kings admini∣stred Justice themselves; afterward, when they were left to the Judges, Merchants built them for themselves; and lastly, they were taken for Churches by the Christians. Then it happened that they built most of their Churches in the Fashions of Basilica's, which differed from the Temples of the Ancients, in this, that their Pillars stood within, whereas in Temples they stood with∣out. Basilica's were for Tradesmen and Pleaders, as now the Halls of a Palace are, where they administer Justice. BASSAREUS, and BASSARI∣DES, Epithets given to Bacchus, and the Bacchae, from the long Robe Bassara, which they are said to wear, as Hesychius, and Pol∣lux teach us; and as we learn from the Statues of Bacchus. Phornutus, and Acron, the Scholiast of Horace, think that this Word Bassara, comes from a City of Lydia, called BASSARA, from whence the Fashion of it came. The Grammarian Cornutus upon Persius will have them to be so called from Foxes skins, which in the Thracian Language are called Bassares, with which the Bacchae were cloathed, BATTUS, a certain ridiculous Poet, who used the same Repetitions frequently in his Poetry, which has given occasion to call a Discourse full of Repetitions, Battology, from his Name. It was also the Name of a Shepherd of the City of Pylus, who was changed by Mercury into a Touchstone, because he had not kept his word with him about the Theft, which he made of the Sheep of Admetus's Flock, kept by Apollo to his Disgrace. BATUALIA, Fencers, exercised with blunt Arms; for we say, rudibus ba∣tuere, to fight with dull Weapons, or in jest. BATHILLUS, a Buffoon and very good Dancer, whom Maecenas loved to an excessive Degree. He made him his Free-man, and he lived in the time of Augustus and Nero. BEELPHEGOR, of whom it is spo∣ken in the Book of Numbers, that a Part of the Israelites gave themselves to the impure and execrable Worship of that false God, and that God took a dreadful Vengeance on them: Initiatusque Israel Beelphegor, occidat
vnusquisque proximos suos, qui initiati sunt Beel∣phegor. Tis probable that the God which was honoured upon Mount Phegor or Pho∣gor, was Saturn, according to Theadoret. St. Jerom believed, that Beelphegor was the God Priapus. Fornicati sunt cum Madianitis, & ingressi sunt ad Beelphegor idolum Madiana∣tarum, quem nos Priapum possumus appellare. He says also the same thing, writing against Jovinian. Propriè quippe Phegor linguâ hebraeâ Priapus appellatur. BELIDES, Belides, or Danaides, were the Fifty Daughters of Danaus, the Son of Belus, surnamed the Old, who slew their Husbands, the Sons of the King of Aegypt, the first Night of their Marriage, except only One, named Hypermnestra, who did not slay her Husband Lynceus. BELLEROPHON, otherwise na∣med HIPPONOMUS, son of Glau∣cus King of Corinth; he slew his Brother Beller, and from thence was surnamed Belle∣rophon, as much as to say, the furtherer of Beller. After he had committed this Mur∣ther he fled to the Court of King Praetus, who received him favourably, but his Wife falling in Love with him, and not being able to induce him to satisfy her unchast Desires, she accused him to her Husband for attempting her Chastity. The King be∣ing angry at the Action, but unwilling to break the Rules of Hospitality, which he had allowed him, contented himself instead of slaying him, to send him to his Father in Law Jobates King of Lycia, with Letters signifying his Condemnation. Jobates wil∣ling to execute the King's orders, sent him to fight against the Chimaera, but he brought it to an happy end by the help of his Horse Pegasus; the King admiring his extraordi∣nary Valour, gave him his Daughter in Marriage. The Fable adds, that being de∣sirous to fly up into Heaven by the Help of his Horse Pegasus, he was cast down Headlong by Jupiter, to punish his proud Rashness, and being made blind by his Fall, he died a wandring Vagabond. Homer gives us this Account of Bellerophon, in the Sixth Book of his Iliads, v. 160. &c. BELLEROPHON, the most beautiful and valiant of the Argives, was passionately loved by Antia the Wife of Praetus, who being not able to perswade him to yield to her unlawful Desires, went to her Husband and told him. You must either dye, or put Bellerophon to Death, who has attempted my Chastity, although 'twas she her self, that had sol∣licited him to love her.Praetus was very angry, but would not put him to Death, but sent him with pri∣vate Letters to his Father-in-Law in Lycia, which ordered him to put him to Death. He went into Lycia under the Protection of the Gods, where being arrived near the River Xanthus, the King looked fa∣vourably upon him, and gave him all the Honours imaginable. He stayed Nine Days together with him, sacrificing every Day an Ox. At the end of that time he asked him the Reason of his com∣ing, whereupon he immediately gave him the Letters of Praetus his Son-in-Law, and having read them, he sent him to fight the Chimaera (an horrible Monster to behold, for he had the Fore-part of a Lion, who vomited Fire and Flames, the middle of a Goat, and the Tail of a Ser∣pent.)He subdued this Monster by the Pro∣tection of the Gods, and killed it. After this Victory he went to War against the Solymi, and then against the Amazons, and because he returned Victorious, King Jo∣bates sent an Ambush to kill him, but he defeated them all. This induced the King to give him his Daughter in Mar∣riage, for the sake of his Courage and Vertue. But to return to the Allegories of this Chimaera, and Bellerophon. Palephates speaks thus of them. Some say that Bellerophon rode upon a winged Horse, which is both ridiculous and unpossible, unless they could lend him all the Feathers of the swiftest Birds. Others would have us also believe, that Bellerophon slew the Chi∣maera of Amisodar, a Monster which had the Fore-part of a Lion, and the middle of a Goat, and the hinder-parts of a Ser∣pent. Others will have it, that it had on∣ly the Three Heads of these Creatures, which is less credible. This then is the Foundation of all these Fictions. BELLEROPHON, was a young Man of Corinth, very beautiful, and liberal, who having fitted a Ship which he named Pegasus, he went to coast along the Phrygian Shore, where at that time reigned Amiso∣dar, near the River Xanthus, along by which there arises a Mountain named by the In∣habitants, Telmessus, to which there is an As∣cent from the Plain on two sides of it. On the side next the City Xanthus, there were very good Pastures, but ont the side next Caria it was barren, and inaccessible; in the middle there was a Gulf, from whence there came out at certain times Flashes of
Fire, and Flames and Clouds of Smoke. To this Mountain is joined another, named Chimaera, upon which there was a Lion, and at the Foot of it a great Serpent, which did much harm among the Flocks, which fed thereabout, as well as to the Shepherds, and Inhabitants round it. But Fellerophon landing on these Coasts with his Ship, named Pegasus, because it was a good Sailer, and very swift in its Course, went to those Mountains, and setting the Woods on Fire, destroyed those Monsters, which gave an Occasion to the Fable to say, that Bellerophon being mounted upon Pegasus, had killed the Chimaera of Amiso∣dar. BELLONA, the Goddess of War, the Wife, Mother, or Nurse of Mars; some will have her to be Minerva, and Pallas. This false Deity was so much honoured by the Cappadocians, that they built a Tem∣ple to her in the City Comana, and her Priest, or Sacrificer was the first Person in Ho∣nour and Dignity next to the King. She is painted in Armour with a menacing or furious Countenance, holding a Trumpet, and a Whip in her Hand, and sometimes a lighted Torch. Appius Claudius, who was after stricken blind for having profaned the Priesthood of Hercules, built her a Temple at Rome, ac∣cording to the Vow he had made to her in the Battle against the Samnites. This Temple was in the Circus of Flaminius near the Carmental Gate. In it, foreign Em∣bassadours were admitted to audience, and they hung up their Bucklers, and other Arms, as Appius did according to Pli∣ny. Posuit in Bellonoe aede Majorum suorum Cly∣peos. There was near this Temple a Pillar na∣med BELLICA, from which the Con∣suls, or Herald cast a Javelin, as far as they could, as if they had cast it into the Ene∣mies Countries, to declare War against them. The Feast of this Goddess was kept up∣on the Fourth Day before the Nones of June, because on that Day, Appius dedica∣ted a Temple to her. The Priests of this Goddess, which from her Name were called Bellonarii, drew Blood from all parts of their Bodies, to appease her with that Sacrifice. Some thought that they had a Gift of Prophecy, to foretel the great Events of War. For that end they entred in a Fury, and holding naked Swords in their hands, they cut deep Gashes in their Arms, and Thighs, and with the Blood that issue out of the Wounds, ma∣king a Sacrifice to Bellona, not giving her any other Victims, as Tibullus tells in these Verses, Haec ubi Bellonae motu est agitata, nec acrem Flammam, non amens verbera torta timet. Ipsa bipenne suos caedit violenta Lacertos. Sanguineque effuso spargit inepta Daeam. Statque latus praefixa veru, flat saucia pectus, Et canit Eventus, quos Dea magna movet. BELUS, the Ancients do not tell us very clearly, what sort of Deity Belus was. Hesychius says, that it was the Heaven, or Jupiter, and that the Sun was called Bela. St. Jerom, and St. Isidore are of Opinion, that Saturn was named Belus. Herodian in the Life of Maximinian assures us, that the People of Aquileia gave the Sun the Name of Beles. Some Manuscripts and Inscriptions call him Belinus or Bele∣nus. The God Baal, or Baalphegor, who is men∣tioned in the Old Testament, was the same Belus, who was the Author of the Idolatry and Priesthood of the Chaldeans. There was another Belus the Son of Nep∣tune, who married Isis after the Death of Apis her first Husband, when Cecrops reign∣ed at Athens. Aegyptus and Danaus were his Sons, and thence it comes to pass, that the Fifty Daughters of Danaus were called BE∣LIDES. BEEL, or BELUS, says Varro, is the same with Jupiter the Son of Saturn. He was the first as St. Cyril tells us in Lib. 3. against Julian the Apostate, who took upon himself the Name of God, and set up Ido∣latry, causing Temples to be built, Altars to be made, and Sacrifices to be offered in Honour of himself, which his Son Ninus, and Queen Semiramis much promoted. BERECINTHIA, the Name of a Mountain, and City in Phrygia, where Cy∣bele the Mother of the Gods was most zealously worshipped, and was from thence named Berecinthian. BERONICE, Berenice, Queen of Aegypt, and Wife of Ptolomaeus Euergetes her own Brother, who having vowed her Hair to the Goddess Venus, if her Husband re∣turned safe from a Voyage, which he made into Asia, consecrated and laid up her Hair in the Temple of the Goddess to fulfil her Vow, but it being not to be found, the Magician Conon a little after, that he might
gain the Favour of the King, who was an∣gry for the loss of it, perswaded him, that it was put among the Stars, and changed into those Seven Stars, which appear in the Form of a Triangle at the Tail of the Cae∣lestial Sign, called the Lion. Callimachus made a Greek Elegy upon this Subject, which Catuilus has turned into Latin. BEROSUS, a Chaldean, to whom the Athenians erected a Statue with a gilded Tongue, upon the account of his excellent Eredictions. BES, or BESSIS, the Mark, or 8 Ounces, part of the Assis. BES, for BIS, which is Two Triens, which are each Four in Value. BESTIAE, Beasts, either wild, or do∣mestick Creatures, which were presented at Rome, in the Plays of the Amphitheatre, for Shows to the People. Some pleased the People with hunt∣ing of these Beasts, in which they made them fight with Men, or one with ano∣ther. Vopiscus has given us a curious Description of an hunting, which the Emperor Probus made upon the Circus, after his Triumph over the Germans. He gave, says he, a great hunting, where the People got an advantage by the Havock made in it. He caused his Souldiers to pluck up Trees by the Roots, and by covering them with Earth, set them again, so that the Circus seemed on a sudden to become a flourish∣ing, Wood, which he filled with Ostri∣ches, Stags, Wild Boars, Bulls, and Wild-Goats. All these Beasts were left to the People, and every one catched what he pleased. Another Day he gave an hunt∣ing of an Hundred Lions upon the Am∣phitheatre, which being let out, made a Noise like Thunder with their terrible roarings. In the same Place an Hundred Lybian Leopards, and as many Syrian; and an Hundred Lions, and Three Hundred Bears, were presented fighting toge∣ther. Men entred the Combate with fierce Beasts. The Fencers and Slaves fought arti∣ficially with Lions, and Leopards, and often conquered and slew them. Criminals also, who were condemned, were exposed to Beasts without any Arms to defend themselves, and often they were bound, and the People were pleased to see them torn in pieces, and devoured by those hungry Creatures. This was the most usu∣al Punishment, which the Pagan Emperors inflicted upon the first Christians, whom they ordered to be given to the Beasts, damnati  Bestias. Some Freemen also to give proof of their Skill and Courage would fight with Beasts. Women themselves, according to the Re∣lation of Suetonius, would dare to divert the Emperor, and People, by engaging with the most cruel Beasts. Lastly, These Creatures were made to fight one with another, Lions with Bears, Rhinoceros's with Elephants, which would shew much Activity and Cunning in so great a Body. BIAS, of Priene, a Philosopher, and one of the Seven wise Men of Greece. The City, where he lived, being taken, he fled, and would not carry any of his Goods with him. His Fellow Citizens asked him, why he did not take his Goods with him, he re∣plyed. All that is mine, I have with me; meaning his Wisdom and Mind. BIBLIOTHECA, a Library, a Room filled with Books. The Kings of the Race of Attalus, being Lovers of Sciences and Learning, built a Li∣brary at Pergamus. King Piolemy did the like at Alexandria. Plutarch writes, that the Kings of Pergamtu's Library contained Two Hundred Thousand Volumes, but was much inferior to that of the Kings of E∣gypt, which Aulus Gellius assures us had Seven Hundred Thousand; and Gallen tells us, that the Kings of Egypt were so very zea∣lous to increase the number of the Books of their Library, that they would give any price for the Books, which were brought them, which gave an Occasion of forging abundance of Books, and attributing them to such Authors, as did not compose them, that they might put a greater value upon them. This Library was burnt by the Romans in the first War, which they made in E∣gypt. Aulus Gellius says, that it was set on Fire through mere carelessness, and that not by the Roman Soldiers, but by their Auxiliary Troops; which he may be thought to speak, that he might free his own Na∣tion from the imputation of so barbarous an action, since the Persians, as illiterate as they were thought, spared the Library of Athens, when Xerxes had taken that City, and set it on fire. The Roman Emperors erected diverse Li∣braries at Rome with great expence, and much magnificence; and Augustus caused a beautiful and spacious Gallery to be made in Apollo's. Temple, that he might put
therein a Library of Greek and Latin Books. BIBLIS, The Daughter of Miletus and the Nymph Cyane, who being fallen in Love with her Brother Caunus, and finding no way, to enjoy him, hanged herself. Ovid in his Metamorphoses says, that the Gods changed her into a Fountain, which bears the same Name. BIGAE, a Chariot for Racing, drawn by two Horses a-breast. BIGATI NUMMI, Pieces of Mo∣ney, stamped with the Figure of a Charior drawn with Two Horses a-breast. BISSEXTUS, the Odd day, which is inserted in the Kalendar every fourth Year, that the Year may equal the Course of the Sun. This Intercalation, or Interposition was found out by Julius Caesar, who having observed, that the Sun finished its course in Three Hundred Sixty Five Days, and about Six Hours, added one whole day every Fourth Year, that he might take in these Hours, and this Day he inserted next the 23. Day of February, which at that time was the last Month of the Year among the Romans. It was called BISSEXTUS, because the Sixth of the Calends of March was then twice counted, bis sexto Calendas Mar∣tias, and that Year had 366 Days BITO, and CLEOBIS, the Sons of Argia, the Priestess of Juno. When their Mother was going to the Temple of that Goddess in a Chariot drawn with Oxen, and the Oxen moved too slow, these Bre∣thren drew their Mothers Chariot to the Temple of Juno, and their Mother when she had sacrificed to the Goddess, begged a Re∣ward for her Children, who voluntarily sub∣mitted their Necks to the Yoke. This was granted; for when they had feasted plenti∣fully upon the Sacrifice, they lay down to sleep, and were both found dead together without Pain, and had the Honour of that Action. BITUMEN, a black Juice, which will grow hard, by putting into Vinegar, yet will swim upon Water. It cannot be cut with Iron, nor Brass, nor will it mix with Menstruous Blood. The People of the Country assure us, that Bitumen runs together on helps, and is driven by the Winds, or drawn to the Shore, where it is dried both by the heat of the Sun, and the Exhalations of the Earth, and then they cut it, as they do Stone or Wood. There was such an Abundance of it at Babylon, says Vitruvius, that they used it for Morter to build their Walls. BOCCHYRIS, King of Aegypt. He was so just in his Judgments, that according to Diodorus, the Aegyptians made use of his Name, as a mark of just and upright Judgment. 'Tis said that in his time (which was in the Days of Romulus and Remus, the Founders of Rome) a Lamb spoke. BOEDROMIA, Feasts, which the Athenians celebrated every Year in Honour of Apollo, for the Victory which Theseus gain∣ed over the Amazons. From it Apollo had the name of Boedromius. BONA DEA, the good Goddess, na∣med by the Ancients, Fatua, or Senta. This Deity was had in great Veneration by the Roman Ladies. She was Dryas the Wife of Faunus, of an exemplary Chastity: They sacrificed to her in the Night, in a little Chappel, into which it was not per∣mitted to Men to enter, or be present at her Sacrifices; whence it is that Cicero im∣putes it to Clodius as a Crime, that he had entred into this Chappel in a Disguise, and by his Presence had polluted the My∣steries of the good Goddess. This Sacrifice was kept Yearly in the House of the High-Priest, and that by his Wife with the Virgins consecrated to the Good Goddess. By her, some understand the Earth, and 'tis for that reason, that she is sacrificed to by the People, because no∣thing is so dear to them as the Fruits of the Earth. This is no just Ground, why the Romans might not understand by this Deity an ancient Queen of Italy, named Fauna, for most of the Heathen Gods had a double Relation in this kind; and this was the Oc∣casion of it. It is certain that in the primitive Times, all their Worship terminated upon material Beings, as the Heaven, Stars, Earth, Sea, Woods, Rivers, and other things of the like Nature, which the first Men through Igno∣rance believed to be the sole Causes of all the Good or Evil that happens in the World: But as Opinion can find no stop, when once the Bounds of Nature are passed over, the religious Respect, which they entertained for these Beings, extended itself with more Reason to the Persons themselves, who had
invented this Worship, and had perswaded others to it. This Adoration increased more and more in following Ages, through the Respect which Antiquity begets, and great Preeminence it gives to all things, and because Men have always had an Inclination to think the Gods like themselves, for this Reason, which Cicero gives (which is) that there is nothing, that appears so excellent to Man, as Man himself, they came by De∣grees not only to deify the Inventers of these Worships, but also to confound them with the Deities, which they had found out. Hence it came to pass, that the same God was worshipped in several Places of the World under different Names, as all the Mythologists confess, because they bore the Name of those eminent Persons, who had each of them settled their Worship in those Countries. Wherefore 'tis probable, that 'twas Fauna, who first began the Wor∣ship of Terra (or the Earth) at least in Italy; since she was after confounded with that Deity there. She was called Bona Da, or the Good Goddess by way of Excellency, and that for the best Reason in the World, because there is no being that does Men more good. If the Sex of this Queen were not enough to make us think this Deity rather to be a Female than a Male, since they are often not distinguished, yet that which bears Fruits as the Earth doth, hath so much greater likeness to a Woman, than a Man, that we need search no farther for a Rea∣son; and this is the manifest cause, why Women were only to perform her Service, and Men totally excluded. This Non-admission might also proceed from this Story. That this devout Queen was so chast, that no Man, but her own Husband ever saw her, nor knew her pro∣per name, for she was called Fauna in af∣ter Ages for no other Reason, but because her Husband's name was Faunus. In Re∣spect therefore to her signal Chastity it was, that all Men are forbidden to be pre∣sent at her Worship, the High-Priest him∣self in whose House it was performed, and who was the Chief-Minister in all others, not excepted; for he was obliged to depart out of his House before they began, and carry along with him all the Men which were there, of what Quality soever they were. All Pictures also which represented any Male were covered; the vestal Virgins were summoned to it. Of all Plants with which the House was to be adorned, only the Myrtle was forbidden, because it was consecrated to Venus, and her Service began just at Night. —Velari pictura jubetur Quaecunque alterius Sexus imitata figuram est. Juv. BOOTES. Charles's Wain, a Constel∣lation in the Heavens called by the Greeks, Arctophilax, which signifies, the Keeper of the Bear, because he drives a Chariot drawn by Fourteen Stars after the manner of an Ox-head. BOREAS, the North Wind, called also Aquilo; it blows between the Oriental and the North Solstice. The Poets feign him to be the Son of Astreus, and falling in Love with Orythia, stole her, that he might have the Enjoyment of her. Philostratus makes Boreas the King of the Winds, who sent his Two Children, Ze∣thes (that is to say, a strong Blast, and Ca∣lais i. e. a gentle Gale) in the Expedition to Colchos. But Apollonius Rhodius gives us a more particular Account of this Fable. The Children of Boreas, says he, were al∣so in the Expedition at Colchos. He begat them of the Nymph Orythia, whom he stole from Athens. These Two Persons had gilded Scales, which covered their Shoulders, and Wings on their Feet, with a long Purple Head of Hair. They drove the Harpies which much molested Phineus King of Thrace, into the Island Strophades, but were warned by Iris, to desist from the Pursuit, that they might not hurt Jupiter's Dogs, as the Harpies were. Pausanias tells us, that the People of Megalopolis in Greece, gave as great Honour to the Wind Boreas, as to any God what∣soever, because he had assisted them with a great Force against the Attempt made upon them by the Lacedemonians. They dedicated, says the same Author, in his Eighth Book, Page 513, an Altar to the Wind Boreas, and the Citizens offer'd a Sacri∣fice to him every Year. Boreae ara dicata est, cui anniversarium Megalopolitani sacrum fa∣ciunt, &c. When Homer says, that the North Wind was transformed into a Stone-Horse, and covered several fine Mares, of which he begat Twelve Colts so swift and light, that they could run upon the tops of standing Corn without breaking it, and upon the Waves of the Sea without ma∣king any Impression upon them, 'twas be∣cause he really believed that they were
Mares, that would conceive by the Influen∣ces of the Wind. Virgil relates that as a true Story of the West Wind, which Homer speaks of Boreas, as a Fable. BOS, an Ox, a Beast, which the Ancients offered in Sacrifice to several of their Dei∣ties, as Jupiter the Chief of their Gods, and such an Ox according to Homer ought to be Five Years old. Yet Plutarch assures us, that Solon forbad by his Laws, that Oxen should be sacrificed; but Aelian explains it of Oxen used in plowing. Oxen were also sacrificed to Cybele the Mother of the Gods, and those Sacrifices were for that reason called Tauropolia, to return Thanks to that Goddess of the Earth, for teaching Men the Art of taming those Creatures, and using them in tilling the Ground. The Greeks also offered black Bulls to Nep∣tune, to denote the raging of the Sea when it is moved. The Superstition of the Ancients proceed∣ed so far as to offer Hecatombs, or Sa∣crifices of an Hundred Oxen to Jupi∣ter. Strabo teaches us, that these Hecatombs came from the Lacedemonians, who every Year offered a Sacrifice of an Hundred Oxen in the name of an Hundred Cities, which were under their Command and Go∣vernment. But these Expences appearing too great to some Persons, they reduced these Sa∣crifices to Twenty five Oxen, and suppo∣sed through a Childish Distinction, that be∣cause these Oxen had each of them Four Feet, it was sufficient to make an Heca∣tomb, that there was the number of an Hundred found in those parts. One of the Ancients finding himself in great Danger upon the Sea, through a Tem∣pest, promised to offer an Hecatomb, if he es∣caped; but being not able to discharge his Vow by reason of his Poverty, he contrived to make an Hundred small Oxen of Dough, and to offer them to the Gods that had delivered him. Some attribute this false Hecatomb to Pythagoras; for Diogenes Laertins tells us, that the Philosopher having found out a new Demonstration in his Trigonometry, offered an Hecat∣tomb of these Artificial Creatures to the Gods. BRABEIA, the Rewards, which the Ancients gave to Actors, Dancing-Wo∣men, Jack-puddings, Vaulters, and Stage-players. BRABEUTES, was he, who in the publick Shows and Plays, ordered them, provide the Expence, and distributed the Rewards. BRACCAE, Breeches, the Linnen which covers the secret Parts, as our Linings, This word is from the Celtae, who gave the Name of Gallia Bracata to that part of France called afterward Gallia Narbonensis. They were a sort of Breeches, or as others think, a short Gown: Mr. Du Cange accounts them, that part of the Cloaths, that cover the Thighs, as our Breeches do; that the word comes from Brace, or Braccae, because they were short. Salmasius will have it to be derived from , and others think it comes from the Hebrew Borec, which signifies a Knee, because that Garment reached no further than their Knees. BRACHIALE, a defensive Armour to secure the Arm. The Compleat Horsemen of Old wore them. The Switz-Foot also do so now, but they are only the Pike-men. BRACHMANES, Brachmans, Philosophers, and Poets among the Indians. Strabo gives us an elegant Description of these Brachmans, and represents them to us, as a Nation devoted as much to Religion, as the Jews were. As soon as their Children are born, their Doctors come and bless their Mothers, and give them some virtuous Instructions. While they are in their Infancy, they ap∣point them Masters, and accustom them to a thrifty way of Living. They teach their Philosophy in Woods, and allow none to marry, till they are Thirty Seven Years of Age; Their Life is very labo∣rious and mortifying, but after that they al∣low something more Liberty. Their Do∣ctrine was, that this Life is only a prepa∣ration and passage to an eternal and hap∣py Life to those who live well; That the joy, and grief, good and evil of this World are but Dreams and Fantoms. They were much of the same Opinions with the Greeks; that the World had a beginning, and should have an end. That God made it, governs it, is present in it, and fills it.Strabo afterward relates a Discourse, which Alexander the Great had with one
of the most famous Brachmans, named Cala∣nus, who laughed at the rich Garments of Alexander, telling him, that in the Golden Age, Nature produced a great Plenty of those things, but now Jupiter had changed the State of Affairs and ob∣liged Men to procure themselves another sort of Plenty by Arts, Labour, and Thrif∣tiness; that Men began to abuse this second Favour, which was a just Reason to think that the World was now quite changed.St. Clement of Alexandria speaks of the Brachmans almost in the same manner as Strabo. He assures us that they would not eat any living Creature, nor drink Wine; observed a continual Continency, eat but once a Day, and some of them only once in Two or Three Days; and that they looked upon Death, as a Passage into another Life. BRANCHIDAE, the Priests of Apol∣lo Didymaeus, who uttered his Oracles near the Promontory of Ionia. This Name was from one Branchut a Thessalian, who affir∣med himself to be the Son of Apollo, and to whom Sacrifices were offered, as to a God. BRIAREUS, one of the Giants, the Son of Coelum and Terra, who had an Hun∣dred Arms according to the Fable. He was chosen by the Sun and Neotune, to decide their difference about the Territory of Co∣rinth, which he adjudged to Neptune, and gave the Sun the Promontory above the City. BRITANNICUS, the Son of the Emperor Claudius and Messalina. His Mo∣ther-in-Law Agrippina, raised Nero to the Empire, to his Prejudice, by means of Tiberius. He was poisoned at the Age of Fourteen Years by Nero's Order. The Account which Tacitus gives of him, is this. Among other Pastimes, which the Youth used at the Feast of the Saturnalia, there was a certain Play, in which they made a King, who commanded all the Company. It fell to Nero's Lot to be chosen, who gave tri∣fling Commands, sometimes to one, and sometimes to another; but when he came to Britannicus, he ordered him to rise up, and reherse some Verses, thinking to make him laughed at; but he not seeking to ex∣cuse himself, began a Poem, wherein he complained of the Wrong done him, and described the Misfortune of a Prince, who had been deprived of his Kingdom, where by he moved the Compassion of all pre∣sent. Then Nero being nearly touched with this Affront, resolved to kill him im∣mediately by poisoning him and to that end gave a Commission to the Captain of the Praetorian Band, named Pollio, who had in his Custody, that famous Woman for poisoning, named Locusta, whom he had before made use of, to destroy the Fa∣ther of Britannicus. It was a Custom for the Emperors, Children, to dine with the other Princes, who were of the same Age, at a Table that was not served with so much State. Wherefore to prevent that the Person who was to tast Britannicus's Meat and Drink should not be poisoned, they gave him some Drink a little too hot, which when he had tasted he gave to the young Prince, who refusing to drink it, they gave him some cooler Water, which was poisoned, and seized all his Members in such a manner, that he lost his Speech, and Life in an Instant. He was carried into Mars's Field with very little Ceremony, but in so great a Tempest, that the Peo∣ple took it for a mark of the divine An∣ger, who detested so black and infamous an Action. BRONTES, one of the Cyclops, who wrought in Vulcan's Forge, so called from the Greek Word  which signifies Thun∣der, because of the Noise and Clatter, which he makes upon his Anvil. Hesiod makes him the Son of Coelum and Terra, as well as the other Cyclops, Styropes, and Pirac∣mon. BROTHEUS, the Son of Vulcan and Minerva, who seeing himself derided for his Deformity, cast himself into the Fire, preferring Death before a contemptible Life. BRUMALIA, the Saturnalia, which were kept at the Winter Solstice, or upon the shortest Day of the Year. See SATUR∣NALIA. BRUTUS, the Name of several Ro∣mans. Lucius Junius Brutus, the Founder of the Liberty and Common-wealth of Rome, which had been governed by Seven Kings Successively. He had seemed till the Death of Lucretia to be of a very dull and slow Wit, but the Death of that famous Woman changed him on a sudden, for he delivered a funeral
Oration in praise of her so well that the People looked upon this Proof of his excellent Wit, and Eloquence for a Prodigy, and Miracle from the Gods. The People at the Conclusion of this Speech cried out, LIBERTY, and made Brutus Consul, giving him an absolute Power. He was slain in a single Fight with Aruns, the Son of Tarquinius, but slew his Enemy at the same time. The Roman Matrons lamented him, and wore Mourning for him a whole Year, acknowledging him the Revenger of the violated Ghastity of their Sex, in the Person of Lretia. M. and Decius Brutus, were the Institutors of the Shews of Gladiators at Rome, which be∣fore had never been used in any Mans Me∣mory. They introduced them in Honour of the Funerals of their Fathers. According to Florus these Shews did not be∣gin till Three Years after. There was another Brutus of the same Family, who was one of the Murtherers of Julius Caesar. He was driven from Rome by Anthony, and killed himself in the Phi∣lippick Field, a little time after. BUCCINA, a sort of Trumpet, used by the Romans in their Wars. BUCEPHALUS, the Horse of Alexander the Great, that is to say, Ox-head, because of his Cross-sight, which made him shy, and Fiery, or because he had a Neck and Head like a Bull. He would not suffer that any Person should mount him but Alexander, In the War with the In∣dians, he exposed himself to the Enemies Darts to save his Master, and finding him∣self wounded, he fled out of the Battle, and when he had carried Alexander to a Place of Safety he died, at which this Prince was much troubled, and made a Magnificent Funeral for him. In the Place where he was buried, he built a City, which he named from him Bucephalia, 'twas in the Indies, as Pliny relates, lib. 6. c. 10. BULLA, a Boss, or Ring, or Medal, which the Romans wore upon their Breast, and was used as an Ornament for such as rode in Triumph. The Children of the Nobility wore it with their Garment, called Praetexta, bordered with Purple, and never went without it, till they put off that Garment, as Persius tells us. Cum primum pavido custos mihi purpura cossit. Bullaque succinctis Lribus donata pependit. Sat. V. v. 30. Pliny discovers to us the Original of this Ornament thus. He says, that the Son of Tarquinius Priscus, the Fifth King of Rome, when he was but Fourteen Years of Age, shewed an extraordinary Courage in the War against the Sabines, and slew one of his Enemies Captains with his own Hand. His Father commended this Action before all the People, and as a Reward of it, gave him a Robe edged with Purple, and ador∣ned with this Bulla, or Ring, which he hung upon his Breast, and came down as far as his Stomach, as the Popish Bishops Crosses do. In these Bulla they had Preser∣vatives against Enchantments, and Witch∣craft. In after times it became a Custom to give this Ornament to Noblemens Chil∣dren, animate them by this Badge of Vertue to behave themselves valiantly in War, and at the same time to preserve them from the Contempt of Men. These Bulla were made in different Shapes, as we may observe, but chiefly those that were worn against Enchantments, for they often resembled the Privy Parts of Beasts, and Men. BUSIRIS, the Son of Neptune, who under a Pretence of entertaining Strangers slew them, and offered them in Sacrifice to Jupiter, which stirred up Hercules to kill him, to revenge that cruel Inhumanity. Hence this Name was made Proverbial, to express such as love Murther and Blood∣shed. BUSTUM, a Pile of Wood, or the Place where the Bodies of dead Persons were burnt in ancient times. They whose Busi∣ness it was to preside over it, were called BUSTUARII. BYRSA, the Tower of Carthage. The Word is Greek, and signifies a Skin, because 'tis said, that Dido flying from the Anger of her Brother came into Africa, and boughe as much Ground of Jarbas, as a Bulls Skin could cover, but she contrived to cut the Skin into Thongs, and by that Means gained a large piece of Ground, big enough to build a Castle on, and na∣med it BYRSA, as we understand from Virgil, Liber. 3. Aeneid. v. 374.
Mercatique solum facti de nomine Byrsam. Taurine quantum possent circundare tergo. This Donatus explains of the Leather Money, which anciently was in use, and with which Dido paid King Jarbas for the Land she bought of him. C C The third Letter of the Alphabet, and one of those Consonants, called Mates. It is pronounced different ways, but usually like a K, unless before the Vowels, A, O, and U, when 'tis pronounced some∣times like an S, and then a little Line is drawn from the bottom of it C, which the Printers call a C with a Tail, but the French a Cedille. C, is a numeral Letter among the An∣cients, and stands for an Hundred, but with a Line drawn over the top, C, it signifies an Hundred Thousand. When we meet in History with a sin∣gle C, it denotes Consul, when with a dou∣ble CC, it for the most part signifies Con∣sules. This Letter has a near Relation to G, and Q for G, is but a diminutive of C, in the Judgment of Quintilian, so like are they one to the other, for of , we make Gubernator, , Gloria, and of Egi, actum. Quintilian further adds, that 'tis not material whether Gaius or Gneius, be written with a C, or a G, and of pornicere, (which is still in use in Sacrifices) is made porrigere, and the like. There is the like Affinity between C, and Q, so that several Grammarians have cast out Q, as a superfluous Letter, affir∣ming that C, and V, are sufficient to ex∣press whatever is written with Q, and 'tis worth our Observation, that the Greeks have no Q, which is taken from the Coph, or Koppa of the Syrians, and in French it has not a different Pronunciation from a single K, or C, before A, O, and U. This Letter was accounted a sad, and fatal Letter among the Ancients, because they made use of it, in the Sentences of Criminals, being set upon their Tickets, or Ballots, for, I condemn the accused, Con∣dem. Among the Greeks, this Letter has the Shape of the Round C Sigma, much used in the ancient Monuments engraven in the Times of the Roman Emperors from Augus to Constantine. CABALA, an Hebrew Word which signifies Receptio, which is a secret Knowledge that the Jews pretend to receive by Tradition and divine Revelation, by which they explain all Mysteries of Divinity, and all the Operations of Nature. They spend most of their Time in making My∣sterious Comparisons of things to the Let∣ters of the Hebrew Alphabet, in which they shew much Ingenuity, but withall as much Vanity and Superstition. Dr. Robert Fludd an English Man has made large Dis∣courses and Apologies for it, in his Nine great Volumes, which may be consul∣ted. CABALISTA, a Cabalist, one who is well skilled in the Jewish Cabalistical Learn∣ing. CABALLUS, the Horse Pogasus, to which the Fable has given Wings, as he flew to Mount Helicon, he caused a Foun∣tain to rise out of a Rock by a Blow of his Hough, from whence it was named Hippocrene, or the Fountain of the Horse. It was consecrated to Apollo and the Muses, and upon that account its feigned that the Poets drank of that Water to make their Poems to be admired and approved. Per∣stus would have us to understand thus much by the first Verses of his first Sa∣tyr. Nec fonte labra prolui Caballino: Nec in bicipiti somniasse Peruasso Memini, ut repente sic Poeta prodirem. I never dipped my Lips in the Waters of the Fountain of the Horse Pegasus. I do not remember, that I ever slept upon Parnassus, which has Two Tops, that I might immediately commence Poet. The Quirinal Mount at Rome was cal∣led Caballus, in the time of the Roman Emperors, because of the Marble Statue of Alexander the Great, taming his Horse Bucc∣phalus, set there. CABIRI, the great Gods of Same∣thrace. Varro calls them Divi potentes, and they are the same which the Samethraciant
name, the powerful Gods, which are Coelum and  Apollonius in the first Book of his , will have these Gods to be Four in Number, to which he gives these bar∣barous Names, though forbidden to disco∣ver them. AXIEROS, which is Ceres, AXIOKERSA, which is Preserpina, AXIOKERSOS, which is Pluto, and CASMILLUS, or CA∣MILLUS, which is Mercury. Others say, they were but Two, JUPITER, and DIONYSUS, some think, they were called Cbiri from certain Moun∣tains of Phrygia, which have the same Name. The Fragment of Sanconiathon quoted by Ensebius, tell us, that at Berith in Phoenieia, they worshipped certain Gods called Cabiri, from the Hebrew Word Cabir, which sig∣nifies Great and powerful. We are also taught from the same Fragments, that the Gods Cabiri, were the Sons of Jupiter, and were called DIOSCURES, i. e. Children of Jupiter, SAMOTHRACES, because they were worshipped in the Isle that bears the same Name. Herodotus relates, that Cambyses being in Aegypt, and treating whatever the Aegyp∣tians counted Holy with Contempt, and Ra∣lliery, went into the Temple of the Ca∣biri, and laughing at their Images, burnt them. The other Nations of the World imita∣ted the Aegyptians, and had their Cabiri, as well as they, whom they honoured in their Temples. The Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, says, that there were at first but Two Cabiri, Ju∣piter, and Bacchus, but names others after∣ward, viz. AXIEROS, AXIO∣kERSA, and AXIOKERSOS, and Fourth named CASMILLUS, which is MERCURY. M. Bochart derives these Names from the Hebrew Tongue, for he tells us that AXI∣EROS, is the same with Achasi eritz, that it to say, the Earth is my Possession, so that it can be no other but Cires, AXIOKER∣SOS, and AXIOKERSA, my Pos∣session is Death and Destruction, which are undoubtedly Pluto and Proserpina; as for Casmillus he was rather a Minister of the Gods Cabiri, then one of them, for Plutarch says, that the Greeks and Romans gave that Name to a young Officer in Jupiter's Tem∣ple, as the Greeks gave it to Mercury. Servius will have it, that in the Tuscan Lan∣guage, Mercury was called Casinillus, as being the Minister of the Gods. Strabo mentions the Opinion of some, who held that there were but Three Gods Cabiri, as also Three Nymphs Cabiri, Ca∣biros tres, & tres Nymphas Cabiridas. And 'tis certain that there were at first, but Three Cabiri, as Tertullian asserts positively in his Book de Spectaculis. Macrobius is of Opinion, that the Gods, which Aensas carried from Troy into Italy, were these Gods Cabiri, and 'tis for this Reason that Virgil calls them the great Gods. Dionysius Halicarnassaeus relates at large from the Credit of Callistratus, the Story of these great Gods, which Dandanus carried out of Arcadia, into the Isle of Samethrace, and from thence to Troy, where he placed them with the Palladium, which contained the Fate of Troy. He adds that Aeneas carried them afterward into Italy. Herodo∣tus gives the Name of Cabiri to the Gods of Samothrace, and says, that they were the Pelasgi, and Athenians together, that carried them into Samethrace. CACA, the Sister of Cacus, worship∣ped by the Romans in a little Chappel, called after her Name, where the Vestal Virgins went to offer Sacrifices. CACUS, the Son of Vulcan and Medu∣sa, whom the Fable represents to us with Three Heads, casting Fire and Flames out of his Nostrils, as Plutarch tells us. Cacus according to History was the Servant of Evander, a very wicked Man, who commit∣ted great Robberies. He attacked Hercules, as he returned out of Spain, and robbed him of most of his Cattel, drawing them into his Cave by their Tails, that his Robbery might not easily be discovered; but Her∣cules having found it by Caius's Sister, and by the lowing of the Cattel, he slew the Thief and buried him in his Cave throwing it down upon him. Hercules in Gratitude built an Altar to JUPITER the FINDER, near the Gate called Tri∣gemina, and sacrificed a Bull to him upon it. CADAVER, a dead Corpse. Lucian in his treatise of Mourning has made a pleasant and useful Description of the Ceremonies used about dead Persons, and says. After the nearest Relation has received a dead Person, and closed his Eyes, his
next Business is to put a piece of Money into his Mouth to pay the Ferry-man of Hell, who is Charon, but never considers whether it be Money that is current in that Country, so that in my Opinion he had better give him nothing, than that he should be constrained to send it back again. After this Ceremony he washes the Body of the dead Person with warm Water, as if there were no Water below, or that he were to assist at a Festival, at his first Arrival: Besides this, he per∣fumes him, crowns him with Flowers, and puts him on his best Cloths, either because they fear he will dye of cold by the way, or that otherwise he will not be treated according to his Quality. All is accompanied with Complaints and Mourning, Tears and Sobs, to agree with the Master of the Ceremony, who orders all Matters, and recites with such a mournful Voice all his former Calamities it would make them weep, if they had never seen him. Then some tear their Hair, others beat their Breasts, or scratch their Faces, some rend their Cloaths and cast dust up∣on their Heads, or fall down upon the Ground, or throw themselves against the Walls. So that the dead Man is the most happy of all the Company, for while his Friends and Relations torment themselves, he is set in some eminent Place, washed, cleansed, perfumed, and crowned, as if he were to go into Company. Then his Father or Mother if he had any, leave the Company and go to him to embrace him with such ridiculous Lamentations, as would make him burst with Laughter, if he could be sensible of it. There are some, who at the Death of their Rela∣tions, kill their Horses and Slaves, to send them for their Use into the other World, and burn or bury with them, their most valuable Goods, as if they would be use∣ful to them. Nevertheless, all that these People do, is neither for the Dead, who can know nothing of it, though they cried Ten Times as loud, nor for them∣selves, for then they might act in Silence. So that, if it be not done meerly for Custom sake, 'tis only for fear they should be thought to have no Friendship for, or good Opinion of their Neighbours. If he could be sensible of what they do, doubtless he would say, why do ye lament me so much, and torment your selves for me, who am happier than you? Is it because the Darkness wherein I am frights you, or because you think I am smothe∣red with the Weight of my Tomb? But a Dead Man has nothing to fear, since now he is past all Apprehensions of Death, and my burnt or putrified Eyes have no need to see the Light. Besides, were I miserable, what good could all your Com∣plaints do, or the smitings of your Breasts to the Tunes of Instruments, and this crowned Tomb, these Tears, and Lamen∣tation of Women? Do you think this Wine which you pour out, runs down to Hell, or is good to drink in another World; as for the Beasts which you but in Sacrifice one part of them rises in Smoke and the rest is consumed into Ashes, whic are very indifferent Food.This sort of mourning for the Dead, was much alike at Rome and Greece. But their Burials differ according to the Di∣versity of Nations; for the one burn, or bury them, and the other embalm them. I have been present at the Feasts in Aegypt, where they set them at the end of their Table; and sometimes a Man or Woman is forced to deliver up the Body of his Father or Mother to conform to that Custom. As for Monuments, Columns, Pyramids, and Inscriptions, nothing is more use∣less; there are some that celebrate Plays in Memory of the Dead, and make Fu∣neral Orations at their Burials, as if they would give them a Certificate or Te∣stimonial of their Life and Manners.After all this, some treat the Company, where the Friends comfort you, and de∣sire you to eat. How long say they, will you lament the dead? You can't re∣call them to Life again, by all your Tears? Will you kill your selves with Despai for your Friends, and leave your Chil∣dren Orphans? You ought at least to eat, because by this means you may mourn the longer. Thus far Lucian. When the Body is laid upon the Pile of Wood to be burnt, some Person opens his Eyes, as it were to make him look up to Heaven, and having called him several Times with a loud Voice, his next Relation sets Fire to the Pile of Wood with a Torch, turning his Back upon it to shew that he does that Service for the Dead with Regret. Pliny is of Opinion, that burning of the Bodies of the Dead was not ancient at
Rome. We do not, says he, find, that any of the Cornelian Family were burnt, till Syl∣la; but Pliny seems to contradict himself, when he writes, that King Numa forbad to pour Wine upon the Fires, which were kindled for the burning of the Dead; and Plutarch assures us, that Numa did strictly forbid that his Body should be burnt after his Death, but he ordered Two Tombs of Stone to be built, in one of which his Body should be laid, and in the other those holy Books which be had written about Re∣ligion, and the Worship of the Gods, which is Proof that burning of Bodies was very ancient, and that it was at least used in his Time. The Laws of the XII Tables, which were made Three Hundred Years after the building of Rome, which forbad the Burial, or burning of Bodies within the City, does not at all favour the first Opinion of Pliny, for nothing else can be concluded; but that there were Two ways of disposing of dead Bodies in use, burying, or burning, and both were forbidden within the City to avoid Infection, and secure it from the danger of Fires, which might happen by that means. Cicero teaches us, that the Custom of bu∣rying Bodies was introduced at Athens, by Cecrops, and that they buried them with their Faces to the West, whereas at Megara they turned their Faces to the East. The Custom of burying Bodies lasted a very long time throughout all Greece, and that of burning them came from the Gymnosophists of India, who had used it long be∣fore. The Aegyptians embalm the Bodies of the Dead, to preserve them from Corruption. The Aethopians had diverse ways; some∣times they cast them into the Currents of Brooks and Rivers, sometimes they burnt them or put them in Earthern Vessels, ac∣cording to the Testimony of Herodotus and Strabo. The Indians eat them, that by this cu∣rious Secret, they might give them a second Life by converting them into their own Substance. Those People whom Herodotus calls, the Macrobies, or Long-lived dry the Bodies, then paint their Faces with white, and so restore them to their Natural Colour and Com∣plexion. Then they wrapt them up in a Pillar of Glass, in which having kept the Body a whole Year they set it up in some place near the City, where all might see it. Diodorus Siculas relates that there were cer∣tain People, who after they had burnt the Bodies, put their Ashes and Bones into Sta∣tues of Gold, Silver, and Earth, covering them over with Glass. The Garamantes bury their dead on the Shore in the Sand, that they may be wash∣ed by the Sea. When the Body of the dead is consumed by the Fire, and all present have taken their last farewell, Vale aternum nos eo ordine, quo Natura vlouerit, sequemur, the nearest Relations gather up the Ashes and Bones, which they sprinkle with holy Water, and then put them into Urns of different Mat∣ter, to set them in their Tombs, pouring out Tears upon them, which being catched in small Vessels, called Lacrymatoriae, they are likewise reposited with the Urn in the Tomb. It is very uncertain how they could gather the Ashes, and keep them mingling with those of the Wood and other things, which were burnt with the Bodies. Pliny mentions a sort of Linnen which grows in the Indies, called by the Greeks, Asbestos,  not to be burnt, of which is made a Cloath that will not burn, although it be cast into the Fire. In this the Body being wrapped up, the Ashes of it may easily be kept together without mixing with those of the Wood; but this is not probable, since the same Pliny tells us, that this Cloth was very rare, and was preserved for the Kings of the Country only. Perhaps they made use of another Cloath made of the Stone Amiantus, which Pliny says, they had the Art of spinning at that Time, and Plutarch assures us, that in his Age there was a Quarry of that Stone in the Isle of Negropont, and the like is found in the Isle of Cyprus, Tines, and else∣where. They might have also some other Inven∣tion, as to set the Body upon the Fire in a Coffin of Brass or Iron, from whence it was easy to gather the Ashes and Bones that were not consumed. CADMUS, the Son of Agenor, King of Phoenicia, who was sent by his Father to find out Europa, which Jupiter had taken away, but not hearing of her after several long and dangerous Voyages, he went to consult the Oracle of Delphi, who ordered him to build a City in the Place, whither an Ox should lead him. And preparing in the first place to sacrifice to the Gods, he sent
his Companions to the Fountain of Dirce, which was near, to fetch him some Water, but they were devoured by a Dragon. Minerva to comfort him for this Loss, advised him to go and slay the Monster, and to sow its Teeth upon the Earth. This being done, he saw armed Men immediately to grow up, who slew one another, except Five who surviving that Slaughter helped him to build the City, which he called Thebes, and reigned there several Years. He mar∣ried Harmonia, or according to Ovid, Hermione, the Daughter of Mars and Venus, by whom he had several Children, which came all to miserable ends. Cadmus was expelled out of Thebes by Amphion, and went into Europe with the Phaenicians. 'Tis said that he brought with him Sixteen Letters of the Greek Alphabet, that he taught to write in Prose, and that he was the first that set up Images in the Temples of the Gods He was changed into a Serpent with his Wife, through the Anger of the God Mars, be∣cause he slew the Dragon which kept the Fountain of Dirce. Cadmus was one of the Graecian Heroes, of which the Pagans often made their Gods. Bochart informs us, that Cadmus was one of those Cadmonites, of whom Moses speaks in Genesis. The Name of Cadmonites, was gi∣ven them, because they lived about Mount Hermon, which was the most Easterly Coun∣try. It is probable that Hermione Cadmus's Wife might have taken her Name from that Hill. And because these People were part of the Hivites, it was feigned that Cad∣mus and Hermione were changed into Ser∣pents, because the Syriack Word Hevaeus signifies a Serpent. The Fable says, that Cad∣mus having sown the Serpents Teeth, there came up armed Souldiers, which slew one another, and there survived Five of them only, which subdued Baeotia. Bochart in∣geniously conjectures, that these are only Allusions to the Phoenician or Hebrew words, for these Two Terms, seni naas, signify both the Teeth of Serpents, and Points of a Sword. Hyginus tells us, that Cadmus found out Steel first at Thebes, as also the Metallick Stone, of which, Steel and Copper is made, still called Cadmia. The armed Souldiers were at length reduced to Five, because the word Hames signifies Five. It imports also a Soldier girded, and ready for Battle, because the Souldiers girded their Body about the fifth Rib. Nevertheless some Interpreters of Finder relate, that Cadmus and Hermione lived to a very old Age, and were by the special Fa∣vour of the Gods carried into the Elysian Fields in a Chariot drawn by two Dragons, which doubtless was the Occasion of the Fable. Euhemerus, of the Isle of Cos, in the third Book of his sacred History, will have it that Cadmus was the Cook of the King of the Cydonians, one of whose Maids, a Player the Flute he debauched, and had by her Semele, whom she put in a Chest with Bac∣chus, and cast her into the Sea, because she prostituted her self to Jupiter. Such as have allegorized this Fable, say, that Cadmus was a very valiant Prince, who conquered the Kingdom of Boeotia, by force of Arms, which was then governed by a King named Draco; that he endeavoured to divide it among his Subjects, but they quar∣relled and destroyed one another, and so he invaded the Kingdom. This History made the Poets feign that he slew a Dra∣gon, and sowing the Teeth their sprung up Men, which killed one another. CADUCA BONA, Escheats, Goods which are forfeited to the Kings Treasury, by the Laws of Escheats which were made in the Time of Augustus, to encrease the Treasure, which was exhausted by the civil Wars. These Laws were contained in seve∣ral Articles. 1. That all Persons who lived a single Life, should enjoy no Legacy, if they did not marry within the time limited by that Law, and if they did not, whatever they had bequeathed to them by Will, should be paid into the Treasury. 2. That those who had no Children should lose one Moyety of what was left them by Will, and this is that which the civil Law calls, Poena orbitatis. 3. All that was given by Will to any Person, who died in the Life of the Testa∣tor, or after his Decease before the Will was opened, was an Escheat, and belonged to the Treasury. 4. Every Heir, who was negligent in re∣venging of the Death of him, whose Estate he inherited was deprived of his Inheritance, and it came to the Treasury. In a Word, Caducum, in the sense of the civil Law is meant of any Legacy, or Gift of Inheritance, which is void, There is a Title in the Civil Law, de caducis tollendis.
CADUCA AUSPICIA, Vain Signs by Birds, which are of no Use. CADUCA VOTA, & CADU. CAe PRECES, Fruitless Vews, and vain Prayers which are not heard. CADERE CAUSA, or LITE, to lose his Suit or Cause. An ancient Term of Law. CADERE VOTIS, to make Vews in vain which are not heard. To hope vainly. CADUCEUM, an Heralds Staffe. The Wand which Mercury according to the Fable received of Apollo, in exchange of the Seven-stringed Harp, which he gave him, was so called. The Poets speak of many Vertues, which this Wand of Mercury had, as to lay Men asleep, and to raise the Dead. The Word comes from the Latin Cadere, which signifies to fall, because this Wand had a force in it to appease all Differences, and make Mens Arms to fall out of their Hands, as Mercu∣ry proved by Two Serpents which were fighting, for he threw it down between them, and they were Friends, and from that time Mercury always carried it as an Ensign of Peace. This Wand according to the Aegyptian Mythology was streight, adorned with Two Serpents twining round it, and as it were joined together about the middle of their Bodies which seek to kiss one another, ma∣king an Arch of the highest part of their Bo∣dies. The Ambassadours of Rome sent to make Peace carried a Wand of Gold in their Hand, and were upon that account called Caduceatores, as those who were sent to de∣clare War, were called FECIA∣LES. The Ancients have attributed many won∣derful Effects to the Cadinoeans, alluding to the Rod or Staff of Moses, with which he did such Miracles in Aegypt, before Pharoah, and the Magicians of that Coun∣try. CAECIAS, the East Wind, which blows from the Parts where the Sun rises, and raises Clouds, from whence comes the Pro∣verb. It is attended with Mischief, as the Cecias with Clouds. CAECILIUS, of Epirus, who was the Freedman of Atticus a Roman Knight. He taught Grammar at Rome and was the first who read Virgil and the other Latin Poets to his Scholars. There was another of that name, who was a Gaul, who has written of the Civil-Law, and of the signification of its Terms. CAECUBUM, a Town of Campania, whence came the excellent Wines which Ho∣race and others of the Poets speak so often of. Their Vineyard was destroyed by Nero, as Pliny relates. CAEDERE pignora, or Sectionem pigno∣rum instituere, or pignora auctione distrahere (In the Roman Law are used to signify) to sell by Auction, or by Parcels, the Goods which were seized from any one. CAELIUS, one of the Seven Moun∣tains of Rome, so called from Caelius Vi∣benus King of Tuscany, who assisted Romulus against the Latins. This Mountain was in∣closed within Rome by Tullus Hostilius, who built his Palace there. There were many beautiful Temples upon it, viz. That of Faunus, Venus, Cupid, and the Fourth to the Emperor Claudius. CAENIS, the Daughter of Elatheus, one of the Lapithae, who was beloved by Neptune, and changed into a Man that was invulnerable. He fought against the Centaurs for the Lapithae, and received no Wound, but he was crushed by the Fast of some great Trees. Virgil informs us that she resu∣med her Sex after his Death, but Ovid will have her changed into a Bird. CAERUS, was called by the Greeks the God of Opportunity, and by the Latins, of Occa∣sion. The Elians consecrated an Altar to him. Callistratus the famous Carver has re∣presented this God under the Form of a fair young Man, having his Hair loose, and blown about by the Gales of the Wind, and holding a Rasor in his Hand. A certain Poet also calls him the youngest of Saturn's Children. Phaedrus in his witty Fables has described him in the Shape of a Man with Wings, having Hair on the fore part of his Head, but being bald behind, that none can regain him when he has suffered him once to pass him, because he went so swift,
that he could run upon the edge of a Razor without hurting himself. CAESA & PORRECTA, these are the Entrails taken out of a Sa∣crifice, when it is opened, which the Sa∣crificer considers attentively, before he casts them into the Fire, to observe whe∣ther there be any Blemish, which may in∣terrupt the Sacrifice, or cause it to be re∣newed, and from hence arises the Proverb used by Cicero, Epist. 18. lib. 5. ad Atticum. Multa imo omnia, quorum  ne quid inter Caesa & porrecta, ut aiunt, oneris mihi ad∣datur, aut temporis. You see all that is in my Letters, refer to this Head, That being upon the point of learning my Office and relin∣quishing my Government, none shall involve me against my Intention and Design in new Affairs, and so oblige me to remain in my Office. CAESA, and RUTA, some understand by these Words, Things moveable, which are not fastened either by Hooks or Nails to the Foundation, or any part of the Building, as belonging neither to the Mason, or Car∣penter's Work. Cum aedes Paternas vende∣res, ne in rutis quidem, & caecis solium tibi paternum recepisti. When you sold your Fathers House, you did not reserve so much to your self out of all his moveables, as the Chair wherein he sat. CAESAR, Caius Julius, who was the first Roman Emperor. He was the Son of Lucius Julius Caesar, a Roman Consul and Praetor. This Word Caesar, was the Surname of the Julian Family, either because the first of them was cut out of his Mothers Belly, or because he was born with much Hair; or lastly, because the Grandfather of Caius slew an Elephant, which in the Punick Language is called Caesar. CAIUS JULIUS CAESAR, was of a good Stature, he had a pale Com∣plexion, brisk Eyes, a large Nose, some∣thing rising, all Marks of a great Soul; a lover of Honour and Command. Being made Consul he went into Gallia, and sub∣dued it by Force. He first crossed the Sea, and made old Albion, now England, to pay tribute to the People of Rome. He made Pompey and Crassus Friends, by marry∣ing his Daughter Julia to the former; but afterward they quarrelled in such a manner, as begat a civil War, which had almost over∣turned the Roman Empire. Caesar was ever the Conqueror, and utterly routed all Pom∣pey's Forces in Aegypt, and in the Pharsalian Field, and so he got the Government into his Hands, He marched from thence into Syria, and into the Kingdom of Pontus, where he con∣quered Pharnaces, vanquished Juba with Sci∣pio, and Cato in Africa. Returning to Rome he triumphed Four Times together, viz. over the Gauls, Aegypt, Pontus, and Africa, and further a fifth Time for subduing Pompey the younger in Spain. After all these Victories he was chosen perpetual Dictator, and proclaimed Empe∣ror, which so stirred up the Hatred and Envy of the Noblemen of Rome, that they conspired against him and slew him in the Senate-house, having given him Twenty Three Wounds with their Daggers, of which he died. Brutus and Cassuis were a∣mong the Conspirators. He was Fifty Six Years old at his Death. Dr. Andreas an Italian, a Scholar of the famous Argoli, has given an excellent description of him in writing upon the Medal of this Emperor. It is my Opinion, says he, that Julius Cae∣sar being of a tall Stature, and having brisk Eyes, and of a pale Skin, was of a passionate Disposition, but a little me∣lancholy; his large Nose a little rising between the Eyes, his Nostrils turning something upward, and flat on the top, make his Nose something like an Eagle's, which denotes great Courage, a lover of Glory and Empire. His brisk and black Eyes, his Forehead a little sinking in the middle, shew, that he was a Man of great Designs, and constant in his Undertakings; his Head was well shaped with Two ri∣sings behind and before, and his Forehead lean, all which joined together discover his Fitness for Study and Eloquence. He was bald on the fore part of his Head, which signifies his Inclination to love, from whence it became a common saying of his Souldiers which they sang at his Re∣turn from the East, O ye Romans, we have brought you the bald Adulterer. There never was any Man, who had more Valour, fearless Boldness, and Courage, than he, nor greater Experience in warlike Affairs, or the Art of governing, by which he subdued 300 Nations, took 800 Cities, and conque∣red 3 Millions of Men in several Battles. He was very resolute and daring, which made him to cross the Rhine and the Ocean to attack Germany and England, though the Wars of the Gauls, were not yet finished.
He shewed his Magnificence in his Prepara∣tions of Plays, and Triumphs, in which he ex∣ceeded all that had been before him, and swal∣lowed up, if I may so say, in that prodigal Ex∣pence, all the Roman Bravery, and Wealth. The large Reach of his Wit was proved by his Re∣formation of the Time and Laws, the former of which is an hard Work still, and the other his Death prevented him from finishing, as also his Eloquence in his learned Commentaries, which he has left of the Civil Wars, and the War with the Gauls. He was the mildest Prince in the World, and we may say, that his whole Life was nothing but a continual Example of Mercy and Bounty; for he not only pardoned his Enemies thro' the Greatness of his Mind, but he restored them to their Dignities, and often heaped new Honours upon them; which made Cicero say, that he had conquer'd Victory, because he freely deprived himself of that which she had given. Where∣fore 'twas nothing but Justice to him, that the Senate decreed, that in grateful Acknowledg∣ment, a Temple should be built to Clemency, his Device was, Veni, Vidi, Vici, i. e. I came, I saw, I conquered. CAESAR OCTAVIUS, surnam'd Au∣gustus, the Nephew of Julius, and adopted by him: His Stature was tall and proper, he had a comely Face, a sweet and modest Look, a Nose gently rising near the Forehead, his Hair some∣what cur'd. He succeeded Julius Caesar, and was Heir to his Name as well as his Vertues, and happily finish'd those Designs of Monarchy the other had laid. He reveng'd his Death upon his Murderers, who died all a violent Death, and some of them by the same Dagger wherewith they had assassinated him. This Prince had a generous Soul, and a charming and insinuating Wit. He was prudent and brave without Ostentation. His Eye-brows joining over his Nose, according to some Physiognomists, signified his Inclination to Vertue; others thought that this was a Sign of his Inclination to Study, because it denotes Melancholy, and there must be a little of that or Study: He was a Lover of Learning, and had a pleasant Way of Writing both in Prose and Verse, from whence it was that in his Time there were such able Men, as Virgil, Horace and Mecanas. The Teeth of this Prince being small and thin set, according to Suetonius, progosticated short Life, in the Judgment of Hippocrates, and some Physicians: But, perhaps, his Sobriety made a∣mends for this Defect, since he liv'd to 76 Years of Age, although he was often troubled with Rheum, the Setica, the Gout and Gravel. Suetonius also remarks, that he commonly fell sick about his Birth-day. See Augulus. CAESTUS, a large Gantlet made of a raw Hide, adorned with Lead, which the ancient Wrestlers made use of when they fought at Fifty-cuffs in the publick Games. Calepin is mi∣staken, when he says that it was a kind of Club, for it was only a Strap of Leather, strengthned with Lead, or Plates of Iron, wherewith, after the Manner of Chains lying a-cross, they encom∣pass'd the Hand, and also the Wrist and part of the Arm to guard them from Blows, left they should be broken, or dislocated by them. CAESTUS or CESTUM, a Girdle which the Poets and Painters have given to Venus and Juno: Thus Pallas in Lucian advises Paris to take away Venus's Girdle, that he might the better judge of the Beauty of the Three Goddesses; because, adds she, Venus is a Magician, who keeps some Charm conceal'd within her Girdle. This Word comes from the Greek , which signi∣fies a Girdle, or any other Work embroider'd with the Needle, which was commonly were by Women. It was a large Strap, which serv'd for a Girdle, made of Wool, and which the Husband untied for his Spouse the first Day of their Mar∣riage, before they went to Bed; as we learn from Homer, ; and O∣vid, Castáque fallaci zona recincta manu. And this relates to the Girdle of Venus, which Juno borrow'd of her to entice Jupiter to Love; for this Girdle, says Homer, B. 14. Of the Iliads, con∣tains the Passion, Wishes and Charms, by which Venus unites the Hearts of new-married People; which made Martial say, Ʋt Martis revocetur amor summique Tonantis, A te Juno petat ceston, & ipsa Venus. Lib. 6. Epig. 13. Some Authors say, that this Caestus of Venus was a little illet or Diadem, wherewith the Heads of Deities were encompass'd, which had a Point in the middle. CAEYX, King of Taracinia, the Son of Lucifer, or the Morning-Star, and Husband of Alcione; who going to consult the Oracle about the Government of his Kingdom, was Ship∣wreck'd at Sea; which so sensibly touch'd his Wife, that for Grief she threw her self Head-long into the Sea: But the Gods having Com∣passion on them, chang'd them both into Birds, call'd Haleyons, (i. e. Kingsfishers) who make the Sea calm when they harth their young ones in the Sea-rushes, during the sharpest Storms of Winter. Lucian in his Dialogue, entituled, Alcyon, re∣lates the Fable after another manner, for he in∣troduces Socrates, speaking thus to Cherephon, whose pleasant Sound had struck his Ear from the other side of the River: 'Tis Alcyon, says Socrates to him, who is so much exoll'd, of whom this Fable is told: That the Daughter of Eolus having left the brave
Caeyx her Husband, the Son of the Morning-star, wasted her self with fruitless Complaints, until the Gods mov'd with Compassion, chang'd her into a Bird, which still searches on the Waters for him, whom she cannot meet with upon Earth. And to recompense her Love, while she makes her Nest and hatches her Young, the Winds are still, and the Sea is calm, even in the sharpest Weather of Winter: And so to this Day, these fine Days are call'd from her Name Halcyon-Days. CAIUS or GAIUS, a Surname given to many illustrious Romans, upon the Account of the Joy their Parent felt at their Birth, à gaudio pa∣rentum. CAIUS, surnam'd Octavius, the Father of the Emperor Augustus, who defeated the Fugi∣tive Slaves, and destroy'd those that remain'd of Catiline's Conspiracy. CAIUS MEMMIUS, a Curule, Edile, who first celebrated the Feast Cerealia, or the Festival of Ceres, as appears by this Motto, Memmius aedilis Cerealia primus fecit. CALABRA CURIA, the Calabrian Court, built by Romulus upon Mount Palatine, near his own Habitation, according to Varro; or according to others, near the Capitol, in the Place where the Magazine of Salt now is. It was call'd Calabra, from the Latin Word Calare, which signifies to call together; because Romulus design'd this Place for the general Assemblies of the Peo∣ple; but since that time, the Rex sacrorum sum∣mons the Senate and People to meet there, to give them Notice of the Days for Games and Sacrifices. You may consult Macrobius about this Word, Lib. 1. Saturnal. and Festus. CALANTICA, a Kerchief, the ancient Head-dress of the Roman Women. CALARE, from the Greek Word  Voco, signifies to call together, or assemble the People, from whence comes the Word Calendae, which is as much as to say, the first Day of each Month, because he who presided at the Sacri∣fices, assembled the People in the Capitol, after he had observ'd the New Moon, to signifie to them the Feasts and Games of that Month. CALATA COMITIA, an Assembly of the People, who were call'd together for the E∣lection and Consecration of Priests, and for Wills which were made in the most ancient Times of the Commonwealth, in the Presence of the Peo∣ple, as Theophilus says, in Book 2. Instit. See Comitia. CALCEAMENTUM, the Shoe of the Ancients, which was different from ours both in Matter and Form: It was made at first of a raw Hide, with all the Hair on, which they call'd Carbatinas crepidas: But in succeeding Times, the Hides were prepared, curried, and steep'd in Allom-water. Shooes were made of the Skins of Cows, Calves, Deer, Goats, &c. from whence comes the Raillery used by Martial, of one who had a Cap of fine Leather, to whom he says, that his Head was shod. They made use also of the Bark of a Tree, which they wove or knit, as Martianus Capella tells us, Calceos praeterca ex papyro textili subligavit; which are also mention'd by Benedictus Balduinus, in Book 3. de Calceis antiquis. These sort of Shoes were especially used in Egypt, for the Priests wore them when they sacrific'd to the Gods: They made them also of Broom and Rushes, and they were call'd spartei and juncei calcei, which Fashi∣on came from Foreign Countries; and these the Spanish Peasants wore, as Pliny testifies. They made them also of Flaxen Cloth very white, em∣broider'd and enrich'd with Pearls and Dia∣monds. History informs us, that the Emperor Antoninus, surnam'd Philosophus, and his Succes∣sors till Constantine's Time, wore Shoes of this sort. They made use also of Mettals to make Shoes, as Iron, Brass, Gold and Silver. Em∣pedocles wore Shoes or Slippers of Brass; which gave occasion to that Apostrophe of Luci∣an, in his Dialogues to him, God preserve you good Master Slip-shoe. The Romans had Shoes of Iron, but they were used for the Punishment of Christians, during the Persecutions. They put great Nails into them, which they caus'd to be made red-hot, as was done to St. Basil, ferreas crepidas ignitis clavis confixas calceatus. They wore also Shoes of massy Gold, and others which were only gilt. Plautus, in his Bacchides, speaks of a very rich Man who wore Shoes, whose Soals were of Gold; Etiam rogas qui soccis babeat auro suppactum solum. Julius Caesar wore Shoes of Gold, and others which were only gilt, according to the Testimony of Seneca, Qui excusant eum, nigant id insolentiae factum, aiunt socculum auratum, imò aureum margaritis distinctum ostendere eum voluisse. They made use also of Wood, whereof they made Wooden Shoes, and Sandals or Galloches, which were the Shoes of the Poor, and of Parricides when they were shut up in a Sack, as Cicero tells us, Si quis parentes oc∣ciderit vel verberavit, ei damnato obvolvatur or folliculo lupino, soleae ligneae pedibus inducantur. Here follow the Names of the several sorts of Shoes which were used by the Ancients. CALCEI, Mullei, Soleae, Sandalia, Cothur∣ni, Caligae, Gallicae, Crepidae, Socci, Perones, O∣creae; to which we may add those which were in∣troduc'd by Custom, borrow'd for the most part from the strange Fashions of divers People; which are the Campagi, Phaecasia, Sicyonia, Alci∣biadae, Amiclaidae, Anaxyrides, Arpides, Laconicae, Lymphides, Persicae, Scythicae, Iphicratides: Of each of which we shall speak according to the Order of the Alphabet.
CALCEUS, which we now call a Shoe, was different from ours in this, that it covered half the Leg, and was open in the Fore-part, and was tied with Thongs or Straps, which they called corrigias calceamenti: This may be easily observ'd from the Passage of Sidonius Apollinaris, —Etconcurrentibus anfis Vinclorum pandas texunt per crura catenas. This Shoe was extream close upon the Foot, when they had a mind to be handsomly shod, and thence it was called tersum calceum or tenti∣pellium, and it was a Sign of Carelessness or Po∣verty, to have a Shoe too big, and your Feet loose in it and bagging out, laxum calceum, follen∣tem, or follicantem, which made Ovid caution his Mistress to take heed that her Shoe was not too big. Nec vagas in laxâ pes tibi pelle natet. Thus St. Jerom says, that all the Care of worldly Men was to be handsomly cloath'd and shod, Omnis bis cura in vestibus, si benè oleant, si pes in laxâ pelle non folliat. To shun this, they took care to tie their Straps close, as Tibullus tells us, Ansaque compressos alligat arcta pedes, and to stuff them with Locks of Wool, and such like Things, as we learn from Tertullian, Stipabant tomento; upon which Words Rhenanus says, Stipant ne fol∣licet calceus, they stuff it with Wool for fear left it should have Wrinkles and the Foot turn about in it. The Toe of the Shoe ended in a Point bend∣ing a little backwards, which they called calceum rostratum, repandum, uncinatum, and those who wore them so were called uncipedes, as Tertullian tells us in his Book de Pallio C. 5. Such were the Shoes of Juno, as Cicero informs us, cum lceis repandis. The common Citizens wore black Shoes, and the ordinary Women wore white: And there∣fore Lipsius seems to be mistaken, when he en∣deavours to prove that the Shooes of the Romans were white, and grounds his Opinion upon a Passage of Martial, where 'tis said, Calceus can∣didior sit primâ nive. But this learned Man doubtless did not take Notice, that in this Place Martial blames Cecinna, because he had a very nafty Gown, and wore Shoes as white as Snow: What is ahrm'd by Horace and Juvenal is more probable therefore, that they wore black. Ne∣vertheless 'tis true, that some Men wore white Shoes under the Emperors, for we read in Spar∣tianus, that Alexander Severus forbad Men to use them, and permitted the Use of them only to Women, who wore also some that were red, and some of other Colours, which made Persius caution a young Man to take heed lest his Mi∣stress should cuff him with her red Patten, soleâ objurgabere rubrâ. The Shoes of Senators, Patricians and their Children, had something like a Crescent at the End, which made the Figure of a C, to shew, that they were descended of the Number of the first 100 Senators or Fathers which Romu∣lus instituted after the building of his new City; Plutarch gives other Reasons for it, Resides, this Crescent was upon the Instep, and served to tie the Shoe close, as now our Buckles do, if we will believe Balduinus, who pretends to prove it by this Verse of Statius, Primaque patriciâ clausit vestigia lunâ. And by the Authority of Triaguellus upon the fifth Book of Alexand. Neap. Lunulae, says he, in calceis erant fibulae eburneae ad instar Lunae corni∣culantes. These Crescents were made of diffe∣rent Matter, as Gold, Silver and Ivory adorn'd with Diamonds and other precious Stones. The chief Roman Magistrates wore commonly red Shoes, on Days of Ceremony and Tri∣umphs. The greatest part of Writers will have the Emperor Dioclesian to be the first who wore precious Stones upon his Shoes, and that he presented them to be kiss'd by those who did him Reverence. Yet we find that Heliogabalus wore them before him, as also Alexander Seve∣rus; and Pliny speaks of this Custom as an Abuse very common in his Time. The Slaves wore no Shoes, but went barefoot, and for that Reason they were called cretati, or gypsati from their dusty Feet. There were also some Free-men that went barefooted, and Taci∣tus observes, that Phocion and Cato Ʋticensis and many others walk'd without Shoes; but these Examples are rare, and generally speaking all Persons that were of a free Condition walk'd always shod, except at some religious Solemni∣ty, or in the Time of some publick Calamity; for we learn from History, that when the great Mother of the Gods was wash'd, the People went in Procession barefooted, and that the Roman Dames put off their Shoes at the Sacrifices of Vesta. Tertullian relates, that the Pagan Priests very often order'd Processions to be made barefooted in a Time of Drought: Cùm tupet caelum & aret annus, nudipedalia denuntiantur. The principal Roman Knights at the Death of Julius Caesar ga∣thered up his Ashes, and being clad in white Tunicks they walked barefoot, to signifie at once both their Respect and Sorrow. Lycurgus and the Lacedemonian young Men went always bare∣foot, and the Aetolians and Hernicians, a Peo∣ple of Italy, had one Foot shod and the other naked, as also the Magicians in their Magical Mysteries: Virgil and Ovid tell us, Ʋnum exuta pedem vinclis. 4. Aeneid. Horace speaking of Canidia that famous Magician, acquaints us that she went barefooted,
—Pedibus nudis, passoque capillo. CALCULUS, this Latin Word signifies a Stone, because the Ancients made use of little Flint-stones instead of Counters, for reckoning up any Sums whether multiplied or divided in their Computations, either in Astronomy or Geometry. The Kings of Lacedemonia gave their Suffrages with Two small Stones, and the Romans marked their fortunate Days with a white Stone, and unfortunate with a black Stone, —Albo aut nigro notanda lapilio. CALENDAE, the Calends. The Romans called the first Day of each Month by this Word, which comes from the Greek Word , voco, because reckoning their Months by the Moon, there was a Priest appointed to observe the New Moon, who having seen it, immedi∣ately gave notice to him who presided over the Sacrifices; and he presently called the People to∣gether in the Capitol, and declared unto them how they must reckon the Days until the Nones, pronouncing Five times this Word , if they happen'd on the Fifth Day, or Seven times if they happen'd on the Seventh Day. These Calends, or first Day of each Month, were consecrated to Juno, upon which Account she was surnam'd Calendaris Juno. The Greeks had no Calends as the Romans had, and therefore when one would signifie a Time that should never happen, they made use of that Expression, ad Graecas Calendas, i. e. at latter Lammas, or never. Augustus was the first who brought this way of Speaking into Fashion, as Suetonius relates, upon the Occasion of certain Debtors, who were become insolvent, Cùm ali∣quis nunquam exsoluturos significare vult, ad Ca∣lendas Graecas soluturos ait. Instead of the Name of Calends, the Geeeks made use of the Word , i. e. the Day of the New Moon, which was the same thing with the Calends a∣mong the Romans, as this Passage of Plutarch in the Life of Galba plainly proves, . The Calends of January were more consider∣able than the Calends of the other Months, be∣cause they were particularly consecrated to Juno and the God Janus; upon which Account the Romans then never fail'd to offer Vows and Sa∣crifices to these Two Deities; and the People being clad in new Gowns, went in Crouds to the Tarpeian Mount where Janus had an Altar. Although the Calends of January was a Festival Day for them, yet they did not fail then to be∣gin any new Work, every Man according to his Profession, that they might never be idle the rest of the Year, having begun it with Working. The Magistrates entered upon their Office on this Day, and Feasts were kept everywhere, and Presents exchang'd between them in Token of Friendship. The Feasts of the Calends, says Matthew Ba∣lastris, was kept on the first Day of January, and there was great Rejoycing, because the New Moon happen'd on that Day, and it was com∣monly believ'd, that if they diverted themselves well at the Beginning, they should pass the whole Year the more merrily. This Day brought no Sorrow to any but only to Debtors, who were oblig'd to pay their Interest and Arrears, upon which Account Horace calls them tristes Ca∣lendas. CALENDARIUM, a Calendar; an Al∣manack which contains the Order of the Days, Weeks and Months, and shews the Festivals which happen during the Year. The Roman People at first had no Calendar, for it was only in the Hands of the Priests, from whom they learned the Festivals, and the other Solemnities of a civil Life. They took great care to write down in it every Thing that happened each Year, and marked moreover the Days on which there were Pleadings and on which there were none: And therefore this Calendar was called Fastus, or in the Plural Number, Fasti, and also Annales publici, because in it were set down the most considerable Actions of the Great Men of the Commonwealth: And from hence come these ordinary Forms of Speech, Conscribere nomina fastis, or Referre in fastos & in annales publicos, i. e. to transmit your Memory to Posterity. Cn. Flavius, Secretary to Appius Clandius, gave the People a Calendar in Despite of the Priests and Senate. Romulus was the first who divided Time by certain Marks, to serve for the Use of the People that were subject to him, and being much more skilful in Military Affairs than in Astronomy, he made the Year commence with the Spring, and gave it only Ten Months, whereof the first was the Month of March, and next after that was A∣pril, May, June, Quintilis, Sextilis, September, October, November, December. He gave 31 Days to each of these Four Months, March, May, Quin∣tilis and October, and only 30 to each of the other Six, so that they made altogether 304 Days, which was that Duration of Time wherein, as he ima∣gin'd, the Sun run through all the differed Sea∣sons of the Year, as may be seen in the following Calender. But as to the Division of Months into Calends, Nones and Ides, and the Manner of reckoning their Days, see hereafter the Seventh Paragraph before the Calendar of Julius Caesar.
The CALENDAR of Romulus, containing 10 MONTHS, and consisting of 304 DAYS. March. April. May. June. Quintilis. Sextilis. September. October. November. December. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 2. VI 2. IV 2. VI 2. IV 2. VI 2. IV 2. IV 2. VI 2. IV 2. IV 3. V 3. III 3. V 3. III 3. V 3. III 3. III 3. V 3. III 3. III 4. IV 4. Prid. 4. IV 4. Prid. 4. IV 4. Prid. 4. Prid. 4. IV 4. Prid. 4. Prid. 5. III 5. Non. 5. III 5. Non. 5. III 5. Non. 5. Non. 5. III 5. Non. 5. Non. 6. Prid. 6. VIII 6. Prid. 6. VIII. 6. Prid. 6. VIII 6. VIII 6. Prid. 6. VIII 6. VIII 7. Non. 7. VII 7. Non. 7. VII 7. Non. 7. VII 7. VII 7. Non. 7. VII 7. VII 8. VIII 8. VI 8. VIII 8. VI 8. VIII 8. VI 8. VI 8. VIII 8. VL 8. VI 9. VII 9. V 9. VII 9. V 9. VII 9. V 9. V 9. VII 9. V 9. V 10. VI 10. IV 10. VI 10. IV 10. VI 10. IV 10. IV 10. VI 10. IV 10. IV 11. V 11. III 11. V 11. III 11. V 11. III 11. III 11. V 11. III 11. III 12. IV 12. Prid. 12. IV 12. Prid. 12. IV 12. Prid. 12. Prid. 12. IV 12. Prid. 12. Prid. 13. III 13. Id. 13. III 13. Id. 13. III 13. Id. 13. Id. 13. III 13. Id. 13. Id. 14. Prid. 14. XVIII 14. Prid. 14. XVIII 14. Prid. 14. XVIII 14. XVIII 14. Prid. 14. XVIII 14. XVIII 15. Id. 15. XVII 15. Id. 15. XVII 15. Id. 15. XVII 15. XVII 15. Id. 15. XVII 15. XVII 16. XVII 16. XVI 16. XVII 16. XVI 16. XVII 16. XVI 16. XVI 16. XVII 16. XVI 16. XVI 17. XVI 17. XV 17. XVI 17. XV 17. XVI 17. XV 17. XV 17. XVI 17. XV 17. XV 18. XV 18. XIV 18. XV 18. XIV 18. XV 18. XIV 18. XIV 18. XV 18. XIV 18. XIV 19. XIV 19. XIII 19. XIV 19. XIII 19. XIV 19. XIII 19. XIII 19. XIV 19. XIII 19. XIII 20. XIII 20. XII 20. XIII 20. XII 20. XIII 20. XII 20. XII 20. XIII 20. XII 20. XII 21. XII 21. XI 21. XII 21. XI 21. XII 21. XI 21. XI 21. XII 21. XI 21. XI 22. XI 22. X 22. XI 22. X 22. XI 22. X 22. X 22. XI 22. X 22. X 23. X 23. IX 23. X 23. IX 23. X 23. IX 23. IX 23. X 23. IX 23. IX 24. IX 24. VIII 24. IX 24. VIII 24. IX 24. VIII 24. VIII 24. IX 24. VIII 24. VIII 25. VIII 25. VII 25. VIII 25. VII 25. VIII 25. VII 25. VII 25. VIII 25. VII 25. VII 26. VII 26. VI 26. VII 26. VI 26. VII 26. VI 26. VI 26. VII 26. VI 26. VI 27. VI 27. V 27. VI 27. V 27. VI 27. V 27. V 27. VI 27. V 27. V 28. V 28. IV 28. V 28. IV 28. V 28. IV 28. IV 28. V 28. IV 28. IV 29. IV 29. III 29. IV. 29. III 29. IV 29. III 29. III 29. IV 29. III 29. III 30. III 30. Prid. 30. III 30. Prid. 30. III 30. Prid. 30. Prid. 30. III 30. Prid. 30. Prid. 31. Prid.     31. Prid.     31. Prid.         31. Prid.        
'Tis true, there needed no long time to dis∣cover that this Account was too short, and that his Year must begin long before the Solar Year, and therefore to reduce these things into Order, he ordain'd that all the Days which were over and above what he had reckoned in this Calen∣dar, should be inserted amongst the rest without any Name, by way of Intercalation, which was done with little Care. But under the Reign of Numa Pompilius the Calendar was first reform'd. This Prince had private Conferences with Py∣thagoras, from whom he learn'd many things concerning Astronomy, which he chiefly applied to this Purpose; and he followed very near the same Order which the Greeks then observed in the Division of Time. 'Tis true, that instead of 354 Days, which they gave to their common Years, he gave to his 355, because he would have the Number to be odd, out of a supersti∣tious Opinion which he learned from the Egypti∣ans, who had an Aversion to even Numbers which they accounted unfortunate: And there∣fore he took away one Day from each of these Six Months, April, June, Sextilis, September, No∣vember and December, to which Romulus had given 30 Days, that they might have but 29, and left to the rest 31 Days which they had be∣fore; and then adding these Six Days to the 51, which Romulus's Year of 304 Days wanted, to make up his own Year of 355; he made them in all 57 Days; which Number he divided into Two to make of it Two other Months, which he placed before the Month March, viz. January consisting of 29 Days, and February of 28, which Month he design'd for the Sacrifices which were offered to the Infernal Gods, to which this e∣ven Number as being unfortunate seem'd most properly to belong. Thus he made the Month of January, which he plac'd at the Winter-solstice, the first Month of the Year, instead of March which was the first before, and which Romulus had placed at the Vernal Equinox: And to make this Institution everlasting, he made use of the Intercalation of 90 Days every Eight Years, which Number was made up of the Eleven Days and a Quarter, which the Lunar Year consisting of 354 Days wanted of the Solar Year consisting of 365 Days and Six Hours. Of these the Greeks made Three Months, each whereof had 30 Days, which they called , and which they intercalated after the Third, the Fifth and the Eigth Years; but Numa made Four Months of them, and in∣tercalated one every Two Years, after the Feast called Terminalia, which happened on the Sixth of the Kalends of March, i. e. on the 24th of February; and the first Month intercalated he made to consist of 22 Days, and the next of 23, that so the whole Intercalation in the Space of Four Years might make up the Number of 45 Days, which was equal to that used among the Greeks in their Olympiads. This Month inter∣calated every Two Years was called Mercedonius, and the Intercalary February. The Year of Numa which consisted of 355 Days, ending one Day later than the Greek Year, it was easie to observe, that since their Beginnings were so far from agreeing together, they would in a little time recede very far from one another: And therefore the same Numa, to obviate this Inconvenience, ordain'd, that in the Space of Eight Years the whole 90 Days should not be intercalated, according to the Custom of the Greeks, but only 82 Days, which were to be inserted in this Order: At first in the Space of Two Years an Intercalation was made of 22 Days, next after that, an Intercalation was made of 23 Days, at the Third time an Intercalation was made of 22 Days, and at the Fourth an In∣tercalation was made of 15 Days only, in lieu of 23 which should have been inserted, this Deduction was necessary to take off in Eight Years time, the Eight superfluous Days he had added to his Year. Numa's Year therefore consisted of Twelve Months, viz. January, February, March, April, May, June, Quintilis, Sextilis, September, October, November and December, whereof Seven had 29 Days, and the rest 31, except February which had only 28, which may be seen in the following Account of his Calendar. But as to the Division of Months into Calends, Nones and Ides, and the Manner of reckoning Days. See hereafter the Paragraph before Caesar's Calendar.
The CALENDAR of Numa Pompilius, containing 12 MONTHS, and consisting of 355 DAYS. January. February. March. April. May. June. Quintilis. Sextilis. September. October. November. December. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 2. IV 2. IV 2. VI 2. IV 2. VI 2. IV 2. VI 2. IV 2. IV 2. VI 2. IV 2. IV 3. III 3. III 3. V 3. III 3. V 3. III 3. V 3. III 3. III 3. V 3. III 3. III 4. Prid. 4. Prid. 4. IV 4. Prid. 4. IV 4. Prid. 4. IV 4. Prid. 4. Prid. 4. IV 4. Prid. 4. Prid. 5. Non. 5. Non. 5. III 5. Non. 5. III 5. Non. 5. III 5. Non. 5. Non. 5. III 5. Non. 5. Non. 6. VIII 6. VIII. 6. Prid. 6. VIII 6. Prid. 6. VIII. 6. Prid. 6. VIII 6. VIII 6. Prid. 6. VIII 6. VIII 7. VII 7. VII 7. Non. 7. VII 7. Non. 7. VII 7. Non. 7. VII 7. VII 7. Non. 7. VII 7. VII 8. VI 8. VI 8. VIII 8. VI 8. VIII 8. VI 8. VIII 8. VI 8. VI 8. VIII 8. VI 8. VI 9. V 9. V 9. VII 9. V 9. VII 9. V 9. VII 9. V 9. V 9. VII 9. V 9. V 10. IV 10. IV 10. VI 10. IV 10. VI 10. IV. 10. VI 10. IV 10. IV 10. VI 10. IV 10. IV 11. III 11. III 11. V 11. III 11. V 11. III. 11. V 11. III 11. III 11. V 11. III 11. III 12. Prid. 12. Prid. 12. IV 12. Prid. 12. IV 12. Prid. 12. IV 12. Prid. 12. Prid. 12. IV 12. Prid. 12. Prid. 13. Id. 13. Id. 13. III 13. Id. 13. III 13. Id. 13. III 13. Id. 13. Id. 13. III 13. Id. 13. Id. 14. XVII 14. XVI 14. Prid. 14. XVII 14. Prid. 14. XVII 14. Prid. 14. XVII 14. XVII 14. Prid. 14. XVII 14. XVII 15. XVI 15. XV 15. Id. 15. XVI 15. Id. 15. XVI 15. Id. 15. XVI 15. XVI 15. Id. 15. XVI 15. XVI 16. XV 16. XIV 16. XVII 16. XV 16. XVII 16. XV 16. XVII 16. XV 16. XV 16. XVII 16. XV 16. XV 17. XIV 17. XIII 17. XVI 17. XIV 17. XVI 17. XIV 17. XVI 17. XIV 17. XIV 17. XVI 17. XIV 17. XIV 18. XIII 18. XII 18. XV 18. XIII 18. XV 18. XIII 18. XV 18. XIII 18. XIII 18. XV 18. XIII 18. XIII 19. XII 19. XI 19. XIV 19. XII 19. XIV. 19. XII 19. XIV 19. XII 19. XII 19. XIV 19. XII 19. XII 20. XI 20. X 20. XIII 20. XI 20. XIII 20. XI 20. XIII 20. XI 20. XI 20. XIII 20. XI 20. XI 21. X 21. IX 21. XII 21. X 21. XII 21. X 21. XII 21. X 21. X 21. XII 21. X 21. X 22. IX 22. VIII 22. XI 22. IX 22. XI 22. IX 22. XI 22. IX 22. IX 22. XI 22. IX 22. IX 23. VIII 23. VII 23. X 23. VIII 23. X 23. VIII 23. X 23. VIII 23. VIII 23. X 23. VIII 23. VIII 24. VII 24. VI 24. IX 24. VII 24. IX 24. VII 24. IX 24. VII 24. VII 24. IX 24. VII 24. VII 25. VI 25. V 25. VIII 25. VI 25. VIII 25. VI 25. VIII 25. VI 25. VI 25. VIII 25. VI 25. VI 26. V 26. IV 26. VII 26. V 26. VII 26. V 26. VII 26. V 26. V 26. VII 26. V 26. V 27. IV 27. III 27. VI 27. IV 27. VI 27. IV 27. VI 27. IV 27. IV 27. VI 27. IV 27. IV 28. III 28. Prid. 28. V 28. III 28. V 28. III 28. V 28. III 28. III 28. V 28. III 28. III 29. Prid.     29. IV 29. Prid. 29. IV. 29. Prid. 29. IV 29. Prid. 29. Prid. 29. IV 29. Prid. 29. Prid.         30. III     30. III     30. III         30. III                 31. Prid.     31. Prid.     31. Prid.         31. Prid.        
And to add the greater Weight and Autho∣rity to this Law, he appointed the High-priests to put it in Execution, and enjoyn'd them to sig∣nifie to the People the Time and Manner in which this Intercalation of extraordinary Days must be made: But these Priests, either thro' Ignorance or Malice, brought the Account of Time and other Matters depending upon it into so great Confusion, that the Festivals happen'd at such Seasons as were directly opposite to the Times of their Institution, and the Feasts of Autumn fell out in the Spring, and those of Har∣vest in the Middle of Winter. This Disorder came to so great a Height, that when Julius Caesar was Dictator and High-priest, after the Battle of Pharsalia, he thought the Re∣formation of the Calendar to be a Thing well worthy of his Care, and necessary for the good Government of the Empire: And for this pur∣pose he fetch'd one Sosigenes from Alexandria, who was esteemed the best Astronomer of that Time, and he by the Order of the Emperor, after he had several times corrected it himself, declared that the Destribution of Time in the Calendar could never be settled as certain and unalterable, unless a principal Regard was had to the Annual Course of the Sun, and that it was necessary for the Future, by a Method contrary to that which had been hitherto practised, to adjust the Lunar Year by the Motion of the Sun, rather than accommodate the Course of the Sun to the unequal Laws of the Moon's Motion. And because it passed then for a thing certain among A stronomers, that the Annual Period of the Sun's Course was predsely 365 Days and Six Hours, therefore he resolved to give the whole Time of 365 Days to the Year in his Calen∣dar, reserving the Six Hours to the End of Four Years, when they made a whole Day, which he then added to the rest by way of Intercalation; so that this Year did not consist of 365 Days, as the other Years did which he called common, but of 366 Days. And since according to the Institution of Numa Pompilius, the Intercalation of the Month Meredonius was made towards the End of February, the same Sosigenes by order of the Emperor, used the same Time for the Inter∣calation of this Day, which happened to fall out on that Day which they called Regifugium, be∣cause the Romans in ancient Times had drove their Kings out of Rome on that Day, and on the Day which follows another Festival called Termi∣nalia, i. e. on the 24th Day of February, or to speak in the Language of the Romans, on the Sixth of the Calends of March; and because this Day was called the second Sixth of the Calends, which in Latin is Bissxius, therefore the Year in which this Intercalation was made, was called Bissextile or Intercalary. He chang'd nothing in the Order nor Names of the Months, nor yet in the Number of Days in these Four, viz. March, May, Quintil is and October, which had each 31 Days in Numa's Ca∣lendar; but to make room for the Ten Days, whereby the Solar Year exceeded that of Numa, he added Two Days to each of these Three Months, January, Sextilis and December, which had only 29 Days before, and so he made them equal to the other Months which had 31, but he added only one Day to these Four Months, April, June, September and November, and so made them consist of 30 Days, and to the Month of February he left 28 Days for the common Years, and 29 for the Year called Bissextile, that so there might be no Change made in the Cere∣monies of the Sacrifices, which were offered in this Month to the Infernal Gods. As soon as these Things were thus order'd, and Sosigenes had finished his Work, the Empe∣ror publish'd an Edict, wherein he set forth the Reformation he had made of the Calendar, and commanded it to be used through all the Roman Empire. And because of the Negligence of those to whom the Care was committed of distributing the Intercalatory Months, the Beginning of the Year was then found to anticipate its true Place 67 whole Days, therefore this Time must be some way spent to restore the first Day of the next Year to its due Place at the Winter-ostice, and to this end Two Months were made of these 67 Days, which were ordered to be intercalated between the Months of November and December, from whence it came to pass, that the Year of the Correction of the Calendar by Julius Caesar, which was called the Julian Correction, consist∣ed of 15 Months and of 445 Days; and upon this Account it was called the Year of Confusion, because in it that great Number of Days was to be absorbed which brought so great Confusion into the Account of Time. But to accommodate the Matter in some measure to the Genius of the Romans, who had been so long accustomed to the Lunar Year, the Emperor would not begin his Year precisely on the Day of the Winter solstice, but only on the Day of the New-Moon which followed next after it, which happened by Chance at the time of this Correction of the Calendar, to be about Eight Days after the Solstice, from hence it comes to pass, that the Julian Year in all succeeding Times hath still preserved the same Beginning, i. e. the first Day of January, which is about Eight Days after the Solstice of Capricorn. Julius Caesar drew a great deal of envy upon himself by this Correction of the Calendar, of which we have an Instance in that picquant Ral∣lery of Cicero upon this Occasion; One of his Friends discoursing with him, happen'd to say, that Lyra was to set to Morrow, Cras Lyra occi∣dit, said he, to whom Cicero immediately report∣ed, Nempe ex Edicto, yes, quoth he, by vertue
of an Edict. Yet this did nowise hinder this Reformation from being generally received and observed after the Death of Caesar, which hap∣pened the next Year after it. And to give the greater Authority to this Usage, it fell out also, that Marcus Antonius in his Consulship order'd, that the Month called Quintilis, which was that in which Julius Caesar was born, should bear his Name, and for the Future be called Julius; as it happened afterwards to the Month Sextilis, to which was given the Name of Augustus, both which Names are still continued down to our Time. 'Tis true, the Priests by their Ignorance com∣mitted a considerable Error in the Observati∣on of the first Years, for not understanding this Intercalation of a Day was to be made e∣very Four Years, they thought that the Fourth Year was to be reckoned from that wherein the preceeding Intercalation was made, and not from that which follow'd next after it, by which means they left only Two common Years in∣stead of Three between the Two Intercalary Years, from whence it came to pass, that they intercalated Twelve Days in the Space of 36 Years, whereas Nine only should have been in∣tercalated in that Space, and so they put back the Beginning of the Year Three Days: Which being observ'd by Augustus, Successor to Julius Caesar, he presently caused this Error to be a∣mended, by ordering that for the first Twelve Years no Intercalation should be made, that by this means these Three superfluous Days might be absorbed, and Things might be restored to their first Institution, which continued ever∣since without any Interruption, until the End of the last Age, when some thought themselves oblig'd to take Pains in making another Cor∣rection of the Calendar. Here follows the Copy of an ancient Roman Calendar which some curions Antiquaries have gathered together out of divers Monuments that it might be published. There are Six different Columns in it; the first contains the Letters which they called Nundinales, the Second notes the Days which they called Easti, Nefasti and Comittales, which are also signified by Letters; the Third contains the Number of Meto, which is called the Golden Number; the Fourth is for the Days in Order, which are marked with A∣rabick Figures or Characters, the Fifth divides the Month into Calends, Nones and Ides, accord∣ing to the ancient Way of the Romans; and the Sixth contains their Festivals and divers other Ceremonies, of which we shall treat more large∣ly hereafter. In this Calendar, to which we have given the Name of the Calendar of Julius Caesar, although it appears to have been made since Augustus's Time, is to be seen, 1. The same Order and Succession of the Months which was instituted by Numa Pompi∣lius, and such as we have set down before. 2. These Seven Months, January, March, May, Quintilis or July, Sextilis or August, Octo∣ber and Decembor have each of them 31 Days, and these Four April, June, September and No∣vember have only 30, but February for the com∣mon Years has only 28 Days, and for the In∣tercalary or Bissextile it has 29. 3. This Series of Eight Letters which we have called Literae Nundinales, is continued without Interruption from the first to the last Day of the Year that there might always be one of them to signifie those Days of the Year on which those Meetings were held that were called by the Ro∣mans Nundinae, and which returned every Ninth Day, to the end that the Roman Citizens might come out of the Country to the City to be in∣formed of what concerned either Religion or Government: These Letters are so placed, that if the Nundinal Day of the first Year was under the Letter A, which is at the 1st, the 9th, the 17th, the 25th of January, &c. the Letter of the Nundinal Day for the next Year must be D, which is at the 5th, the 13th, the 21st of the same Month, &c. for the Letter A being found at the 27th of December, if from this Day we reckon Eight Letters, besides the Letters B, C, D, E, which remain after A in the Month of December, we must take Four other Letters at the Beginning of January in the next Year, A, B, C, D, and so the Letter D, which is first found in the Month of January will be the 9th after the last A in the Month of December pre∣ceeding, and consequently it will be the Nundi∣nal Letter, or that Letter which notes the Days set apart for these Meetings, which may be also called by the Name of Faires or publick Markets. Thus by the same way of Calculation the Nun∣dinal Letter of the Third Year will be G, that of the Fourth B, and so on of the rest, un∣less their happens some Change by the In∣tercalation. 4. To understand aright what is set down in the second Column, we must know, That to sue one at Law, (which we call trying of Causes or sitting of Courts,) was not allowed among the Romans on all Days, neither was the Praetor permitted on every Day to pronounce these Three solemn Words, or this Form of Law, Do, Dico, Addico; but these Days were called Fasti, on which the Courts sate to administer Justice, quibus fas esset jure agere, and these were called Nefasti, on which this was not permitted, quibus nefas esset, as we learn from these Two Verses of Ovid, Ille Nefastus erit, per quem tria verba silentur; Festus erit, per quem jure licebit agi. i. e. That Day was Nefastus on which these Three Words were not pronounced, Do, Dico, Addico,
as who should say among us, The Court does not sit to Day, and that Day was called Fastus, on which it was lawful to sue at Law, or try a Cause. Besides, there were certain Days which they called Comitiales, which were marked with a C, on which the People met in the Campus Martius, for the Election of Magistrates, or treating a∣bout the Affairs of the Commonwealth, and these Days were so called because the Assemblies of the People held on them, were nam'd Comitia. There were also some set Days on which a certain Priest, (who was called among them Rex Sacrorum) was present at these Assemblies: And lastly, on a certain Day of the Year they were wont to cleanse the Temple of Vesta and carry off all the Dung in it, which was done with so much Ceremony, that it was not lawful on that Day to try Causes. This being supposed, 'tis no wise difficult to understand what is contained in this Column, for where-ever we meet in it with the Letter N, which signifies Dies Nefastus, this denotes a Day on which Justice could not be administred, or if we meet in it with the Letter F, or Fastus, that signifies a Court-Day; or if we meet with F. P. or Fastus primâ parte diei, that signifies that the Court sits on the former part of the Day; or if we meet there with N. P. or Nefastus primâ parte diei, that signifies the Court does not sit on the former part of the Day; or if we meet there with E. N. or Endotercisus seu intercisus, that signifies the Court sits some certain Hours of the Day, and not at other Hours; or if we meet there with a C. that denotes that these Assem∣blies were then held which were called Comitia, or if we meet there with these Letters Q. Rex. C. F. or Quando Rex comitiavit, fas, they signifie, that the Court does sit after the Priest called Rex has been present at the Comitia; or lastly, when we see these other Letters Q. ST. D. F. or Quando stercus delatum, fas, they signifie, that the Court does sit immediately after the Dung is carried out of the Temple of the Goddess Vesta. 5. The Third Column is for the 19 Figures of the Numbers of the Lunar Cycle, otherwise called the Golden Number, which signifie the New Moons through the whole Year, according to the Order in which they were thought to hap∣pen in the Time of Julius Caesar, when these Figures were thus disposed in his Calendar. 6. The Fourth notes the Succession of the Days of the Months, by the Numbers of the Arabick Figures or Caracters; but then we must not imagine that they were thus disposed in the Tables of the Fasti, i. e. in the Calendar used by the Ancients, for they had no Knowledge of any such thing: Yet we thought it convenient to place them here, that we might the better com∣pare the Manner of naming and reckoning Days that was used by the Ancients with ours at pre∣sent, and discern what are the Days as we now reckon them, to which the Festivals and other Days of the Romans might correspond. 7. The Fifth Column contains that famous Di∣vision of the Days of the Months into Calends, Nones and Ides, which was in use among the Ro∣mans; and though this Division was not into e∣qual Parts, as were the Decads used by the Greeks, but into very different Portions of Time, yet this Variety is well enough expressed in these Two Verses. Sex Maius Nonas, October, Julius & Mars, Quatuor at reliqui. Dabit Idus qui libet octo. i. e. These Four Months, March, May, July and October, have Six Days of Nones, and all the rest have only Four; but in every one of them there are Eight Days of Ides. This must be under∣stood after this Manner, that the first Day of each Month was always called the Calends of that Month; after that in Four Months, March, May, July and October, the Seventh Day of the Month was called the Nones, and the Fiftenth the Ides, whereas in other Months in which the Nones lasted but Four Days, the Fifth was called Nonae the Nones, and the Thirtenth Idus the Ides; the other Days are reckoned backward from the Beginning of the next Month, and the Number always lessens as you come nearer to it. The Days which are after the Calends until the Nones take their Name from the Nones of the Month currant, the following Days which are between the Nones and the Ides, take their Name from the Ides of the same Month; but all the rest from the Ides until the End of the next Month, take their Name from the Ca∣lends of the next Month: All which we shall ex∣plain more at large under the Word Mensis. Besides, you may observe, that the Tables of the Fasti, by which the Romans described their Months and their Days throughout the Year, in Process of time were called by the Name of Calendar, because this Name of Calends is found written in great Characters at the Head of each Month. 8. The last Column contains those Things which chiefly belong to the Religion of the Ro∣mans, such as the Festivals, the Sacrifices, the Games, the Ceremonies, the fortunate or un∣fortunate Days, as also the Beginning of the Signs, the Four Cardinal Points of the Year, which make the Four Seasons; the Rising and Setting of the Stars, &c. which were very much much observ'd by the Ancients who made use of them for a long time, to denote the Difference of the Seasons, instead of a Calendar; at least, until it was reduced into a more regular Form by the Correction of Julius Caesar. We find in most of the ancient Books, that they govern'd themselves wholly by the Observation of the Ri∣sing and Setting of the Stars, in Navigation, in tilling the Ground, in Physick, and in the great∣est Part of their Affairs both publick and private.
The CALENDAR of Julius Caesar. JANUARY. Ʋnder the Protection of the Goddess Juno. Nundinal Letters. Days. Golden Number.       A F I 1 Kalen. Sacred to Janus, to Juno, to Jupiter and Aesculapius. B F   2 IV An unfortunate Day. Dies Ater. C C IX 3 III Cancer sets. D C   4 Prid.   E F XVIII 5 Non. Lyra rises. Aquila sets at Night. F F VI 6 VIII   G C   7 VII   H C XIV 8 VI Sacrifices to Janus. A   III 9 V The Agonalia. B EN   10 IV The middle of Winter. C NP XI 11 III The Carmentalia. D C   12 Prid. The Compitalia. E NP XIX 13 Id. The Trumpeters make Publications thro' the City in the Habit of Women. F EN VIII 14 XIX Wicked Days by Order of the Senate. G     15 XVIII To Carmenta, Porrima and Postverta. H C XVI 16 XVII To Concord. Leo begins to set in the Morning. A C V 17 XVI The Sun in Aquarius. B C   18 XV   C C XIII 19 XIV   D C II 20 XIII   E C   21 XII   F C X 22 XI   G C   23 X Lyra sets. H C XVIII 24 IX Festi Sementini, or the Feast of Seed-time. A C VII 25 VIII   B C   26 VII   C C XV 27 VI To Castor and Pollux. D C IV 28 V   E F   29 IV Equiria in the Campus Martius. The Pacalia. F F XII 30 III Fidicula sets. G F I 31 Prid. To the Dii Penates.
The CALENDAR of Julius Caesar. FEBRUARY. Ʋnder the Protection of Neptune. Nundinal Letters. Days. Golden Number.       H N IX 1 Kalen. To Juno Sospita, to Jupiter, to Hercules, to Diana. The Lucaria. A N   2 IV   B N XVII 3 III Lyra sets, and the Middle of Leo. C N VI 4 Prid. The Dolphin sets. D     5 Non. Aquarius rises. E N XIV 6 VIII   F N III 7 VII   G N   8 VI   H N XI 9 V The Beginning of the Spring. A N   10 IV   B N XIX 11 III Genialic Games. Arcturus rises. C N VIII 12 Prid.   D NP   13 Id. To Faunus and Jupiter. The Defeat and Death of the Fabii E C. XVI 14 XVI The Rising of Corvus, Crater and the Serpent. F NP V 15 XV The Lupercalia. G END   16 XIV The Sun in the Sign Pisces. H NP XIII 17 XIII The Quirinalia. A C II 18 XII The Fornacalia. The Feralia to the Gods Manes. B C   19 XI   C C X 20 X   D F   21 IX To the Goddess Muta or Laranda. The Feralia. E C XVIII 22 VIII The Charistiae. F NP VII 23 VII The Terminalia. G N   24 VI The Regifugium. The Place of the Bissextilo. H C XV 25 V Arcturus rises at Night. A EN IV 26 IV   B NP   27 III Equiria in the Campus Martius. C C XII 28 Prid. The Tarquins overcome.
The CALENDAR of Julius Caesar. MARCH. Ʋnder the Protection of Minerva. Nundinal Letters. Days. Golden Number.       D NP I 1 Kalen. The Matronalia; to Mars, the Feast of Ancylia. E F   2 VI To Juno Lucina. F C IX 3 V The second Pisces sets. G C   4 IV   H C XVII 5 III Arcturus sets. Vindemiator rises. Cancer rises. A NP V 6 Prid. The Vestaliana. On this Day Jul. Caesar was coeated High-Priest. B F   7 Non. To Ve-Jupiter in the Wood of the Asylum. Pegasus rises. C F XIV 8 VIII Corona rises. D C III 9 VII Orion rises. The Northern Pisces rises. E C   10 VI   F C XI 11 V   G C   12 IV   H EN XIX 13 III The Opening of the Sea. A NP VIII 14 Prid. The second Equiria upon the Tyber. B NP   15 Id. To Anna Parenna. The Parricide. Scorpio sets. C C XVI 16 XVII   D NP V 17 XVI The Liberalia, or Bacchanalia. The Agonalia Milvius sets. E C   18 XV The Sun in the Sign Aries. F N XIII 19 XIV The Quinquatria of Minerva, which last 5 Days. G C II 20 XIII   H C   21 XII The 1st Day of the Century. Pegasus sets in the Morning. A N X 22 XI   B NP   23 X The Tubilustrium. C QR XVIII 24 IX   D C VII 25 VIII The Hilaria, to the Mother of the Gods. The Vernal Equinox. E C   26 VII   F NP XV 27 VI On this Day Caesar made himself Master of Alexandria. G C IV 28 V The Megalesia. H C   29 IV   A C XII 30 III To Janus, to Concord, to Salus and Pax. B C I 31 Prid. To the Moon, or Diana upon the Aventine Mount.
The CALENDAR of Julius Caesar. APRIL. Ʋnder the Protection of the Goddess Venus. Nundinal Letters. Days. Golden Letters.       C N IX 1 Kalen. To Venus with the Flowers and Myrtle. To Fortuna Virilis. D C   2 IV The Pleiades set. E C XVII 3 III   F C VI 4 Prid. The Megalesian Games to the Mother of the Gods, for the Space of 8 Days. G     5 Non.   H NP XIV 6 VIII To Fortuna publica primigenia. A N III 7 VII The Birth of Apollo and Diana. B N   8 VI Plays for Caesar's Victory. Libra and Orion set. C N XI 9 V   D N   10 IV Cerealia. Ludi Circensis, the Circensian Games. E N XIX 11 III   F N VIII 12 Prid. The Mother of the Gods brought to Rome. Plays in ho∣nour of Ceres for 8 Days. G NP   13 Id. To Jupiter Victor, and Liberty. H N XVI 14 XVIII   A NP V 15 XVII Fordicidia, or Fordicalia. B N   16 XVI Augustus saluted Emperor. The Hyades set. C N XIII 17 XV   D N II 18 XIV Equiria in the Circus Maximus. The Burning of the Foxes. E N   19 XIII Cerealia. The Sun in the Sign Taurus. F N X 20 XII   G NP   21 XI Paliliana, or Pariliana. The Nativity of Rome. H N XVIII 22 X The second Agoniana, or Agonalia. A NP VII 23 IX The first Vinalia to Jupiter and Venus. B C   24 VIII   C NP XV 25 VII Robigalia. Aries sets. The middle of the Spring. D F IV 26 VI The Dog-star rises. The Goat rises. E C   27 V Latinae Feriae on the Mons sacer. F NP XII 28 IV The Floralia for the Space of 6 Days. The Goat rises in the Morning. G C I 29 III The Dog-star sets at Night. H F   30 Prid. To Vesta Palatina. The first Larentalia.
The CALENDAR of Julius Caesar. MAY. Ʋnder the Protection of Apollo. Nundinal Letters. Days. Golden Number.       A N IX 1 Kalen. To Deu bona. To Lares praestites. Ludi Floria for the Space of the 3 Days. B F   2 VI The Compitalia. C C XVII 3 V The Centaar and the Hyades rise. D C VI 4 IV   E C   5 III Lyra rises. F C XIV 6 Prid. The Middle of Scorpio sets. G N III 7 Non. Virgiliae rises in the Morning. H F   8 VIII The Goat rises. A N XI 9 VII Lemuria at Night for the Space of 3 Days. The Lumi∣naria. B C   10 VI   C N XIX 11 V Orion sets unfortunate Days to marry on. D NP VIII 12 IV To Mars The Avenger at the Circus. E N   13 III Lemuria. The Pleiados rise. The Beginning of Summer. F C XVI 14 Prid. To Mercury. Taurus rises. G NP V 15 Id. To Jupiter. The Feast of the Merchants. The Birth of Mercury. Lyra rises. H F   16 XVII   A C XIII 17 XVI   B C II 18 XV   C C   19 XIV The Sun in Gemini. D C X 20 XIII   E NP   21 XII The Agonalia, or Agoniana of Janus. F N XVIII 22 XI To Vejupiter. The Dog-star rises. G NP VII 23 X The Feriae of Vulcan. The Tubilustrium. H Q. REX   24 IX     C. F.         A C XV 25 VIII To Fortuna publica. Aquila rises. B C IV 26 VII The second Regifugium. Arcturus sets. C C   27 VI The Hyades rise. D C XII 28 V   E C I 29 IV   F C   30 III   G C IX 31 Prid.  
The CALENDAR of Julius Caesar. JUNE. Ʋnder the Protection of Mercury. Nundinal Letters. Days. Golden Number.       H N XVII 1 Kalen. To Juno. To Moneta To Tempestas. To Fabaria. Aquila. rises. A F VI 2 IV To Mars, to the Goddess Carna. To Hyades rise. B C   3 III To Bellona. C C XIV 4 Prid. To Hercules at the Circus. D N III 5 Non. To Fides. To Jupiter Sponsor, or Deus fidius, holy half Father E N   6 VIII To Vesta. F N XI 7 VII The Piscatorian Days in the Campus Martius. Arctu∣rus rises. G     8 VI To Intellectus, at the Capitol. H N XIX 9 V Vestaliana. The Altar of Jupiter Pistor. The Crown∣ing of Asses. A N VIII 10 IV Matralia, of Fortuna fortis. The Dolphin rises at Night. B N   11 III To Concord. To Mother Matuta. C N XVI 12 Prid.   D N V 13 Id. To Jupiter Invictus. The lesser Quinquatrus. The Begin∣ning of Heat. E N   14 XVIII   F Q. ST XIII 15 XVII The Carrying of the Dung out of the Temple of Vesta. The Hyades rise.   D. F.         G C II 16 XVI   H C   17 XV Orion rises. A C X 18 XIV The whole Dolphin rises. B C   19 XIII   C C XVIII 20 XII To Minerva upon Mount Aventine. The Sun in the Sign Cancer. D C VIII 21 XI To Summanus. Serpentarius rises. E C   22 X   F C XV 23 IX   G C IV 24 VIII To Fortuna fortis. The Summer Solstice. H C   25 VII   A C XII 26 VI The Girdle of Orion rises. B C I 27 V To Jupiter Stator and Lar. C C   28 IV   D F IX 29 III To Quirinus on the Quirinal Mount. E F   30 Prid. To Hercules and the Muses. The Poplifugia.
The CALENDAR of Julius Caesar. QUINTILIS, or JULY. Ʋnder the, Protection of Jupiter. Nundinal Letters. Days. Golden Number.       F N XVII 1 Kalen. Removing from one House to another. G N VI 2 VI   H N   3 V   A NP XIV 4 IV Corona sets in the Morning. The Hyades B N III 5 III The Poplifugium. C N   6 Prid. Ludi Apollinares for the Space of 8 Days. To Fortuna Fe∣minina. D N XI 7 Non. The Nonae Caprotinae. The Feast of Maid-servants. Romu∣lus disappear'd. E N   8 VIII Vitulatio, or wanton Rejoycings. The Middle of Capricorn sets. F EN XIX 9 VII Cepheus rises at Night. G C VIII 10 VI The Etesian Winds begin to blow. H C   11 V   A NP XVI 12 IV The Birth of Julius Caesar. B C V 13 III   C C   14 Prid. To Fortuna Feminina. The Merkatus, or Mercuriala for 6 Days. D NP XIII 15 Id. To Castor and Pollux. E F II 16 XVII The foremost Dog rises. F C   17 XVI The fatal Day of the Battel of Allia. G C X 18 XV   H NP   19 XIV Lucaria, Games lasting 4 Days. A   XVIII 20 XIII Plays for Caesar's Victory. The Sun in the Sign Leo. B C VII 21 XII Lucaria. C C   22 XI   D   XV 23 X The Games of Neptune. E N IV 24 IX   F NP   25 VIII Furinalia. The Circensian Games lasting 6 Days. Aqua∣rius sets. G C XII 26 VII The little Dog-star rises. H C I 27 VI Aquila rises. A C   28 V   B C IX 29 IV   C C   30 III Aquila sets. D C XVII.   Prid.  
The CALENDAR of Julius Caesar. SEXTILIS, or AUGUST. Ʋnder the Protection of the Goddess Ceres. Nundinal Letters. Days. Golden Letters.       E N VI 1 Kalen. To Mars. To Hope. F C XIV 2 IV Feriae, upon the Account of Caesar's subduing Spain. G C III 3 III   H C 4 Prid. The Middle of Leo rises. A F XI 5 Non. To Salus on the Quirinal Mount. B F   6 VIII To Hope. The Middle of Arcturus sets. C C XIX 7 VII The Middle of Aquarius sets. D C VIII 8 VI Soli Indigeti on the Quirinal Mount. E NP   9 V   F C XVI 10 IV To Opis and Ceres. G C V 11 III To Hercules in the Circus Flaminius. Lyra sets. The Be∣ginning of Autumn. H C   12 Prid. The Lignapesia. A NP XIII 13 Id. To Diana in the Sylva Aricina. To Vertumnus. The Feast of Slaves, and Ser∣vant-maids. B F II 14 XIX The Dolphin in the Morning. C C   15 XVIII   D C X 16 XVII   E NP   17 XVI Portumnalia to Janus. F C XVIII 18 XV Consualia. The Rape of the Sabine Virgins. G FP VII 19 XIV The last Vinalia. The Death of Augustus. H C   20 XIII Lyra sets. The Sun in the Sign Virgo. A NP XV 21 XII Vinalia Rustica. The Grand Mysteries. Consualia. B EN IV 22 XI Vindemiator rises in the Morning. C NP   23 X Vulcanalia in the Circus Flaminius. D C XII 24 IX The Feriae of the Moon. E NP I 25 VIII Opi Consivae in the Capitol. F C   26 VII   G NP IX 27 VI Volturnalia. H NP   28 V To Victory in the Court. Sagitta sets. The End of the Etesian Winds. A F XVII 29 IV   B F VI 30 III The Ornaments of the Goddess Ceres are shown. C F   31 Prid. Andromeda rises at Night.
The CALENDAR of Julius Caesar. SEPTEMBER. Ʋnder the Protection of Vulcan. Nundinal Letters. Days. Golden Number.       D N XIV 1 Kalen. To Jupiter Maimactes. Feasts to Neptune. E N III 2 IV To the Victory of Augustus Feriae. F NP   3 III Dionysiaca, or Vindemiae. G C XI 4 Prid. Roman Games for the Space of 8 Days. H F   5 Non.   A F XIX 6 VIII To Erebus a Ram and a black Sheep. B C VIII 7 VII   C C   8 VI   D C XVI 9 V The Goat rises. E C V 10 IV The Head of Medusa rises. F C   11 III The Middle of Virgo rises. G N XIII 12 Prid. The Middle of Arcturus rises. H NP II 13 Id. To Jupiter. The Dedication of the Capitol. The Nail fix'd by the Praetor. A F   14 XVIII The Tryal of Horses. B   X 15 XVII The Grand Circensian Games, dedicated for 5 Days. The Departure of the Swallows. C C   16 XVI   D C XVIII 17 XV   E C VII 18 XIV Spica Virginis rises in the Morning. F C   19 XIII The Sun in the Sign Libra. G C XV 20 XII The Merkatus for the Space of 4 Days. The Birth of Romulus. H C IV 21 XI   A C   22 X Argo and Pisces set. B NP XII 23 IX The Circensian Games. The Birth of Augustus. The Cen∣taur rises in the Morning C C I 24 VIII The Autumnal Equinox. D C   25 VII To Venus, Saturn and Mania. E C IX 26 VI   F C   27 V To Venus the Mother, and Fortuna redux. G C XVII 28 IV The Last of Virgo's rising. H F IV 29 III   A F XIV 30 Prid. A Feast to Minerva. The Meditrinalia.
The CALENDAR of Julius Caesar. OCTOBER. Ʋnder the Protection of the God Mars. Nundinal Letters. Days. Golden Number.       B N III 1 Kalen.   C F   2 VI   D C XI 3 V   E C   4 IV Bootes sets in the Morning. F C XIX 5 III The Ornaments of Ceres shown. G C VIII 6 Prid. To the Gods Manes. H F   7 Non.   A F XVI 8 VIII The bright Star Corona rises. B C V 9 VII   C C   10 VI Ramalia. D   XIII 11 V Meditrinalia. The Beginning of Winter. E NP II 12 IV Augustalia. F NP   13 III Fontinalia. To Jupiter Liberator. Games lasting for 3 days. G NP X 14 Prid.   H NP   15 Id. The Merchants to Mercury. A F XVIII 16 XVII Popular Games. Arcturus sets. B C VII 17 XVI   C C   18 XV To Jupiter Liberator. Games. D NP XV 19 XIV Armilustrium. E C IV 20 XIII The Sun in the Sign Scorpio. F C   21 XII Plays lasting 4 Days. G C XII 22 XI   H C I 23 X To Liber Pater. Taurus sets. A C   24 IX   B C IX 25 VIII   C C   26 VII   D C XVII 27 VI Plays to Victory. E C VI 28 V The lesser Mysteries. Virgilia set. F C   29 IV   G C XIV 30 III The Feria of Vertumnus. Games consecrated. H C III 31 Prid. Arcturus sets.
The CALENDAR of Julius Caesar. NOVEMBER. Ʋnder the Protection of the Goddess Diana. Nundinal Letters. Days. Golden Number.       A N   1 Kalen. The Banquet of Jupiter. The Circensian Games. The Head of Taurus sets. B F XI 2 IV Arcturus sets at Night. C F   3 III The Fidicula rises in the Morning. D   XIX 4 Prid.   E F VIII 5 Non. Neptunalia. Games lasting 8 Days. F F   6 VIII   G C XVI 7 VII A Show of Ornaments. H C V 8 VI Scorpio rises with a clear Light. A C   9 V   B C XIII 10 IV   C C II 11 III The Shutting up of the Sea. Virgiliae set. D C   12 Prid.   E NP X 13 Id. A Feast commanded. The Lectisternia. F F   14 XVIII The Tryal of Horses. G C XVIII 15 XVII Popular Games in the Circus for 3 Days. H C VII 16 XVI The End of Seed-time for Corn. A C   17 XV   B C XV 18 XIV The Merkatus for 3 Days. The Sun in the Sign Sagittarus. C C IV 19 XIII A Supper of the Priests, in Honour of Cybele. D C   20 XII The Horns of the Bull set. E C XII 21 XI The Liberalia. Lepus sets in the Morning. F C I 22 X To Pluto and Proserpina. G C   23 IX   H   IX 24 VIII Bruma or Brumalia, for the Space of 30 Days. A C   25 VII The little Dog-star sets. B C XVII 26 VI   C C VI 27 V Funeral-Sacrifices to the Gauls dug up, and to the Greeks, in the foro boario. D C   28 IV   E C XIV 29 III   F F III 30 Prid.  
The CALENDAR of Julius Caesar. DECEMBER. Ʋnder the Protection of the Goddess Vesta. Nundinal Letters Days. Golden Number.       G N XI 1 Kalen. To Fortuna Feminina. H     2 IV   A   XIX 3 III   B   VIII 4 Prid. To Minerva and Neptune. C F   5 Non. The Faunalia. D C XVI 6 VIII The Middle of Sagittarius sets. E C V 7 VII Aquila rises in the Morning. F C   8 VI   G C XIII 9 V To Juno Jugalis. H C II 10 IV   A NP   11 III Agonalia. The 14 Halcyonian Days. B EN X 12 Prid.   C NP   13 Id. The Equiria, or the Horse-Races. D F XVIII 14 XIX Brumalia. Ambrosiana. E NP VII 15 XVIII Consualia. All Cancer rises in the Morning. F C   16 XVII   G   XV 17 XVI The Saturnalia, lasting 5 Days. H C IV 18 XV Cygnus rises. The Sun in the Sign Capricorn. A NP   19 XIV Opaliana. B C XII 20 XIII Sigillaria lasting 2 Days. C NP I 21 XII Angeronalia. The Divalia. To Hercules and Venus with Wine mix'd with Honey. D C   22 XI Compitalia. Feriae dedicated to the Lares. Games. E NP IX 23 X The Feriae of Jupiter. Larentinalia, or Quarentinalia. The Goat sets. F C   24 IX Juvenalia. Sports. G C XVII 25 VIII The End of the Brumalia. The Winter Solstice. H C VI 26 VII   A C   27 VI To Phoebus for the Space of 3 Days. The Dolphin rises in the Morning B C XIV 28 V   C F III 29 IV Aquila sets at Night. D F   30 III Canicula sets at Night. E F XI 31 Prid.  
It was not difficult for the Romans, when they were now become Masters of the World in the Time of Augustus, to cause this Correction of the Calendar made by Julius Caesar, to be every∣where receiv'd, and to introduce the Use of it among all Nations, even those which were most remote, at least so far as concern'd the Political Distribution of Time. For this Reason the Greeks did no longer make use of a Lunar Year, nor make their Intercalation of a Month and a Half to each Olympiad. The Egyptians also were oblig'd to fix their Thot to the first Day of their Year, which moved before through all the Sea∣sons, and to fix it for ever to a determinate Point. In like manner did the Jews, for they quite left off their way of intercalating of a Month in the Space of 120 Years, as they had been used to do, and submitted to the Interca∣lation of a Day once every Four Years. 'Tis true, the Observation of the Julian Ca∣lendar brought no other Alteration into these Countries, but each of them still retain'd the free Use of their own Customs and Traditions for Divine Worship. Thus the Jews continued in the ancient Observation of the Law, without changing any thing as to their Sabbath, Festivals, or Ceremonies; and herein the other Nations of the World did imitate them, although they were subject to the Roman Empire. The primitive Christians made use of the Di∣vision of Tune according to the Custom of the Romans, to whose Power they were subject, ex∣cept such Customs as were peculiar to the City of Rome, or savoured of their blind Superstition and Idolatry. They kept therefore the same Names of the Months, the same Number of their Days, the same Division of these Days into Calends, Nones and Ides, and the same Interca∣lation of a Day every Four Years, in the Year which was called Bissextile or Leap-year. They left out the Nundinal Letters which were used in the Calendar of the Romans, and in their stead placed other Letters to signifie every holy Sun∣day throughout the Year. They took no Notice of their Dies Fasti, Nefasti or Comitiales, because they were employ'd only for some Uses peculiar to they City of Rome; but they rejected with Abhorrence the Festivals and Games of the Ro∣mans, as being Ceremonies consecrated to the Devil, and in their stead introduced the Feasts and Ceremonies of the true Religion. CALIGA, a Boot or Buskin, a sort of Shoes that were worn by a common Roman Soldier in time of War, from whence the Word Caligatus comes to signifie a common Soldier: And thus we must understand that Passage of Suetonius, in the Life of Augustus, Coronas murales sape etiam cali∣gatis tribuit, that he often gave the Mural Coro∣net to common Soldiers who first scal'd the Walls of the Enemies Cities; and also that Proverb which Seneca uses, speaking of Marius, that from a common Soldier he arrived at the Consulship, à caligâ ad consulatum pervenisse: Thus Agrippina caused her Son Caius to be nam'd Caligula, be∣cause he being born in the Army, she caused him to wear these Buskins like a common Soldier, to gain their Good-will by this Complaisance. These sort of Shoes came up as high as the Middle of the Leg, and had at the Top the Fi∣gure of the Head of a Lion or Leopard, or only of the Muzzle of these Animals: It was garnish'd with little Nails of Iron, and sometimes even of Gold and Silver, and had a Sole of Wood. There was a Fund set apart for providing these Nails for the Soldiers, which was called Clava∣rium, and the Officers that distributed it were called Clavarii, of which Number was the Father of Suetonius. The Soldiers did very often desire of the Em∣perors the Clavarium, i. e. the Money of this Fund, for buying Nails to adorn their Shoes; so they did of Vitellius according to the Relation of Tacitus, in L. 3. of his History. Justin tells us, that all the Soldiers of Antio∣chus's Army caused their Buskins to be adorn'd with Nails of God, Argenti certè aurique tan∣tùm, ut etiam gregarii milites caligas auro suf∣figerent. CALIGULA CAIUS, the Fourth Ro∣man Emperor, the Son of Germanicus and Agrip∣pina, he succeeded Tiberius in the Empire. He was surnamed Caligula from the Military Shoes which his Mother caused him to wear in the Army, and which were called Caliga. He had an ill-shaped Body, a small Neck, a large Fore∣head and slender Legs; he affected sometimes, says Suetonius, to put on a terrible Countenance, to strike a Dread into the Minds of those who came near him; his Chin turned up, which was a Sign of Cruelty, but he would put on a modest Look, which was only a Copy of his Counte∣nance, says Tacitus, to cover his naked Designs. He gave an Example of all sorts of Vices, and committed the most enormous Crimes. He en∣deavoured to gain the Good-will of the People by Largesses and Shows of extraordinary Ex∣pence and Magnificence. He caused a Bridge to be built upon the Sea a Mile long with Moles, upon which he erected Towers and built Houses, out of a foolish and ridiculous Fancy, that by this means he had subdued this Element. He caused many of the Statues of the Gods to be maimed, breaking off their Heads, that he might place his own in the Room of them. In fine, he was a Monster of Cruelty and Prodigality. His own Servants killed him after he had reigned Four Years. CALLIOPE, who was the Mother of Or∣pheus, and the first of the Nine Muses, according to the Poets, who presided over Harmony, and the Hymns made in Honour of the Gods.
CALLISTO, the Daughter of Lycaon, King of Arcadia, and a Nymph of Diana who suffered her self to be debauched by Jupiter; whereupon the Goddess being angry, chang'd her into a Bear: But afterwards her Lover placed her in the Heavens; and this is that Con∣stellation which is called the Great Bear. CALUMNIA, Calumny, of which the A∣thenians made a Deity, and to which they built a Temple. Lucian has given us an Emblem of Calumny, in a Dialogue under the same Title. Apelles, says he, being accused by a Painter jealous of his Glory, that he had conspired a∣gainst Ptolomy, and caused the Revolt of Tyre, and the taking of Pelusium, and being acquit∣ted from this Accusation by one of the Pain∣ter's Accomplices, Ptolomy was so sensibly touch∣ed with Sorrow for what was done, that he gave Apelles 100 Talents, and deliver'd up the Accuser into his Hands, to do with him as he should think fit. Apelles therefore to be reven∣ged on Calumny which had done him such an ill turn, made the following Picture. He painted a Prince with large Ears, as commonly Midas's are painted, sitting upon a Throne encompassed with Suspicion and Ignorance, and while he is in this State, he reaches out his Hand a great Way off to Calumny, which advances towards him, having a Face very bright, and sparkling with extraordinary Charms and Enticements: She holds in her Left-hand a sorch, and with the other drags an innocent young Man by the Hair, who holds up his Hands to Heaven and implores its Assistance: Before her marches Envy with a pale Face and squinting Eyes, which set off and dress up Calumny to make her the more accepta∣ble: After her comes Repentance under the Fi∣gure of a Lady in Mourning-Habit, with her Garments rent, which turns her Head towards Truth, who weeps for Sorrow and Shame. CALYPSO, was one of the Nymphs, the Daughter of Oceanus and Tethys: She reigned in the Isle of Ogygia, where she entertain'd Ʋlysses kindly, when he was cast upon it by a Storm. They lived together for Seven Years in great Privacy: But Ʋlysses at last forsook it, and pre∣ferred his own Country and his dear Penelopy to his new Mistress. Lucian in L. 2. of his true History says, That as he was going out of the Isle of the Blessed, Ʋlysses took him aside and gave him a Letter to Calypso, without the Knowledge of his Wife, and that he arriving within Three Days after in the Isle of Ogygia, broke open this Letter for fear lest this crafty Knare should put so me Trick upon him, and he found written in it what follows: I should not have left you be∣fore, but that I inffer'd Shipwrack, and hardly escaped by the Help of Leucotheus in the Coun∣try of the Phaeaces. When I returned home, I found my Wife courted by a sort of People who consumed my Goods; and after they were killed, I was assassinated by Telemachus whom I had by Circe. At present I am in the Isle of the Blessed, where I remember with Grief the Pleasures we enjoy'd together, and wish that I had always continued with you, and had accepted the Offer you made me of Im∣mortality. If I can therefore make an Escape, you may rest assured that you shall see me again. Farewel. He delivered this Letter to Calypso, whom he found in a Grotto, such as Homer de∣scribes, where she was working Hangings with Figures in them. CHAM, or CHAMESES, the Son of Noab, who brought upon himself his Father's Curse by his Reproaches; although he had for his Share the rich Countries of Syria and Egypt, and all Affrica, as we read in Genesis, yet he made Inroads into the Countries possessed by his Nephews, and planted there such Vices as were not known before. He continued Ten Years in Italy, and was driven thence by Janus. Fuctius does not reckon him among the first Founders of the Italians. CAMILLA, the Queen of the Volsci, who was much addicted to Hunting, and was never so well pleased as in shooting with a Bow. She came into the Help of Turnus and the Latins a∣gainst Aeneas, and signalized herself by many brave Exploits: She was treacherously killed by Arontius, as we learn from Virgil, in L: 11. of the Aeneids. CAMILLUS, Camillus Furius, an illu∣strious Roman, who was called a second Romulus for restoring the Roman Commonwealth. He vanquished the Antiatae in a Naval Fight, and caused the Prows of the Ships to be brought into the Place of the Assemblies at Rome, which were afterwards called Rostra, being the Tribu∣nal for Orations. When the Capitol was besie∣ged by the Gauls, he was chosen Dictator, al∣though he had been banished by his ungrateful Country-men. Assoon as he heard this News, he solicited the Ardeatae to come in to the Assi∣stance of Rome, and invited all Italy to oppose the Invasion of the Gauls. He arrived at Rome in that very Moment when the Citizens were weighing 2000 Pounds of Gold in Performance of a Treaty they had made with the Gauls to oblige them to raise the Seige: But he charging them on a sudden, forced them by this Surprize to draw off with Shame and Loss. After this Defeat and Deliverance of Rome, he made a Model of a Temple for that Voice which had given Notice to the Romans of the Arrival of the Gauls, and which they had slighted: He in∣stituted Sacrifices to it under the Name of Deus Locutius. He caused also a Temple to be built to Juno Moneta, and the Goddess Matuta. The Romans in Acknowledgement of so many Bene∣fits, erected to him an Equestrian Statue in the
Market-place of Rome, which was an Honour that was never done to any Citizen before. He died of the Plague at Eighty Years of age. CAMILLUS, or CASMILLUS, was the Minister of the Gods Cabiri: Thus Plutarch says, that the Romans and Greeks gave this Name to a young Man, who served in the Temple of Jupiter, as the Greeks gave it to Mercury: Mi¦nistrantem in ade Jovis puerum in flore aetatis dici Camillum; ut & Mercurium Graecorum nonnulli Camillum à ministerio appellavêre. Varro thinks that this Name comes from the Mysteries of the Samothracians. Macrobius informs us, that the young Boys and Maids, who ministred to the Priests and Priestesses of the Pagan Deities were call'd Camilli and Camillae: Romani quoque pueros puellasve nobiles & investes, Camillos & Camillas appellant, Flaminicarum & Flaminum praeministros. Servius says, that in the Tuscan Tongue Mer∣cury was call'd Camillus, as being the Minister of the Gods. This Word Camillus obtained among the Tuscans, Romans, Greeks, Samothracians, and the Egyptians; and came from the East into the West. Bochart thinks that this Word might be deriv'd from the Arabick chadamae, i. e. ministrare: And 'tis well known, that the Arabick has much Affinity with the Phoenician and Hebrew Tongues. Grotius derives Camillus from Chamarim Writings wherein this Term signifies Priests or Augurs. CAMOENAE, the Nine Muses, the Daugh∣ters of Jupiter and Mnemosyne, so call'd from the Sweetness of their Singing. CAMPANA SUPELLEX, an Earthen Vessel which was made in Campania. CAMPANA, alone, or NOLAE, Bells. Pancirollus says expresly, that they were not in∣vented until about the Year of J. C. 400, or 420, when they were first found out by the Bishop of Nola in Campania, call'd Paulinus: And that for this Reason they were call'd Cam∣panae from the Country, or Nolae from the City where they were first used: But Salmuth upon this Passage of Pancirollus tells us, that it was an ancient Error to think that Paulinus first invent∣ed the Use of Bells, since they were in use from the Times of Moses; for the High-Priest among the Jews had a great many little Bells of Gold at the lower part of his Garment, to give No∣tice to the People when he entred into, and when he came out of the Sanctuary. The Priest of Proserpina among the Athenians, call'd Hie∣rophantus, rung a Bell to call the People to Sa∣crifice. The Romans likewise had a Bell in the publick Baths, to give Notice of the Time when they were open'd and shut up; as may appear from these Verses of Martial, L. 14. Epigr. 163. Redde pilam: sonat aes thermarum: ludere pergis? Virgine vis solâ lotus abire domum. Plutarch in his Book of Symposiacks speaks of cer∣tain Greeks who assembled at the Ringing of a Bell, to go and sup together. Adrianus Junius assures us, that the Ancients used Bells for the same End as we do, that they rung them at the Death of any Person, as is done to this Day, out of a superstitious Opini∣on, which was then generally receiv'd, that the Sound of Bells drove away Devils. They made use of them also against Enchantments, and par∣ticularly after the Moon was eclipsed, which they thought came to pass by Magick: Thus we must understand these Verses of Juvenal, —Jam nemo tubas atque aera fatiget, Ʋna laboranti poterit sucurrere Lunae. CAMPESTRE, the Lappet of a Gown, or lower part of a Cassock, that went round the Body; a sort of Apron, wherewith they girded themselves, who perform'd the Exercises in the Campus Martius, which reach'd from the Navel down to the middle of their Thighs, to cover their Privy Parts. CAMPUS MARTIUS, a large Place without Rome, between the City and the River Tiber. Some Authors affirm, that Romulus con∣secrated it to the God Mars, from whom he said he was descended, and that he devoted it to the Exercises of the Roman Youth. Others, as particularly Titus Livius, think that Tarquinius Superbus challeng'd to himself the Use of it; and that when he was driven away upon the Account of his Cruelty, and the impudent Rape of his Son committed on the Body of the chaste Lucretia, the Romans confiscated all his Goods, and particularly a great Field cover'd with Corn without the City, which they consecrated to the God Mars, by throwing all the Corn into the Tiber; Ager Tarquinius qui inter Ʋrbem & Tibe∣rim fuit consecratus Marti, Martius deinde campus fuit. Liv. This Field contain'd all that great Plain which reaches to the Gate call'd Popolo, and even as far as the Pons Milvius, or Ponte-mole, according to the Topography of Cluverius. It had on one side the Tiber, and on the other the Quirinal Mount, the Capitol and the little Hill of Gar∣dens. Its lowermost part was call'd Vallis Mar∣tia, which reach'd from the Arch of Domitian as far as the Gate Popolo. Strabo speaking of the Beauties of the City of Rome, takes particular Notice of the Field of Mars, which was of a prodigious Compass, and much longer than it was broad. In this Field the People assembled to chuse Magistrates; Review was taken of the Armies, and the Consuls listed Souldiers. This Place serv'd also for the Exercises of the Youth, as to ride the Horse, to Wrestle, to shoot with the Bow, to throw the Quoit, or Ring: And after these Exercises they bath'd them∣selves
in the Tiber, to refresh themselves, and to learn to swim. In this Place the People beheld the Nauma∣chiae, or Sea-fights, which were shown there for their Pleasure and Diversion. Here also were to be seen the Statues of illustrious Men, and a vast Gallery built by Antoninus Pius, together with that Pillar 70 Foot high, whose Ascent was 106 Steps, that were enlightned by 36 Win∣dows. Here also was the Obelisk, which Augu∣stus fetch'd from Egypt, that supported a Sun-dial: Moreover, in this Place were to be seen the Arch of Domitian, the Amphitheatre of the Emperor Claudius, the Naumachia of Domitian, the Mansoleum of Augustus, the Sepulchre of Marcellus his Nephew, the Trophies of Marius, and a vast Number of Sepulchres and ancient Monuments all along the River-side. At one End of this Place there was a little rising Ground, call'd Mons Citorius, or Citato∣rum, on which the People mounted to give their Votes at Elections. Very near to this was the Town-house, where Foreign Ambassadors were receiv'd, lodg'd and entertain'd at the Charge of the Commonwealth, during the Time of their Embassy, as Titus Livius relates upon occasion of the Macedonian Ambassadors, Macedones deducti extra Ʋrbem in villam publicam, ibique eis locus & lautia praebita. In this Place also the Censors made the first Assessment, and the Enrolment of the People and their Estates in the Year 319. In Cicero's Time C. Capito made a Proposal to build the Campus Martius, and inclose it within the City. He offer'd to make the Septa or Inclosures, into which the People entred one by one to give their Votes, of Marble, which be∣fore were only of Wood: But the Civil Wars which fell out unexpectedly, hindred the Exe∣cution of this great Design. CAMPUS FLORAE, the Field of Flora, a Place consecrated to that Goddess, wherein were shown the Games call'd Floralia, instituted to her Honour. CAMPUS SCELERATUS, a Place which was near the Porta Collina, where the Vestal Virgins, which were lewd Prostitutes, were enterr'd alive. CAMPUS RIDICULI, a Place where Hannibal encamp'd when he besieg'd Rome, which he might easily have taken, if he had not been frighted with vain Dreams and Fancies, which kindred him from continuing the Siege; for the Romans perceiving the Siege to be raised, and their City by this means to be deliver'd, upon this occasion burst out into a very loud Laughter, and henceforth erected an Altar to the God of Laughter. CANCELLARIUS; he who went by this Name in the Roman Empire, had neither the Dignity nor the Power of him whom we now call Chancellor in England; for he was only a little Officer of very small Esteem among the Romans, who sate in a Place shut up with Grates or Bars, to write out the Sentences of the Judges and other Judicial Acts, very much like our Re∣gisters or Deputy-Registers. They were paid by the Roll for their Writing; as Salmasius has observ'd when he relates a Passage out of the Laws of the Lombards: Volumus ut nullus Can∣cellarius pro ullo judicio aut scripto aliquid amplius accipere audeat, nisi dimidiam libram argenti de majoribus scriptis; de minoribus autem infra dimi∣diam libram. Doubless this Officer was a very inconsiderable Person, since Vopiscus tells us, that Numerianus made a very shameful Election, when he preferr'd one of these Officers to be Governour of Rome, Praefectum Ʋrbi unum è Can∣cellariis suis fecit, quo oedius nec cogitari potuit aliquid, nec dici. Mons. Menage says, that this Word comes à Cancellis, from the Bars or Lat∣tice, within which the Emperor was when he administred Justice, because the Chancellor stood at the Door of that Apartment, which se∣parated the Prince from the People. M. Du Cange following herein the Opinion of Joannes de Janua, thinks that this Word comes from Pa∣lestine, wherein the Tops of Houses were flat, and made in the Form of Terrass-walks, having Bannisters with cross Bars, which were call'd Cancelli; and that those who mounted upon these Tops of Houses to repeat an Oration, were call'd Cancellarii; and that this Name was extended to those who pleaded within the Bars, which were call'd Cancelli forenses; and that af∣terwards those were call'd Chancellors, who sate in the first Place between these Bars. The Re∣gister in Sea-Port-Towns, i. e. in the Maritime Places in the Levans, was also call'd Chan∣cellor. CANDELA BRUM, a Candlestick. The Candlestick of the Temple at Jerusalem which was of Gold, which weigh'd 100 Minae, i. e. Pounds, differ'd from the Candlestick of the Romans, in this, that the latter had but one Stem with its Foot, and one Lamp at top, where∣as the Candlestick of the Temple of Solomon had seven Branches, three on each side and one in the middle, together with seventy Lamps, as Josephus says. Du Choul, in the Religion of the ancient Romans, has given seven Branches to their Candlestick, as Joseph did to that in Solo∣mon's Temple; but then he allows to it only seven Lamps, whereof that in the middle is greater than the rest, and represents the Sun, as the six other do the Planets. This Candlestick with the Vessels and other Rarities of the Tem∣ple at Jerusalem, serv'd for Ornaments to the Triumph of Titus and Vespasian, after the Sack∣ing of Jerusalem; and it was laid up in the Temple of Peace, together with the Sacred Ves∣sels of the Temple of the true God.
CANDIDATI, the Candidates, or such as aspir'd to Offices in the Commonwealth; were so call'd from the white Garment they were oblig'd to wear during the two Years of their solliciting for the Place. This Garment was to be wore singly without any other Cloaths, according to the Relation of Plutarch, in the Life of Coriolanus, to avoid any Suspicion the People might have of conceal'd Money for pur∣chasing Votes, and also that they might the more easily show to the People the Scars of those Wounds they had receiv'd in fighting for the Defence of the Commonwealth. In the first Year of their Canvassing, they ask'd leave of the Magistrate to harangue the People, or to make a Speech to them by some of their Friends. At the End of these Speeches they declar'd to them, that they desir'd to ob∣tain such an Office by their good Opinion of them, and pray'd them to have regard to their Ancestors, and the Services they had done, of which they gave a large Account: This was call'd profiteri nomen suum, and this Year was call'd annus professionis, which was wholly em∣ploy'd in making Friends among the Grandees, and Populace, either by Games and Feasts, or by building some Work for the Publick, or by defending at the Bar such as were sued. At the Beginning of the second Year they return'd to the Magistrate with the Recommendation of the People, which was commonly express'd in these Terms, rationem illius habe, and they pray'd him to set down their Names in the List of Candi∣dates, which they call'd, Edere nomen apud Prae∣torem aut Consulem: And there was this diffe∣rence between profiteri apud populum, & profiteri apud Magistratum, i. e. Between declaring their Intention to the People, and petitioning them for an Office, and being admitted by the Magistrate to petition for it; that no Person was ever hindred from desiring a Favour of the People, but every one was not admitted by the Magistrate to put in his Petition in publick on the Day of Election. For, as soon as the Magistrate had seen the Pe∣tition of the Candidate together with the Re∣commendation of the People, he call'd together the Ordinary Council of Senators; and after they had examin'd the Reasons he offer'd for desiring such an Office, and inform'd themselves of his Life and Behaviour, the Magistrate gave him leave to put in for the Place, in these Terms, rationem habebo, renuntiabo; or else he rejected him, and answer'd, rationem non habebo, non re∣nuntiabo, i. e. I will have no regard to you. We have an infinite Number of Examples to this purpose: Asconius-Pedianus writes, that Cati∣line desir'd the Consulship of the People at his return from Africa; and yet the Consul Volca∣tius, having call'd the Senate together, declar'd, that he was by no means to be admitted. C. Mar∣tius Rutilius put in for the Office of Censor, but the Consuls protested that they would have no regard at all to his Name, non renuntiabo. This Opposition was so powerful, that it prevail'd above the Favour of the People, and even above the Authority of the Tribunes. It was never known that any Man did more powerfully sol∣licite, or had greater Favour shown him than Pelicanus had for obtaining the Consulship, for he was supported by the Tribunes, and favour'd by the People; and yet the Consul Piso declar'd with a loud Voice, in the Presence of the Peo∣ple, as Valerius Maximus relates it, that he would not name him at all, non renunriabo. The Tribunes also very often opposed the Candidates, when the Magistrate appear'd not to be sufficiently inform'd of their Defects, or plainly dissembled his knowledge of them, for then the Tribunes would exclude them. The most general and essential Defect which excluded any Person from Offices, was his bad Life and wicked Actions: A second Defect which render'd any Person uncapable, was the want of that Age which was prescrib'd by the Laws to every one that should obtain the Offices of the Commonwealth. Tacitus informs, that at the Beginning of the Commonwealth the Person's Age was not at all consider'd, but any one was admitted indifferently to Dignities, and even to the Consulship, the Young as well as the Old; but in succeeding Times they were forc'd to make Laws, which prescrib'd a certain Age for Offices. One must be 27 Years of Age to be Quaestor, 30 to be Tribune; and the Office of the Major or Curule Edile could not be admini∣stred by any one under the Age of 37 Years; nor of Praetor under 39, nor of Consul under 43 Years of Age: But according to the Opini∣on of Justus Lipsius none could be Quaestor until he was 25 Years old, nor Tribune or Edile Ma∣jor until he had entred upon the 27th or 28th Year of his Age; nor Praetor until he was 30 Years old, nor Consul until he had entred upon the 43th Year of his Age. Nevertheless they did very often dispense with the Rigor of these Laws; for Scipio was made Consul at 24, and Pompey at 34 Years of Age. There was also a third Defect which render'd them uncapable of Offices, and that was when they endeavour'd to obtain the greater Offices before they had passed thro' the lesser: Thus it was forbidden that any one should put in for the Office of a Consul, until he had first passed thro' the other inferior Offices: Upon which ac∣count Cicero in his Book, entituled, Brutus, calls the Petition of Caesar for the Office of Consul, An over-hasty and unusual Petition, Extraordi∣nariam & praematurum petitionem; because he had been formerly no more than Edile: And we learn from History, that Sylla testified so great a Zeal for the Observation of this Law, that he kill'd Q Lucretius Osella with his own Hand, for deli∣ring
the Consulship, before he had exercised the Office of Quaestor or Praetor. The Reader may consult the Word Annus, where we have given an Account of the Years which were prescrib'd for the several Offices. The Magistrate having admitted the Pre∣tender to put in a Petition for the Office, he made it his Business to find out Friends, which were of great Credit and Authority among the Grandees of Rome, and the Populace, that by their Interest he might obtain it. To this end they made use of all manner of Civilities, and the little Arts of pleasing, to gain the Good-Will of the Voters; they courted private Per∣sons, not only with Complements but Gifts, and in the corrupt Times of the Commonwealth, they came at last to that pass, as to purchase openly the Votes of the Tribes: For buying their Votes, they made use of three sorts of Persons, who were call'd Interpretes, Divisores, Sequestres Interpretes, i. e. Brokers who help'd to make the Bargain, per quos pactio inducebatur, says Asconius Pedianus; Divisores, Distributers, who divided the Money among the Tribes, and Sequestres, Persons in whose Hands the Money was deposited, to give it to the Voters, in case they did not fail to give their Votes according to Agreement. To remedy this Disorder, ma∣ny Laws were made, which were call'd leges de ambitu; but still they found out from time to time several ways to evade them. The time of Election being come, the Magi∣strate appointed an Assembly to be held three several Market days, that so those in the Coun∣try, who liv'd in the Municipal Cities and Co∣lonies, and had the Right of Voting, might have time to come to the City. When the Day of Election was come, the Candidates or Preten∣ders to Offices, being cloath'd in white, were present very early in the Morning, accompanied with those who befriended them, at the Quirinal Mount, or upon the little Hill of Gardens, call'd Collis Hortulorum, which overlook'd the Campus Martius, that so being upon a high Place, the People might the better see them. From thence they descended into the Campus Martius, where they continued their Sollicitations and Canvassings; as Horace informs us in these Verses, —Hic generosior Descendat in Campum petitor; Moribus hic meliorque famâ Contendat; illi turba clientium Sit major. Odar. L. 3. Od. 1. Then the President of the Assembly after he had named aloud the Pretenders to the Offices, and related the Reasons which every one had to stand for them, call'd the Tribes to give their Votes; and these being counted, he who had most was declar'd Magistrate, who after this Declaration never fail'd immediately to return Thanks to the Assembly, and from thence he as∣cended to the Capitol, there to say his Prayers to the Gods. This good Order was a little chang'd under the Emperors. Augustus canvass'd for his first Consulship, after a Manner something new, be∣ing no more than 20 Years old; for he caused his Army to march near to Rome, and sent a famous Embassy, to desire the Office for himself, in the Name of the Legions; and the Captain of this Embassy, call'd Cornelius, perceiving that the Answer to his Petition was delay'd, laid his Hand upon the Hilt of his Sword, and had the Boldness to speak these Words, Hic faciet, si non feceritis. In process of Time, when Augustus was ad∣vanc'd to an absolute Power, he himself can∣vass'd for those whom he had a Mind to favour, until he went to give his Voice in his Tribe, and these Candidates were call'd Candidati Ca∣saris. Suetonius adds, that afterwards he left to the People only the Power of naming the In∣ferior Magistrates, reserving to himself the Right of naming to the greater Offices, Caesar comitia cum populo partitus est, ut exceptis Consu∣latûs competitoribus, de catero numero candidato∣rum pro parte dimidiâ, quos populus vellet, renun∣tiarentur. Moreover, he encroach'd upon the People's Power of electing to Offices, which he had granted them, by making them disperse Tickets in his Name among the Tribes, who by this means were forc'd to chuse such as he recommended to them, & edebat per libellos cir∣cum Tribus missos scripturâ brevi, Caesar Dictator illi tribui: commendo vobis illum & illum, ut ve∣stro suffragio suam dignitatem teneant. Tiberius, Successor to Augustus, took away the Right of Election from the People, and trans∣ferr'd it to the Senate: Nero restored it to them again, yet they never made use of it afterwards; and the Senate did only take care to proclaim in the Campus Martius such as were chosen to Offices, thinking by this means still to retain some Shadow of the ancient Manner of E∣lections. Of all the Magistrates which were chosen, none but the Censors entred immediately upon the Discharge of their Office, the other Magi∣strates continued some Months before they en∣tred upon it, in which time they were instruct∣ed in the Duties belonging to them; for they were chosen in the Beginning of August, and they did not enter upon their Office till the First of January, and so they had the Space of Five Months for Instruction. CANEPHORIA, a Feast of Diana a∣mong the Greeks, at which all the Maids that were to be married, offer'd to this Deity Bas∣kets full of little Pieces of Work wrought with
the Needle, and by this Offering signified that they were weary of their Virginity, and had a Desire to taste the Pleasures of Matrimony. The Athenians also celebrated a Feast to Bacchus, during which the young Women carried Bas∣kets, or little Chests of Gold full of Fruit, from whence this Feast was called Canephoria, and the Women Canephorae, Basket-carriers. Suidas speaks of these Baskets consecrated to Bacchus, Ceres, and Proserpina; as also the Poet Theocritus in his Idyllia. They had a Cover to preserve the Mysteries of Bacchus, and conceal them from the Eyes of those who were not initiated into them, and who upon that account were treated as prophane. CANIS, the Coelestial Dog, is a Constel∣lation, of which there are two sorts; the Great Dog call'd Sirius, which is a Constellation con∣sisting of Eighteen Stars, according to Piolomy, of the Nature of Jupiter and Venus, the princi∣pal Star whereof is held to be greater than any other Star, nay, than the Sun it self: The little Dog, which is otherwise call'd Canicula, or Pro∣cyon, has only Two Stars, whereof one is of the first Magnitude, and of the Nature of Mars, which is the Cause of the great Heats in Sum∣mer. CANIS, a Dog, an Animal which was kept in the Temple of Aesculapius, and which was consecrated to the God Pan. The Romans never fail'd to crucifie one of this Kind every Year, be∣cause the Dogs had not given Notice by their barking, of the Arrival of the Gauls, who be∣sieg'd the Capitol; which was intended for a Punishment to the Species; whereas on the con∣trary, to do Honour to a Goose, they carried one of Silver in an Elbow-Chair, laid upon a Pil∣low, because she had advertised them of the Coming of the Gauls by her Noise. Aelian re∣lates, that the Egyptians held the Dog in great Veneration, because they look'd upon it as a Symbol of the Coelestial Dog, whose rising gives encrease to the Nile. This Author says else∣where, that there was a Country in Ethiopia, where they had a Dog for their King, and they took his Fawnings or Barkings to be Signs of his Good-will; and for his Authors he cites Her∣mippus and Aristotle. Plutarch also speaks of this Dog which some of the Ethiopians held for a King, and to whom all the Nobility paid Ho∣mage. CANICULARIS PORTA, a Gate at Rome, according to Festus, where Dogs of Red Hair were sacrific'd to the Dog-star, to ripen the Corn. CANOPUS, the Sovereign Deity among the Egyptians, of whose Original Suidas gives the following Account: There arose, says he, one Day a great Controversie between the E∣gyptians, Chaldeans, and the Neighbouring Nations, concerning the Supremacy of their Gods; and while each Nation maintain'd that their own God was Supreme, it was at last decreed, that he among the Gods who should conquer the rest, should be acknowledg'd for So∣vereign over them all: Now the Chaldeans ado∣red the Element of Fire, which easily melted down or consum'd all the other Gods, made of Gold, Silver, and other fusile or combustible Matter; but when this God was about to be de∣clar'd the Sovereign Deity over all the rest, a certain Priest of Canopus, a City of Egypt, stood up, and advised them to take an Earthen Pot that had many little Holes made in it, such as the Egyptians used for purifying the Water of Nile; then having stopt up those Holes with Wax, he fill'd it with Water, and placed it over the Head of the God which they adored, whereupon the Contest was presently begun be∣tween it and the Fire, whose Heat having melted the Wax, the Water run out imme∣diately and extinguish'd the Fire; whereupon the God of Canopus was acknowledg'd for the Sovereign over all the Gods among these Na∣tions. CANOPUS, is also a Star, which we have no knowledge of, says Vitruvius, but by the Re∣lation of those Merchants who have travell'd to the uttermost Parts of Egypt, as far as these Countries which are at the End of the World, (and in the other Hemisphere) because it turns round about the South-Pole, and so is never visible to us, since it never rises above our Ho∣rizon. CAPENA, a Gate so call'd at Rome, ac∣cording to Festus, from a Neighbouring City near the Fountain Egeria: It was also call'd Ap∣pia, because it was the Gate thro' which they went to the Via Appia; and Triumphalis, because the Generals to whom a Triumph was decreed, made their Entrance into the City thro' this Gate, and Fontinalis from the Aquaeducts which were raised over it; whence Juvenal calls it ma∣dida Capena, and Martial, Capena, grandi porta quae pluit gutta. CAPETIS SILVIUS, King of Alba-Dionysius calls him Capetus: Eusebius, Titus Li∣vius, Messala and Jacobus, of Auzol, call him barely Atis; and Cassiodorus names him Egyptus. He reign'd 24 Years. CAPIS SILVIUS, King of Latium: He is said to have laid the Foundation of Capua in the Terra Laboris, tho' others attribute this Foundation to the Trojan Capis, the Father of Anchises; but without any probability. Sueto∣nius speaks of certain Plates of Brass, which were found at Capua, in the Tomb of Capis, in that Year that Julius Caesar was kill'd, on which Greek Letters were engraved, which signified, that at such time as the Bones of Capis should be discover'd, one of the Posterity of Julius should be killed by his own People; from whence we may
draw an uncontestable Proof that Capis was not a Trojan, for if he had, 'tis very probable, that Greek Characters would not have been used in his Monument. CAPITOLIUM, or MONS CAPI∣TOLINUS, the Capitol, or the Capitoline Mount, which was called at first Saturnius, be∣cause Saturn dwelt there; afterwards it was called Tarpeius from the Vestal Virgin Tarpeia, who was smothered there under the Bucklers of the Sabines; at last Capitolinus, from the Head of a Man called Tolus, which was found by the Workmen when they were digging the Foun∣dation of the Temple of Jupiter, who upon this Account was called Jupiter Capitolinus. This Mountain was the most considerable of all those that were at Rome, as well for its Extent, as for the Buildings that stood upon it, which were one Fortress and Sixty Temples, whereof the most famous was that dedicated to Jupiter un∣der this Title, J. Opt. Max. which was begun by Tarquinius Priscus, finished by Tarquinius Saperbus, dedicated by Horatius Pulvillus. It was burnt 424 Years after its Dedication: Sylla begun to rebuild it, and Quintus Catulus finished it, and consecrated it anew. 330 Years being expired after the Renewing of this second Consecration, the Souldiers of Vitellius set it on fire, and Vespa∣sian caused it to be built again. In this Temple Vows were made and solemn Oaths, here the Citizens ratified the Acts of the Em∣perors, and took the Oaths of Fealty to them, and lastly, hither the Magistrates and the Gene∣rals that kept a Triumph came to give Thanks to the Gods for the Victories they had obtained, and to pray for the Prosperity of the Empire. CAPRICORNUS, Capricorn, one of the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac, into which the Sun enters at Winter-solstice. The Poets feign that Capricorn is the God Pan, who to avoid the Pur∣suit of the Giant Typhon, changed himself into a He-goat, whose lower Parts were of Fish. Ju∣piter admiring his Cunning placed him in the Heavens under this Figure. Others think that Capricorn was the Foster-brother of Jupiter; for Amalthea to whom he was put out to nurse ha∣ving no Milk of her own, suckled him with the Milk of a Goat, which Jupiter in Acknowledg∣ment for the Kindness placed among the Signs of the Zodiac. CAPROTINA JUNO, and CA∣PROTINAE NONAE; the Occasion of giving this Name to Juno, and to the Nones of the Month of July, which were called Caprotinae, was a follows. The Gauls having drawn off their Army after they had sack'd Rome, the Latins had a mind to make an Advantage of this Misfortune, of their Neighbours, and therefore entred into a League with the Gauls, and resolved utterly to destroy the Roman Empire; and that they might give some Colour to their Design, they sent to desire of the Romans all their Maids to be given in Marriage, which they refused to grant, and thereupon the Gauls presently declared War against them. This War happening just after their late Misfortune mightily perplexed the Senate, and put the Romans in great Trouble and Consternation, who could not resolve with themselves thus to abandon their Daughters. While they were in this Consternation, a cer∣tain Woman-slave called Philotis or Tutola pro∣posed to the Senate, that she and the other Fe∣male Slaves should be sent to the Latins instead of the young Roman Maids, being dress'd up in Cloaths like them. This Design was approved and presently put in Execution, for those Female Slaves resorted to the Enemies Camp, who up∣on their Arrival presently fell a drinking and rejoycing. When Philotis perceived that they were plunged into an Excess of Riot, she climb∣ed up a wild Fig-tree, and having from thence given a Signal to the Romans with a lighted Torch, they came presently and fell upon the Latins, and finding them buried in Wine and Luxury, they easily destroyed them. In Me∣mory of this Victory the Romans ordained that every Year a Festival should be kept at the Nones of July to Juno, who was called Caprotina from the wild Fig-tree, which in Latin is called Caprisicus. These Female Slaves having by this Stratagem preserved the Empire, were set at Liberty; and on this Day they give always a Treat to their Mistresses without the City, where they sport and jest with them, and throw Stones at one another to represent the Stones wherewith the Latins were overwhelmed. CAPULUS, a Bier, on which the Bodies of the Dead were carried to the Grave, from whence it comes to pass that old Men who are on the Brink of the Grave and just ready to die, are called Capulares senes; and those Criminals who are condemned to die, are called Capula∣res rei. CARACALLA, Antoninus, the Son of Septimius Severus and Marcia: He was declar'd Caesar, and made Partner in the Empire with Geta his Brother by the Father's Side. In his Youth he had sucked in the Principles of Chri∣stianity, having Evodus for one of his Gover∣nours, whose Wife and Son were instructed in the Christian Religion. Thus at first he gave good Signs of a very sweet Disposition, which procured him the Love of every Body: But his Father having removed from his Person those that inspired him with a Relish of true Piety, choaked that good Seed he had received, and made a Monster of him when he thought to make him a great Prince; for he intended to have usurped the Sovereign Power by Parricide, having laid his Hand upon his Sword on purpose to draw it and kill his Father, when he was one Day coming behind him on Horse-back, and
had certainly done it if those who were about him had not cryed out and hindered him. The Horror of an Action so black brought Severus in∣to such a deep Melancholy, that he died in it within a Year after. Carcalla being thus ad∣vanced to the Empire, killed his Brother Geta in his Mother's Bosom, that he might reign alone without any Partner upon the Throne. He cut off the Head of Papinian a celebrated Lawyer, because he would neither excuse nor desend the Murder of his Brother; which Ex∣ample of a generous Courage in this Lawyer, who was then Praefectus Praetorio, should make Christians blush, who so easily excuse the Crimes of Kings when they have Hopes of rising at Court. We have some Medals of this Prince, which represent to us what kind of a Person he was after he came to be Emperor. For when we observe in his Medal, the Space between his Eye-brows knit, his Eyes sunk in his Head, and his Nose a little turned up at the End, these Marks make up the Countenance of a Man who is thoughtful, crafty and wicked, and indeed he was one of the cruellest Men in the World: Besides, he was addicted to Wine and Women, fierce, insolent, hated by the Soldiers, and even by his own domestick Servants, inso∣much that at last he was killed by one of his own Centurions called Martialis, in the 43 Year of his Age, and the Sixth Year of his Reign. It might seem wonderful that so wicked a Prince should be placed among the Gods, as we learn that he was by the Title of Divine, which was given him, and by the Consecration we see in his Medal, but that we have this to say in the Case, that Macrinus who succeeded him, and was the Cause of his Death, had a mind by do∣ing him this Honour to clear himself of all Suspi∣cion of this Murder, or rather, that this was an Age of Slavery, and the People being enslaved bestowed the most sordid Flatteries upon the worst of Princes. CARIATIDES, Statues in the Shape of Women without Arms, habited genteelly, which served for Ornament and Support to the Chapi∣ters of Pillars in Edifices. Vitruvius in L. 2. C. 1. of his Architecture, relates the Story of them thus, That the Inhabitants of Caria, which was a City of Peloponnesus, in former times had joyn'd with the Persians when they made War against the People of Greece; and that the Greeks having put an End to that War by their glorious Victories, declared afterwards to the Cariates, that their City being taken and ruin'd, and all their Men put to the Sword, their Women should be carried away Captive; and that to make the Disgrace the more re∣markable, their Ladies of Quality should not be suffered to put off their Garments, nor any of their usual fine Dresses. Now to make the Ca∣riates an everlasting Monument of the Punish∣ment they had endured, and to inform Poste∣rity what it was, the Architects of that Time instead of Pillars, placed this sort of Statues in publick Buildings. Some remains of this sort of ancient Statues are still to be seen at Rome. Montiosius, who had much ado to find out some Signs of these Cariatides, which Pliny says were placed by Diogenes, an Athenian Ar∣chitect to serve for Pillars in the Pantheon, re∣lates that he saw Four of them in the Year 1580, which were buried in the Ground as high as the Shoulders on the Right-side of the Portico, in Demi-relief, and which sustain'd upon their Heads a kind of Architrave of the same Stone. This kind of Cariatides is still to be seen at Bourdeaux in a very ancient Building which they call Tuteles; as also in the old Louvre at Paris in the Hall of the Swiss Guards: They are Sta∣tues Twelve Foot high, and support a Gallery enriched with Ornaments which are very well cut, done by Goujon, Architect and Engraver to Henry II. CARITES, or the Three Graces, which were Three Sisters, the constant Companions of Venus, viz. Aglaia, Euphrosyne and Thalia. They are painted young and beautiful, with a smiling Countenance, clad in fine thin Stuff, without a Girdle, and holding one another by the Hand. Seneca explains to us this Picture. He says, They are painted young and beautiful, because their Favours are always agreeable for their Novelty, and the Memory of them can never be lost. They are clad in fine thin Stuff, be∣cause the Kindness they do you ought to be without Dissimulation or any Disguise, and should proceed from the Bottom of the Heart: Their Garment is not girt about, because Benefits ought to be free and unconstrained: They hold one another interchangable by the Hands, to show that Favours should be re∣ciprocal. We ought to believe that the Graces were only Moral Deities. Pausanias has written a large Discourse about them, wherein he says, that Eteocles was the first who consecrated Three of them in Boeotia; that the Lacedaemonians knew but Two of them, Clita and Phaenna; that the Athenians also held Two of them in Ve∣neration, Auxo and Hegemo; that Homer mar∣ries one of the Graces to Vulcan without giving her any other Name, though he elsewhere calls her Pasitbae: Lastly, that Hesiod nam'd the Three Graces, Euphorsyne, Aglaia and Thalia, and makes them the Daughters of Jupiter and Eu∣rynome. CARMENTA, the Mother of Evander, and one who was a Prophetess, from whence she had her Name Carmenta, à carminibus, because the ancient Sibyls gave their Oracles in Verse. A Temple was built to her at Rome, wherein Sacrifices were offered to her: A Festival also
was instituted to her, which from her Name was called Carmentalia. Carmenta, says Father Thomiain, answers pret∣ty well to Themis; for Servius says, that she was called Nicostrata, and that she assumed the Name of Carmenta, because she gave her Oracles in Verse, that she was the Mother of Evander, the Son of Pallas, King of Arcadia; and lastly, that she was killed by her own Son, or according to others, she instigated her Son to kill his Father Pallas; which forced Evander to flie away into Italy: Evander patrem suum occidit, suadente ma∣tre Nicostratâ, quae etiam Carmentis dicta est, quia carminibus vamcinabatur. Ovid relates this Hi∣story after such a manner as is something more to the Advantage of Evander, in his L. 1. V. 461. He makes him an innocent Fugitive, and one that was always maintained by the Pro∣phecies of his Mother, whom he made a Goddess of in Italy. Virgil says as much in L. 2. Me pulsum patriâ, pelagique extremâ sequentem, Fortuna omnipotens & ineluctabile fatum His posuere locis, matrisque egere tremenda. Carmentis Nymphae monita, & Deus aucto Apollo. Dionyfim Halicarnassaeus says, that Evander made this Voyage into Italy Sixty Years before the War of Troy, and that Evander was the Son of a Nymph who was named or surnamed Themis, because she foretold Things to come. Nymphae Arcadiaefilius Evander, quam Graeci Themin fuisse dicunt, & divino afflatu instinctam, i. e. That Evander imposing upon the Simplicity of the Aborigines, who were still wild and incivilized, made his Mother pass among them for a Pro∣phetess and for the Themis of Italy, and so obli∣ged them to pay her Divine Honours. Plu∣tarch also in his Roman Questions says, that Car∣menta was named Themis; and he adds that she was surnamed Carmenta, as who should say, Ca∣rens mente, because the Livine Spirit of Pro∣phecy assumed the Place of the Humane Spirit; and that Verses are called Carmina from her Name Carmenta, because she prophesied in Verse. CARMENTALIA, Feasts instituted in Honour of Carmenta, which are solemnized twice in the Month of January, viz. the first time on the Eleventh (or the Third of the Ides, as may be seen in the Roman Calendar,) because then this Deity perswaded her Son E∣vander to leave Arcadia, and to go and dwell at Italy; the second time this Festival is cele∣brated on the 15th of the same Month, the Occasion whereof is variously reported. Some say, that when a Present was to be made to Apollo of Delphor, of the Tithe of the Plunder of the City of Veii, there being a De∣ficiency of what was necessary to make it up, the Roman Dames assembled together, and brought in to the Magistrates their Ornaments of Gold and Silver; which was so pleasing to the Senate, that they granted them the Pri∣viledge of being carried in a Litter to the Shows and into the City. Plutarch thinks, that for this Largess they had only the Priviledge of ha∣ving Funeral-Orations after their Death. Yet we read in History, that the Right of the Lit∣ter was taken from them, which provoked them so much that they would no longer keep Com∣pany with Men. This is what Ovid and Plu∣tarch tell us. Upon this Account the Senate to appease them, was forced to restore their an∣cient Priviledge unto them; and then they cau∣sed a Temple immediately to be built to Car∣menta, called by the Greeks Themis and Nico∣strata, at the Bottom of the Capitol, and ap∣pointed a Priest for it called Flamen Carmentalis, and hence the Gate of the City which leads to this Temple was also called Porta Carmentalis. CARMA or CARNA, a Deity which presided over the good Habit of the Body. A Sacrifice was offered to her on the first of June, together with a Potrage made of the Meal of Beans and with Bacon. CARON, the Ferry-man of Hell, who ferried over the Souls of the Dead in his Boat, according to the Fable, that they might after∣wards be judged by Rbadamantbus and Minos the Judges of Hell. He received an Obolus from all the Dead for their Passage, and for this Reason the Ancients put always this Piece into the Mouth of the Dead, that they might have wherewithal to pay the Ferry-man. Virgil de∣scribes him to us as very ancient and fat, having a long Beard and very bushy. The Souls of those who had no Burial, were to wander for the Space of a Hundred Years on the Side of the River, and then they were to be ferried over. CARTHAGO, Carthage, the Capital City of all Africk and the Rival of Rome. It was founded by a Tyrian called Charcedo, which confounds the Measures of Virgil, who had a mind that Dido should be the Foundress of it. Per∣haps this Difference may be accommodated by saying, that Dido founded Byrsa the Castle of Carthage, and so the Poet without any great Crime might stretch this to the City. But how to reconcile what Vigenere says with what Velleius Paterculus and Justin say, I know not, for the former says, that Carthage was built 45 Years, and the latter, that it was built 72 Years after Rome; whereas, if we may believe Vigenere, Rome was founded after Carthage more than 200 Years. This City bore the Brunt of Three great Wars against the Romans, which were called the Punick or Carthaginian Wars. The first lasted 24 Years according to Polybius, and 22 according
to Eutropius: The second under the Conduct of Hannibal lasted Eighteen Years, in which the Roman Empire was so shocked, that it was re∣duced to the very Brink of Ruine. But at last Hannibal their formidable Captain was over∣come by the soft Pleasures of Capua, and there∣by gave the Romans such a time of Respite, that they repaired the Losses they had suffered. In the third War Carthage was utterly destroyed by the Grandson of Scipio Africanus. There went out of the City no more than 5000 Per∣sons, who were the only sad Remains of this magnificent City, which had with so much Vi∣gor disputed the Empire of the World with Rome. It lasted only 660, or 700 Years. CARTHAGINENSES, the Carthagi∣nians, or the Inhabitants of Carthage, who are accounted a sort of faithless People in the World, to whom no Credit is to be given; from whence came the Proverb, Punica fides, Punick Faith, to signifie Knavery, or a deceitful Promise. They sacrificed their Children to their Dei∣ties in the Presence of their Mothers, who were to behold this cruel Spectacle with a Stoi∣cal Constancy, and without any Compassion. CASSANDRA, the Daughter of Pria∣mus King of Troy, who was courted by Apollo for her extraordinary Beauty. This God bestow∣ed upon her the Gift of foretelling Things to come, in hopes that she would grant him her greatest Favours; but she not keeping her Word with him, Apollo was very angry with her, and so ordered the Matter, that though she spoke the Truth in what she predicted, yet she never was believed: And this was the Cause of the Ruine of her Country, as Virgil tells us, L. 2. of the Aeneids, V. 246. Tunc etiam fatis aperit Cassindra futuris Ora, Dei jussu, non nunquam credita Teucris. She was ravished at the Sacking of Troy by Ajax the Locrian, although she had embraced the Statue of Pallas. The Greeks having divided among them the Booty of the City of Troy, Cassandra fell to the Share of Agamemnon, by whom she was carried away into his own Country, and by the Way she gave him Notice, that he was to be assassi∣nated by his Wife Clytemnestra, and her adul∣trous Keeper Aegistbus: He gave no Credit at all to this Prediction of his own Misfortune; but after he was come to his Palace, when he was going out of the Bath to sit down at Table, his Wife Clyemnestra clave his Skull with the Blow of an Ax, having first entangled him in a Shirt without a Bosom; and afterwards falling upon Cassandra, she killed her after the same manner: But Orestes the Son of Agamemnon, coming in by Stealth, killed his own Mother, and her adulterous Lover, as al∣so the Murderer of his Father. CASSIDARIUS, He who had the Care and Oversight of the Salades and the Armour for the Head, which were kept in the Arsenals at Rome. CASSIOPEA, the Wise of Cepheus, King of Ethiopia, who incurred the Indignation of the Nereides for being accounted more beau∣tiful; which was the Cause why her Daughter Andromeda was exposed to a Sea-monster, that so the Mother might be punished in the Daugh∣ter: But Perseus at his Return from Libya, res∣cued her from the Jaws of this Monster, when it was just ready to devour her; and in Acknow∣ledgment of this Kindness, Cepheus gave her to him in Marriage. Cassiope was taken up into Heaven by the Favour of her Son-in-law, where the Astronomers represent her to us as sitting upon a Chair in the Milky-way, between Ce∣pheus and Andromeda, who touches our Summer Tropick with her Head and Hand. Vitruvius has given us the following Description of these Constellations. Perseus leans with his Right-hand upon Cas∣siope, holding with the Left, which is over Au∣riga the Waggoner, the Head of Gorgon by the Crown, and placing it under the Feet of Andro∣meda: The Right-hand of Andromeda is over the Constellation of Cassiope, and the Left over the Northern Pisces. Cassiope is in the Middle, and Capricorn has the Eagle and Dolphin above it, which are dedicated to them. CASTALIUS FONS, the Castalian Fountain in Phocis, scituate at the Foot of Mount Parnassus, which the Poets feign'd to be dedi∣cated to Apollo and the Muses, which from thence were surnamed Castalides. CASTITAS, Chastity, which the Romans made a Goddess of, and which they represented in the Habit of a Roman Lady, holding a Scep∣ter in her Hand, and having Two white Doves at her Feet. CASTOR, the Son of Tyndarus, King of Laconia, and of Leda the Daughter of Thestius. The Fable gives us an Account, that Jupiter be∣ing smitten with the Beauty of Leda, trans∣formed himself into a Swan to enjoy her Em∣braces, who growing big with Child, was at length brought to Bed of Two Eggs, in each of which there were Two Twin-Children: In the first Pollux and Helena were included of Ju∣piter's getting; and in the other, Castor and Clytemnestra of Tindarus's: All these Children though gotten by different Fathers, were ne∣vertheless called from the Name of one of them Tyndarides. Castor and Pollux were brave and of great Courage, for they cleared the Seats of Pirates, carried off their Sister Helena by Force, when
she was ravished by Theseus, and they went with Jason to the Conquest of the Golden Fleece. Castor being descended of a Mortal Father was killed by Lynceus; but Pollux his Brother being descended of Jupiter, was Immortal. They were placed in the Number of the Dil Indigetes, or Genitales, by the Greeks and Romans, because they descended originally from the Country. Diodorus Siculus relates, that the Argonauts being destressed with a great Tempest, Orpheus made a Vow to the Gods of Samothracia, where∣upon the Storm immediately ceased, and Two Coelestial Fires appeared over the Heads of Castor and Pollux, who were amongst the Argonauts; from whence comes the Custom of invoking the Gods of Samothracia in a Tempest, and or giving the Names of Castor and Pollux to those Two Coelestial Fires. Lucian in the Dialogue of Apollo and Mercury bring in Apollo speaking thus upon the Occasion of these Two Brethren. Apoll. Can you learn to know Castor from Pollux, for I am always de∣ceiv'd upon the accont of their Likeness. Merc. He who was Yesterday with us is Castor. Apoll. How can you discern them, they being so like one another? Merc. Pollux has a Face black and blew by a Blow he received in fighting, and particularly at Bebryx in his Voyage with the Argonauts. Apol. You'll oblige me to tell me of Things par∣ticularly, for when I see their Eggs-shell, white Horse, Spear and Stars, I always confound them together, but tell me why these Two Bro∣thers never appear in the Heaven at the same Time. Merc. Because it being decreed that these Two Sons of Leda should one be Mortal, and the other Immortal, they divided their good and bad Fortune like good Brethren, and so live and die by Turns. Apoll. This is a great Impediment to their Love; for, so they can ne∣ver see, or discourse one with another. But what Art or Trade do they profess? For every one of us hath his Business: I am a Prophet, my Son is a Physician, my Sister a Midwife, and thou art a Wrestler. Do they do nothing, but eat and drink? Mer. They succour Mariners in a Tempest. Apol. That's a necessary Employ∣ment, provided they perform it well. Arrian says, that Alexander, while he was carrying on his Victories in Persia, sacrificed one Day to Castor and Pollux, instead of Hercules, to whom that Day was dedicated by the Macedo∣nians; and that while the Feast lasted after the Sacrifice was over, he talked sometimes of the great Actions of Castor and Pollux, and at other times of Hercules. Cicero relates a wonderful Judgment, which befel Scopas, because he had spoken contemp∣tibly of these two Brethren Dioscorides, being crushed to Death by the Fall of his Chamber, whereas Simonides, who wrote their Encomium was called out of them by two unknown Persons Phoedrus recites this History more at large in the 4th Book of his Fables, Fab. 22. The Greek and Roman History is filled with the miraculous Ap∣pearances of these two Brethren, either to ob∣tain a Victory, or publish it when it was gained, for they were seen fighting upon two white Horses at the Battle, which the Romans fought against the Latins near the Lake Regillus. But Cicero tells how we must credit these Re∣lations: He says, that Homer, who lived a little after these two Brethren, assures us, that they were buried in Macedonia, and consequently could not come to declare a Victory obtain'd by Vatienus. The Romans did not omit building them a magnificent Temple, where they sacrificed to them white Lambs, and appointed a Feast to be kept in Honour of them, at which a Man sitting upon one Horse and leading another, runs full speed, and at the End of the Race leaps nimbly upon the Horse which is in his Hand, having a bright Star upon his Hat, to shew that only one of the Brothers was alive, because, indeed, the Stars of Castor and Pollux are to be seen above our Horizon, and sometimes not. CATA PULTA, a Warlike Engine so cal∣led, with which the Ancients used to throw Ja∣velins twelve or fiftten Foot long. The De∣scription of a Catapulta, says M. Perrault in his Notes upon Vitruvius, is understood by no Body, tho' many great Persons have applied them∣selves to it very carefully, as Justus Lipsius has observed. The Descriptions which Athenaeus, Ammianus Marcellinus, and Vegetius have given of it; the two Figures, which are in the Book of a nameless Author, entituled, Notitia Im∣perii; that which Will. de Choul says, he took out of an ancient Marble, that which Lipsius saw in the Arsenal at Brussels, and those which are drawn on Trajan's Pillar do none of them agree with the Description of Vitruvius. Caesar Cisaranus, who is the first who after Jocundus drew the Figures of Vitruvius with the greatest Exactness, has not attempted to draw a Cata∣pulta, but when he had translated and explained Vitruvius as far as that place, he leaves the Work, and Benedictus Jovius finished it. Jo∣cundus declares, when he gives us his Figure of it, that he did it not to explain the Text of Vi∣truvius, because it did not agree with it, and he owns that he did not understand either his own Figure, nor the Text of Vitruvius. All that we know in general of the Catapulta is this, that they were made to cast Javelins, as Balistae were used to cast Stones, tho' this Di∣stinction is not observed by latter Latin Au∣thors, who have always expressed both these Engines by the Word Balista. Lucan tells us,
that a Catapulta cast Javelins with so great a Force, that they would pass thro' several Men one after another, and would carry them quite cross the Danube. CATO, the Surname of the Porcian Family, who came from the City Tusculum, from whence was their Original. M. CATO, the Censor, named at first Pris∣cus, and after Cato from his excellent Wisdom, and strictness of Manners. He executed all the Offices in the Roman Commonwealth with Re∣putation and great Integrity. In fine, he was very learned. He has left us his Books of Hus∣bandry, which are written in pure Latin. He died very old. CATO UTICENSIS. Cato of Ʋtica, and Nephew's Son of Cato the Censor, lived a very strict and severe Life like his Great Uncle. He reformed divers Abuses which were crept into the Management of the Revenues of the Commonwealth, and the Military Discipline. He refused at first to join with Pompey, but at length united with him against Caesar. After the Battel of Pharsalia, were Pompey was defeated, he fled to Ʋtica, which was in King Juba's Dominion, but not being able to bear his great Misfortunes, he slew himself in a Fit of Despair, being 48 Years of Age, after he had read Plato's Treatise of the Immortality of the Soul. CATULARIA, the Name of one of the Gates of Rome, so called from the Red Dogs, which were sacrificed there to appease the Heats of the Dog-star. CATULUS, the Surname of the Luctatian Family, from the Word Catus, crafty and judi∣cious. Q. LUCTATIUS CATULUS, was the first of that Family, who conquered the Cartha∣ginians in a Sea-fight, in which they lost 600 of their Ships. There was a Poet of that Name born at Verona, whose Poetry is elegant and soft, but very lewd and satyrical. He composed some Elegies and Epigrams, which still remain. There was another of that Name, and of the same Family, who was Consul with Marius in his fourth Consulship, whom he forced to kill himself by eating live Coals. Sylla revenged his Death upon Marius, Junior. CAUCASUS, a Mountain in the Nor∣thern Parts of the Indies, near the Caspian Ports, where Jupiter bound Prometheus, according to the Fable, to punish him for making Man, and imposing upon him at a Feast, by giving him Bones covered with Fat. CEBUS, a certain Monster which had the Face of a Satyr, and the Body of a Dog and Bear. CECROPS, the first King of Athens, who lived in the Times of Moses. He built the City of Athens, which was first called Cecropia from his Name. He was the first that worshipped Jupiter in Greece, and was the Author of Idola∣try. He began to reign at Athens 375 Years before the Siege of Troy. The Floud of Deuca∣lion happened in his Reign, who was King of the Neighbouring Country by Mount Parnassus. This Deluge overflowed only Greece; as that which happened before under Ogyges, did Egypt only. He was the Author of Idolatry in Greece, and the first that acknowledged Jupiter for a God, appointing him Sacrifices: He brought up the Custom of burying the Dead, as Cicero observes in his 2d Book de Legibus. CELENO, one of the Seven Pleiades, the Daughter of Atlas, and the Nymph Pleione. She was also one of the Harpyes, the Daughter of Jupiter and Terra, of whom Virgil has given us a Description in the 3d Book of his Aeneids. See Harpyiae. CELERES, were 300 young Men, whom Romulus chose to attend his Person, that they might be at hand always to defend him, and execute his Commands. He called them Ce∣leres, i. e. ready and active. This Body of Men guarded him in all Commotions of the People, and made him able at all times to oppose any Attempts of his Enemies. The Captain of this Guard was called Tribu∣nus Celerum, and he was the second Officer of State, for he had the Command of all the Sol∣diery, which he ordered as he pleased: He also had a Power to summon all the People together into the Campus Martius. CELMIS, or CELMES, one of the Fa∣vourites of Jupiter, who saying that that great God was a Mortal Man, was changed by him in∣to a Diamoud, as Ovid tells us in his 4th Book of Metamorphoses, v. 280. Te quoque, nunc Adamas, quondam fidissime parvo Celme Jovi. This Word comes from Chalamis, which in He∣brew signifies a very hard Stone. CENSOR, a Roman Magistrate, which numbred the People of Rome, and who was the Correcter of their Manners. The Occasion of making this Officer in the Commonwealth of Rome was this: The Consuls seeing themselves wholly taken up with Affairs of State, and not being able to attend so many different Businesses, the Senate to ease them propounded to make Censors in the Year after the Building of Rome 311, in the Consulship of M. Geganius Macrinus, and T. Quintius Capitolinus, whose chief Office it should be to take an exact View of the Peo∣ple of Rome, and value the Estate of every Ci∣tizen. First they created Two Censors of the Patricians, viz. Papyrius and Sempronius. Censui
agendo populus suffragiis praefecit Censores, abs re appellati, &c. Liv. They continued in their Office five Years, and were chosen by the great Council called Comitia Centuriata, as the Consuls were, Cen∣sores quinto quoque anno creari solabant, says Asco∣nius Pedianus. This length of Time became a Grievance to the Consuls at last, and the Dictator Mamercus Emilius shortened it, and brought it to Eighteen Months. The Censors hating Mamercus for shortening their Time, blotted him out of his Tribe, and put him among the Cerites, or those who pay Tribute. To attain this Dignity, it was at first required, that they should be Noblemen born, but this continued only 100 Years; for, after the People were allowed to be made Consuls, and other great Officers, we see, that Caius Martius Ru∣tilius, who was the first Dictator chosen from among the People, was also created Censor with Manlius Naevius; and at length the Dictator Q. P. Philo made a Law, by which he ordained, that one Censor should be chosen out of the People. 'Tis also observable in History, that Q. Pompeius, and Q. Metellus were both taken from among the common People. Before the second Punick War, it was not necessary to have executed any great Office before to be a Censor, because we learn from Livy, that Publius Licinius Crassus, who never had been any thing but an Aedile, was chosen Censor and High-Priest at the same time, but afterwards they never chose any to that Office but such as had been Consuls. This Office was never executed more than once by the same Person, and we read in Vale∣rius Maximus, that M. Rutilius being made Cen∣sor a second time, reproved the People sharply for having so little Respect to the Laws of their Ancestors, who had thought it convenient to shorten the Time of that Office, because it made them too powerful, and so they acted contrary to them, in choosing a Man a second time. Plinius Junior, did the same in refusing it, because he judged it not for the Advantage of the State to execute that Office twice. If any of the Censors happened to die in the time of their Office, or would voluntarily re∣sign it, his Collegue was obliged also to resign it, altho there was no Law which commanded it, but a Custom established by a Religious Scruple: For when Lucius Papyrius, after the Death of his Collegue C. Julius had put M. Cornelius Meleginensis into his Place, that he might retain his own Office, it happened that Rome was taken by the Gauls, which was impu∣ted to that Action of Papyrius; whereupon all those that succeeded him, left their Office if their Collegue happened to die, or would resign. 'Tis true, that Appius Claudius Caecus and Aemi∣lius Scaurus would have kept it, but the ∣bunes imprisoned the latter, and no Body would follow the Example of the former. When the Censors were chosen in the Campus Martius, they immediately seated themselves in their Sellae Curules, or Chairs of State, which stood by Mars's Altar, and thanked the People for the Honour they had done them. Then they went up to the Capitol, were they took Possession of their Office, and received the En∣signs of it. They took an Oath to do nothing either for Hatred or Favour in their Places; but in all things to follow exactly the Rules of Equity and Right. Their Office had two Parts: The first con∣sisted in taking the Number of the Citizens, and their Estates, and the other in reforming Manners, and rectifying Abuses. They kept an exact Register of the Name and Estate of every Person, as also of their Children and Slaves, being very careful to place every Citizen in his Tribe or Century accord∣ing to his Estate, removing them every five Years, either higher or lower, according as their Estate was increased or lessened. They punished a single Life with heavy Fines, chiefly since the Law of Furius Camillus, who forbad it, that the City of Rome might be a∣gain peopled, which the Civil Wars had con∣sumed. They also regulated the Expences of the pub∣lick Sacrifices, and caused consecrated Geese to be kept in the Capitol. The other part of their Office was to reform Manners, populi mores regunto; and to that end they took a View of the three Degrees of Men, which made up the Commonwealth, viz. Sena∣tors, Knights and People. They had a Power to put those out of the Number of the Senators whom they judged unworthy thro' their corrupt Manners, and place others in their room. They could take their Horses from the Knights, and deprive them of their Pay, which they received from the Treasury, when they lived not like Persons of Honour. They could remove the Citizens from their Tribe, by turning them down from an higher to a lower, depriving them of a Right of Voting, and making them pay Taxes as Strangers. Altho' their Power was very large, yet they were obliged to give an Account of their Acti∣ons to the Tribunes, and the great Aediles; and we read in Livy, that the Tribune Appius Me∣tellus imprisoned both the Censors M. Furius Phi∣lus, and M. Artilius Regulus, because when he was Quaestor in the foregoing Year they had re∣moved him from his Tribe, and made him pay Taxes. A Law then was made to oblige them
to give their Reasons, why they had degraded a Citizen, and branded him with Disgrace, by de∣riving him of his Priviledges. But this Office decreased in its Power with the Declention of the Commonwealth. Under the Emperors it was wholly laid aside, because they assumed to themselves all those Functions; for Suetonius relates, that Augustus took a View of the People with Ten Men, which he required of the Senate, which was practised by the other Emperors as far down as Theodosius, who endea∣voured to restore it, but the Senate opposed him, and from that time the Censorship was in∣separably annexed to the Imperial Power. CENSURA. The Censorship, the Office or Dignity of Censor. We may judge how considerable this Dignity was at Rome by Plu∣tarch's Words, in the Life of Marcus Cato, That he demanded the Censorship ten Years after he had been Consul, as the Perfection of Honour, and the highest Degree to which a Roman Ci∣tizen could be preferred, because this high Sta∣tion was the Crown of all Offices, and of all the Authority which could be had in the Go∣vernment of their Commonwealth. CENSUS, the general Survey of the People of Rome, which was performed every five Years by the Censors. King Servius appointed this Survey, and he was the first that caused the People to be numbred, that he might know ex∣actly how many fighting Men he was able to raise, and what Sums of Money he could raise from them. Every Citizen of Rome, or he that had the Right of Freedom, was obliged to give a true Acconnt of all his Estate, Children, Slaves and Freemen, upon pain of having their Goods con∣fiscated, which he concealed. The Censors on their part were obliged to keep a perfect Register of all these Matters, and to be very careful that no Stranger should be registred unawares, Ne quis in censorias tabu∣las irreperes. This Survey was made every five Years thro' all the Orders of the Commonwealth, viz. the Senates, Knights and People. The first was Lectio & recitatio Senatûs; the second, Censio, recensio & recognitio; and the third, Census, or Lustrum. For the Censor being set in his Chair of State commanded the Purvant to call over the Senators by their Names, legebant or recita∣bant Senatum. They rased out of the List the Names of those whom they intended to depose for their ill Manners, and put others in their Place taken out of the Knights, which they ex∣pressed by these Words, legere in Senatum. Then they took a Survey of the Knights, whom they called over one by one, and if they had nothing to object against their Behaviour, the Censor said to every one, praeteri & tradus equum; but if on the Contrary he had any thing to blame him for, they took away his Horse and his Pay. Equus adimebatur. After this they went on to survey the People, not only of the City of Rome, but also of other free Cities, which had a Right to the Roman Freedom, whose Names were sent to the Censors: If they had any thing to object against their Manners, they deposed them, deprived them of their Right of Voting, and made them subject to Taxes, aerarios fieri & in Caeritum tabulas referri, (be∣cause the Inhabitants of that little City Caeres gained indeed the Title of the Roman Citizens, but had not obtained a Right to vote.) The Survey being thus ended, an Assembly was appointed upon a certain Day in the Cam∣pus Martius to be present at the Sacrifice of Lu∣stration. The People came in Armies and were divided into Classes or Centuries, according to the Appointment of Servius, and offered a Sa∣crifice called Suovetaurilia, because they sacri∣ficed a Boar, a Sheep and a Bull, to implore the Gods to be pleased with the Survey they had made, and that they would preserve the Commonwealth in its Splendor and Honour. And with this Ceremony the Survey ended, Lu∣strum conditum, i. e. the Survey finished. CENTAURUS, a Centaur, half a Man and half an Horse, which had its Female Cen∣taur, half a Woman and half a Mare. This is a fabulous Monster feigned by the Poets, who have applied that Shape to those who invented Riding, or the Art of Horsemanship, so when it's said, that Chiron the Centaur was the Ma∣ster of Achilles, no more is meant but that he was the Man who taught him to ride an Horse; and the Fight of the Centaurs is a Battle of Horsemen. The Word comes from the Greek , which is compounded of  pungo, and , taurus. Lucian describes the Picture of a Centaur drawn by Zeuxes, of which he affirms, that he saw a Copy at Athens, the Original having been carried away by Sylla. It is a Female Centaur lying upon the Grass, of which, the Part like a Beast is stretched out on the Ground, and that like a Woman is half raised and supported by her El∣bow. She lays her Hind-feet at length, and folds up her Fore-feet, bending the one and leaning on the Ground with the other, as Horses do when they are about to rise. She inclines a little to one Side that she may let her young Ones suck, of which she holds one in her Arms which she suckles with the Breast of a Woman, and the other hangs upon those which she has like a Mare. Upon the Top of the Picture stands an He Centaur, as Centinel, who appears but half, and shew them a Lyon's
Whelp which he has taken. Although he seems to smile, yet he has a fierce Aspect, and a terrible Head of Hair, besides that, he is all hairy, but his Wife is as lovely as he is savage, and hath one half of her Body like the fine Mares of Thessaly, which were never yet tamed, and the other half like the finest Woman in the World, save that her Ears are straight and sharp, as a Satyr is painted. Of her Two young Ones, one is savage and hairy like the Father, and the other more tame and hu∣mane. Lucretius would never believe that there were ever any Centaurs, nor Hippocentaurs, nor Onocentaurs, that is to say, half a Man and half an Ass. Lucian also is of the same Opinion, but speaks more plainly than Lucretius, when he says, Et populum Pholoe mentita biformem. For 'tis certain, that it is a Lye or Fable that there were ever any such monstrous People. What Ovid speaks of the Nation of Centaurs, and of their Battles, is but a Fable built either upon the Idea of some such Monster, or upon some new Invention of Fighting on Horse-back, in which these People did excel all others. Plutarch says in his Banquet of the Seven Wise-men, that a Shepherd brought them in a Basket, a Child which a Mare had brought forth, having the upper Parts of the Body like a Man and the lower like an Horse. Pliny also affirms the same Things, and says, that he himself had seen an Hippocentaur, which was brought from Egypt to Rome, embalmed after the manner of those Times with Honey. Phlegon the Trallian relates the same Story, and Tacitus seems to allude to it, when he says, that the Birth of some Monsters did foreshew the Death of the Emperor Claudius. St. Jerom gives us a Description of an Hippo∣centaur which St. Anthony met in the Desart, when he went to seek for Paul the Hermite. The same St. Jerom writing against Vigilantius, begins his Discourse with a Distinction of Two sorts of Monsters, of which the one was really produced, and the other feigned by the Poets, and puts the Centaurs among the Creatures that were true, but monstrous. The Truth is, that the People of Thessaly called Centaurs, were either the first or the most expert at taming Horses, or fighting on Horseback, which is the Reason that they bare the Name of Hippocentaurs. Their King named Centaurus was the Brother of Pirithous the famous Friend of Theseus, and fought with the Lapithae which were commanded by Polypae∣ces the Son of Pirithous at the Seige of Troy. In Times of Peace these People exercised them∣selves in hunting on Horse-back, but chiefly in casting Bulls upon the Ground by taking them by the Horns. Julius Caesar was the first that introuced this sort or Hunting into Rome in the Shews, as Pliny testifies, and was imitated in it by Nero, as we learn from Suetonius. Lucian tells us also, that Ixion, King of Thessaly, whom Jupiter invited to a Feast of the Gods, because he was a very brave Man and good Company, fell in Love with Juno, and that Jupiter to deceive him formed a Cloud into the Shape of Juno to gratifie his Passion in some measure, and by these Embraces a Centaur was produced. But Palephatus tells the Thing otherwise, that Ixion, King of Thessaly, being one Day upon Mount Pelion, saw several mad Bulls which he durst not come near, and which made a Destruction in the Country round a∣bout; he promised a great Reward to him that could drive away these mad Creatures, and immediately some young Men of a little Village, in the Mountain called Nephele, i. e. a Cloud, getting upon their Horses, offered them∣selves to fight these Bulls, and did it with so great Success that they killed them all, and from this Victory they were call'd Centaurs, from  and , as much as to say, Bull∣fighting. Isaac Tzetzes is of Opinion, that this Jupiter who loved Ixion was a King, who had a Wife of very great Beauty, with whom Ixion fell passionately in Love, and she discovering Ixon's Kindness to her Husband, he put one of her Chamber-maids named Nephele, or a Cloud in her Place, by whom he had a Son named Im∣brus and surnamed Centaurus, of  and , that is to say, pricking a Slave. Mr. Abbot Feuretiere relates this Story o∣therwise: A King of Thessaly, says he, ha∣ving sent some Horse-men to seek his Bulls, that were gone astray, they that saw them on Horse-back (it being a Thing new and ex∣traordinary at that Time) thought them to be made up of a double Nature, a Man and an Horse, which was the Original of the Fable of the Centaurs and Hippocentaurs. CENTENARIA COENA, a Feast wherein the whole Expences could be no more' than an Hundred Asses, which was a Piece of Ro∣man Money. See As. CENTESIMA USURA, The Hun∣dredth Penny, One per Cent. CENTONARII; it was a Military Trade, and they were such as provided Tents and other Equipage for War, called by the Ro∣mans Centones, or else those whose Business it was to quench the Fires which the Enemies En∣gines kindled in the Camp. Vigetius in his Fourth Book speaking of an Engine used in the
Camp to make a close Gallery or Fortification, says, that for fear it should be set on Fire, they covered it on the Out-side with raw or fresh Hides or Centones, i. e. certain old Stuffs fit to resist Fire and Arrows: For Julius Caesar in the Third Book of his Commentaries of the Civil War, says, that the Soldiers used these Centones to defend themselves from their Enemies Darts The Colleges of the Centonarii were often join∣ed with the Dendrophori, and the Masters of the Timber-works, and the other Engines of War, called Fabri, as may be seen by an Inscription of a Decurion of that College. AUR. QUINTIANUS DEC. COLL. FAB. & CENT. That is to say, Aurelius Quintianus, Decurion of the College at the Masters of the Engines and Centonaries. CENTUM, a Numeral Word, a square Number made up of Ten multiplied by it self. This is the Number which begins the Third Co∣lumn of the Arabian Characters set in an Arith∣metical Order, 100. CENTUM-VIRI, may be called the Court of 100 Judges, which were Roman Magi∣strates chosen to decide the Differences among the People, to which the Praetor sent them as to the highest Court made up of the most learned Men in the Laws. They were elected out of 35 Tribes of the People, Three out of each, which makes up the Number of 105, and although at length the Number was increa∣sed to 180, yet they still kept the Name al∣ways of the Court of 100 Judges, and their Judgments were called Centumviralia Judicia. These Magistrates continued a long time in the Commonwealth, as also under the Empe∣rors Vespasian, Domitian and Trajan: Under the last of these they were divided into Four Cham∣bers each having 45 Judges. CENTURIA, a Century, a Part of a Thing divided or ranked by Hundreds. The People of Rome were at first divided into Three Tribes, and these Tribes into 30 Curiae, but Servius Tullius contrived the Institution of a Cense, i. e. a numbering of the Citizens of Rome with an Account of their Age, Children, Slaves and Estates, as also in what Part of the City they dwelt, and the Trade they fol∣lowed. The first Cense was made in the Campus Martius, where were numbred 80000 Men able to bear Arms, as Livy tells us, and Fabius Pictor, an ancient Historian tell us, or 84700, accord∣ing to Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, This Roll coming into the Hands of Servius, he divided all his People into Six Classes, each containing several Centuries, or Hundreds of Men, with different Arms, and Liveries ac∣cording to the Proportion of their Estates. The first Class was made up of 80 Centuries or Companies, of which 40 were appointed to guard the City consisting of Men of 45 Years and upwards, and the other 40 were of young Men from 16 to 45 Years old, who bore Arms. Their Arms were all alike, viz. the Head-piece, the Back and Breast-plates, a Buckler, a Jave∣lin, a Lance and a Sword. These were called Classici in the Army, and were more honourable than those which were said to be infra Classem, as we learn from Aulus Gellius. They were to have 100000 As's in Estate, which make about 1000 Crowns of French Money. Asconius Pe∣dianus makes their Estate to amount to 2500 Crowns. The Second, Third and Fourth Classis were made up each of them of 20 Centuries, of which Ten were more aged Men, and Ten of the younger sort: Their Arms were different from the first Classis, for they carried a large Tar∣get instead of a Buckler, a Pike and Javelin. The Estate of those of the Second Classis was to be 700 Crowns a Year, of the Third 500, and of the Fourth 200. The Fifth Classis contained 30 Centuries, which had for their Arms Slings and Stones to throw out of them, and Three of them were Carpenters and other Artificers necessary for an Army. They were to have 125 Crowns E∣state. The Sixth was a Century made up of the Rabble or such as were exempted from Service in War and all Charges of the Republick: They were called Proletarii, because they were of no other use to the Republick but to stock it with Children: They were also named Capite Censi, because they gave their Names only to the Censor. CENTURIATA COMITIA. Those Comitiae or Assemblies of the People of Rome by Centuries, where every one gave his Vote in his Century. These sorts of Assemblies were first instituted by Servius Tullius, who divided, as is above said, the People into Six Classes and each Classis into Centuries. These Assemblies had a great Share in order∣ing of all State Affairs, for they were summon∣ed together to make great Officers, to approve any new Law, to proclaim War against any People, and to implead any Citizen of Rome after his Death. They also chose the Consuls, Praetors, Cen∣sors, and sometimes the Proconsuls and Chief Priests. Livy tells us, that P. Cornelius Scipio was sent Proconsul into Spain by one of these Assemblies.
It belonged to the Consuls only to summon them together by the Authority of the Senate, who allowed or forbad them as they pleased, and the Dictator and Chief Priest had no Power to do it in the Absence of the Consuls but only by Commission. These Assemblies were held without the City of Rome in the Campus Martius, and one Part of the People were armed during their Meeting for fear of any sudden Invasion, and a Standard was set up on the Capitol which was not taken down till they had ended. When the Senate had ordered this Assembly, the Consuls appointed it to meet after Three free Fairs or Markets, which made 27 Days, that such as had any Right of Voting might have sufficient Notice: This they called edicere comitia in trinundinum. This Appointment was published by Bills set up in all the great Towns, or in the great Streets of Rome on the Three Market days next following: In them the Mat∣ters to be treated of were set down and the les∣ser Officers were forbidden in the Conclusion of them to make any Presages upon the Day of their Meeting: In edicto Consulum, quo edicunt quis dies comitiis Centuriatis futurus fit, sic scri∣bitur ex veteri formulâ; Ne quis Magistratus mi∣nor de caelo servasse velit. When any Law was to be approved in these Assemblies, this was the Order observed: He that propounded it, who was called Rogator legis, made a Speech to the People, or caused another to make one, shewing them the Necessity and Advantage of the Law, which they termed Con∣cione declarare; if the People declared their Ap∣probation of the Law, it was hung up in Publick Three Market-days, the Preamble of it being in these Words, Quod bonum, faustum, felixque Reipublicae, populo, liberisque eorum esset: And thus the Laws of the Twelve Tables were pro∣pounded. While it hung thus in Publick for Three Market-days, he that proposed it, either him∣self or by some able Orator distinctly explained all the Circumstances and Advantages of it. This Action was called promulgatio legis per tri∣nundinum; and discovers to us the Difference between these Two Latin Expressions, proponere legem, which is to set up, and promulgare legem, to explain it viva voce, as also between these two Phrases, Lator legis, and Autor legis; the first was he that barely propounded the Law, and the other was he that perswaded the People to accept it, after he had proved the Benefit, and Usefulness of it to them. The Day appointed for the Meeting of the Assembly being come, the Consul went early in the Morning into the Capitol, or some other high Place, being attended with the Augur, whom he ordered to observe the Signs of the Heavens, which is expressed by these Latin Words, Jubebat sibi in auspicio esse. After he had sat sometime looking round about him to see what appeared in the Air, the Consul spoke to him in these Words, Dicito si silentium esse vide∣tur: Tell me whither there be nothing that pre∣vents this Assembly; to whom the Augur an∣swered, Silentium esse videtur; nothing hinders it, but if the contrary happened, obnuntiabat, he said, that the Signs did not approve of that Assembly. This first Ceremony being finished, this Magi∣strate set up his Pavilion, or Tent in the Campus Martius, where he made a Speech to the People to exhort them to respect the Good of the Com∣monwealth only, and to do nothing thro' Humour or Interest in the Matters that should be propo∣sed to them, and then sent them every one to their own Century to give their Votes, Secediti in centurias oestras, & de iis deliberate. Then the Centuries separated themselves one from another, and gave their Votes viva voce, till the Year DCXV, after the Building of Rome, when Balots or Tickets were commanded, which they put into an Earthen Pot or Urn, made for that purpose. Every Century had its President, named Rogator, who gathered their Votes. After they had consulted a while, the Consul called the first Classis to give in their Votes. If they were all of a Judgment, he called none of the other Classes, because the first had a greater Number of Men than all the rest, and so their Voices carried it: But if their Votes were divi∣ded, he called the second Classis, and all the rest in their Order, till he had the full Number of the Votes given according to the Laws. The Advantage which the first Classis had a∣bove the other was often the Cause of Tumults, because they could not endure that their Votes should be at any time ineffectual. To prevent which they contrived this expedient: They made all the Classes to draw Lots who should be ac∣counted first, and that upon which the Lot fell was called the Prerogative Tribe, because their Judgment was first had in all Matters. This way of giving their Votes was strictly observed till the Year DCXV, when Gabinius the Tribune of the People made a Law, that they should for the Future do it by Balots or Tickets; this Law was called lex Tabellaria. The People much liked this Change, for be∣fore they could not give their Votes freely, left they should incur the Displeasure of their Great Men whom they were afraid to disoblige. Grata est tabella, says Cicero in his Defence of Plancus, quae frontem operit, bominum mentes te∣git, datque eam libertatem, ut quod velint faciant; and in his second Book of the Agrarian Law, he calls this way of Voting, vindex libertatis & principium justissimae libertatis. Yet, even this
had its Inconveniences, as Cicero himself owns in his third Book of Laws: Non fuit lacebra danda populo, in quâ bonis ignorantibus, quid quisque sen∣tiret, tabella vitiosum occultaret suffragium. When the Consul had taken out of the Ear∣then-pot the Prerogative Classis, he order∣ed the Herald to pronounce it with a loud Voice, and then they went into an inclosed Piece of Ground, over very narrow Bridges, and as they entered, certain Persons called Diribitores, gave each of them Two Tickets, which they put into the Urn or Earthen-Pot set on the farther Side for that end. This done, the Consul numbered the Votes, and declared the Officer chosen in these Words, Quod bonum faustum, fortunatum{que} sit mihi, Magi∣stratuique meo, populo, plebique Rom. talem Con∣sulem, aut Praetorem renuntio. I publish, that such an one is chosen Consul or Praetor by Plurality of Voices. Notwithstanding, all these wise Cautions, foul ealings could not be prevented, for such as had Interest, and would have a Law re∣jected or a Person condemned, contrived, that no Ticket should be given to absolve a Man or receive a Law, as it fell out in the Case of Clodius, who had prophaned the Religious Rites of Bona Dea. CENTURIO, a Centurion, a Roman Of∣ficer which commanded an Hundred Soldiers; there were Six Centurions in one Cohors and Sixty in a Legion. CEPHALUS, the Son of Aeolus, and Husband of Procris, the Daughter of Erichtheus King of Athens. He was carried away by Au∣rora who was fallen in Love with him: She could not perswade him to a Compliance, yet Procris was very jealous of him, and contriving to watch him as he returned from Hunting, she hid herself in the Bushes, but Cephalus suppo∣sing it had been some wild Deer, shot his Dart at it and killed his Wife Procris. CERA PUNICA, white Wax, which was whitened by dipping it several times in Sea∣water and laying it in the Sun upon the Grass in the Spring time, that it might be often moi∣stened with the Dew, for want of which it must be continually sprinkled with Water. All this was done to refine the Wax, by driving out the Honey which was mingled with it and made it yellow. CERAMICUS, a Place in Athens inclo∣sed with Walls, which was used to walk in, in it were the Tombs of those famous Men who died in Defence of their Country, and many Statues erected in Memory of them with In∣scriptions, which published their great Actions, and the Praises they deserved for them. CERASTIS, the Isle of Cyprus, it was anciently inhabited by a very cruel People, which Venus changed into Bulls, as Ovid say: in his Tenth Book of his Metamorphosis. Cerastis signifies in Greek, bearing Horns, and this Isle was so called from the great Number of Moun∣tains in it, whose Tops something resembled Horns. CERBERUS, Pluto's Dog, who had Three Heads and as many Necks. The Poets feign him to be the Keeper of the Gate of Pluto's Palace in Hell, and suppose him to be produced from the Giant Typho and Echidna. He was bound in Chains by Hercules, and brought out of Hell, as Homer says. CERCYON, the Arcadian, a famous Robber, who infested all the Country of Attica with his Robberies and Murders, and forcing all Travellers to fight with him, and then killed them when he had conquered them. Theseus slew him in the City Eleusina. Ovid Lib. 7. Metamorph. CEREALIA, & CEREALES LU∣DI, Feasts and Plays appointed in Honour of Ceres. Memmius Aedilis Curulis was the first Institutor of these Feasts, as appears on a Me∣dal on which is the Effigies of Ceres holding in one Hand Three Ears of Corn, and in the o∣ther a Torch, and having her Left-Foot upon a Serpent with this Inscription, Memmius Ae∣dilis Cerealia pris fecit. The Athenians long before had kept Feast to her, which they cal∣led Thesmophoria & Eleusia, upon this Occasion. Ceres searching all Places for her Daughter Pro∣serpina, came to Eleusina, where she undertook to be the Nurse of Triptolemus, the Son of King Elusius, and when he was grown up she taught him the Art of sowing Corn and making Bread. In Requital for so great a Benefit he appointed her a Feast, and Priests called Eumolpides from his Son Eumolpus. Crowns of Flowers were not used in this Feast, but of Myrtle and Ivy, be∣cause Proserpina was stolen while she was ga∣thering of Flowers; they carried light Torches, calling Proserpina with a loud Voice, as Ceres had done, when she was searching for her upon Mount Ida. The Priests of this Goddess were called Ta∣citi Mystae, because they might not discover their Religious Rites. The Sacrifice offered to her was without Wine, as we learn from Plautus in his Aulularia Act 11. Scen. VI. Staph. Cererine, mi Strobile, has sunt facturi nuptias? Strob. Quî? Staph. Quia temeti nihil aliatum est. Sta. Are you celebrating the Marriage of Ceres? Strob. Why ask you that? Staph. Be∣cause you have brought no Wine. Yet Cato seems to affirm the Contrary, and will have Wine to be used in the Sacrifices of Ceres: Postea Cereri exta & vinum dato. Lam∣binus is much perplexed with these Two Autho∣rities
opposite one to the other, and to free him∣self, flies to the Distinction of the Greeks and Romans, and says, that the Greek Women sacri∣ficed without Wine, but the Romans used it: Yet Plautus, who was a Roman, is against offer∣ing Wine to Ceres. After the Sacrifice was o∣ver, they made a magnificent Feast where every one diverted themselves as far as was convenient, in seeing the Sports of Fencers and Horse-races, over which the Aediles presided. Ne∣vertheless, the Roman Women being cloathed in White, expressed the Sorrow and Com∣plaints of Ceres's Mourning for the taking away of her Daughter Proserpina, holding Torches in their Hands. CERES, the Daughter of Saturn and Rhea. Varro says, that Ceres was so named from the Word Geres, because she bore all sorts of Fruits; quae quòd gerit fruges, Ceres. Others derive her Name from creare, because she raised Fruits. Vossius thinks, that the Name Ceres comes from the Hebrew Word cheres, that is to say, arare. In Scripture we meet with the Word Geres to signifie the Fruits of the Earth, from whence comes the Greek Word , which is one of the Names of the Earth in Hesychius. 'Tis pro∣bable that from this Hebrew Word Geres and the Greek , the Name of Ceres is de∣rived. Ceres is called the Law-giver, legifera, be∣cause before Men had the Use of Corn they lived upon Acorns in the Woods without Law or Government; but after Corn was found out, they divided and tilled the Land, which was the Original of Government and Laws, as Ser∣vius assures us. Leges Ceres dicitur invenisse, nam & sacra ipsius Thesmophoria, id est, legum latio vo∣cantur; sed hoc ideò fingitur, quia ante frumentum inventum à Cerere, passim homines sine lege vaga∣bantur: Quae feritas interrupta est, postquam ex a∣grorum discretione nata sunt jura. Ceres was the Mother of Proserpina, and yet both of them are the Earth. Rhea is the Mother of Ceres, and yet neither of them are any thing but the Earth. Truths are real and natural, but Genealogies are poetical and figurative. Some consider the Earth in diverse Respects, and will have Rhea to be the Globe of the Earth, Ceres the Surface, which is sown and reaped, and Proserpina is the Hemisphere of our Anti∣podes. This is the Opinion of Vossius. Diodorus Siculus relates, that the Aegyptians from Tradition believe, that Isis is the same with Ceres who found out Tillage and the Use of Corn, and published most just Laws, from whence she became an Aegyptian Goddess: But because he could not quite conceal the Truth he owns that it was Erectitheus, who sailed out of Aegypt into Greece with a great Quantity of Corn to relieve it in a Time of Famine, and the Grecians in Requital of so great a Benefit made him their King, and he appointed the Rites of eres at Athens, according to the Usages and Ceremonies of Aegypt. This Hi∣storian says also in the same Place, that the coming of Ceres to Athens was nothing but the Transportation of Corn from Aegypt into Greece: Deam illo tempore in Atticam venisse tra∣ditur, quo fruges ejus nomine insignes Athen is sunt importatae, quarum semina tum Cereris beneficio quasi denuò reperta videantur. There is the same Reason to believe, that the Wandering of Ceres through all the World, was nothing else but the Transportation and Giving of Corn to all the World, either the first time when it was first sown, or in Process of time when Famine had made the Land barren. For if there were some Places which imparted their Corn to o∣ther Countries, and by Consequence were af∣firmed in a Poetick Stile to be the Country of Ceres, they were without doubt Aegypt and Sicily, but chiefly Aegypt, because of the Over-flowing of the Nile. The true History thereof is this, that Isis, Queen of Aegypt is the same with Ceres, and that she communicated Corn and the Art of Tillage to other Parts of the Earth. Finally, in Confirmation of what has been said, the same Author adds, that the Ceremonies and Antiquites of the Aegyptians are alike. I pass over other Places in the same Author where he endeavours to answer the Reasons which Sicily, Attica and the Isle of Crete and Aegypt had produced to challenge to themselves the Glory of having been the Places of the Birth-place of Ceres, which was the In∣ventor of Corn. Herodotus confesses, that the Rites of Ceres, whom he calls the Law-giver, were brought out of Aegypt into Greece. The Cities of Greece, as Pausanias says, but chiefly Athens and Argos disputed together, as the Aegyptians and Phrygians did, about the Beginning and Antiquity of the Rites of Ceres and the Gift of Corn. He tells us, that the Mysteries of Ceres and Isis were so secret, that it was not permitted to any to see her Statue except her Priests, and he adds elsewhere, that it was not allowed to any who were not admit∣ted to those Religious Rites to inquire into them, much less to be present and Spectators at them. He speaks also of another Temple of Ceres, into which only Women might enter, assuring us, that the Mysteries and Sacrifices of Ceres Eleusina were the most sacred that Greece had. Some distinguish the great Mysteries, which they call  from the lesser, which they call . The great Ones were observ'd every Year in Argos, and the lesser once in
Five Years at Eleusis, the former in the Spring and the latter in Autumn, as if they had a Re∣spect to the Approaches or Departure of the Sun. The lesser lasted Nine Days, and after it they celebrated several sorts of Combats. Cicero tells us, that at Catanea in Sicily Ceres was honoured, as she was at Rome and in other Parts of the World, where she had a Statue which no Man ever knew more of than if there never had been any; Men never went into her Temple, but only Women and those Virgins who performed all the Offices of Priests. Sacra∣rium Cereris est apud Catanenses eâdem religione quâ Romae, quâ in caeteris locis, quâ propè in toto orbe terrarum. In eo sacrario intimo fuit signum Cereris per-antiquum, quod viri non solùm cujus∣modi esset, sed ne esse quidem sciebant. Aditus enim in i sacrarium non est viris: sacra per mu∣lieres & virgines consici solent. If we will find out the Original of the My∣steries of Ceres Eleusina, we must remember that the Invention of Plowing is attributed by some to Ceres, who taught it Triptolemus, by o∣thers to Bacchus. For the great Mystery of Bacchus instituted by Isis or Ceres, who came in after-times out of Aegypt into Greece, was the Worship of a Phallus, or the Privy-member of Osiris, which could not be found by Isis after Typhon had put him to Death, and to which Ceres or Isis gave those infamous Honours. St. Augustine in his Seventh Book de Civitate Dei, speaks thus of Ceres: Amongst the My∣steries of Ceres, the most famous are those of Ceres Eleusina, which the Athenians celebrated with much Pomp. All that Varro says respects the Invention of Corn, which he attributes to her, and the Steal∣ing of Proserpina by Pluto, fignifies only the Fruitfulness of the Earth. This Fruitfulness, adds he, failing for some time, and the Earth becoming barren, gave Occasion to this Opi∣nion, that Pluto had stolen the Daughter of Ceres and kept her in Hell, i. e. Fruitfulness it self; but after this Calamity, which had caused publick Grief, when Fruitfulness returned, Pluto was thought to restore Proserpina, and so pub∣lick Feasts were appointed to Ceres. We have several Medals upon which Ceres is represented to us. That of Memmius Edilis Curulis shews her to us sitting, holding Three Ears of Corn in her Right-hand and a light Torch in her Left. Another of C. Volteius re∣presents her in a Chariot drawn by Two Ser∣pents, having Torches in her Hands, and set∣ting her Foot upon a Sow, which is ordinarily offered in Sacrifice to her, because that Beast destroys the Corn. Her Statue also is carved in the Habit of a Roman Matron with a Crown of Garlands and Ears of Corn, holding in her Hand a Crown of Poppies, and riding in a Chariot drawn with Two flying Dragons. CERTES, a People of Italy, inhabiting the City Caere, who entertain'd the Vestal Vir∣gins when they fled from Rome in the Invasion of the Gauls. The Romans acknowledged this Benefit, and granted the Freedom of the City of Rome to these People, yet without any Li∣cense to vote in their Assemblies or to execute any Office in their Commonwealth, and from hence arises the Proverb, In Ceritum tabulas referre aliquem, to deprive a Citizen of his Right of Voting. CEROMA, a Mixture of Oyl and Wax, a Sear-cloth, with which the Wrestlers rubbed themselves. It not only made their Limbs more sleek and less capable of being laid hold of, but more pliable and fit for Exercise. CEROSTROTA, In-laying: Salmasius thinks it should be read Cestrota, as coming from the Greek Word , which signifies an Iron-Spit, because the Divisions in the Wood are burnt with an Iron-Spit, which is still done in our In-laying, when by the Help of Fire the little Pieces of Wood which make up the Fi∣gures, are made black to represent the Shadows. This Author is yet of Opinion, that we might still retain the Word Cerostrata, because for the more easie burning of the Wood, it is rub∣bed with Wax. Philander derives this Word from , which signifies an Horn, which is much used in In-laying, being died of several Colours. CHALCIDICA, Banqueting-houses; some are very cautious, says Mr. Perrault, to know what this Word signifies. Philander thinks, that this Greek Word signifies the Places where Money-matters were decided, or the Office for the Mint, supposing that Word comes from , Brass, and , Justice, Some will have it read Causidica, as much as to say, an Hall for pleading. Festus informs us, that Chalcidica was a sort of Building first found out in the City of Chalcis; Arnobus calls Chalcidica the fine Halls, where the Poets feigned, that the Pagan Gods supped. Barbaro and Baldus think it a proper Name for that sort of Buildings, which Dion says, was erected by Julius Casar in Honour of his Father. Palladio follows Barbaro in his Design, and draws this Building in the Fashion of the Judgment-seat, described by Vitruvius in the Temple of Au∣gustus, which was joined to the great Church of Fano. But Ausonius interpreting a Verse in Homer, where he speaks of an old Woman who went up into an high Place, makes use of Chalcidicam to express , which signifies in Greek an upper Room, Cisaranus and Caporali think also, that Chalcidica is a Noun Adjective, and say, that in longitudine Chalcidica implies, that a Palace built in a spacious Place, ought to have the same Proportion with the great
Churches of the City of Chalcis; but the true Construction of the Text will not bear that In∣terpretation. Let us then take the Opinion of M. Perrault upon these Words: Being as∣sured by the Testimony of Ausonius, that Chal∣cidica was a lofty Place, which we call the first Story, I think, that these Chalcidica's were large and lofty Halls, where Justice was admi∣nistred, erected at the End of their Palaces, even with the Galleries through which they went out of one Room into another, and where the  leaders walked. CHALDAEI, the Chaldaeans, a People of the greater Asia, who above all others practi∣sed the Art of Astrology. The Prophet Da∣niel was instructed by them. They worshipped the Fire. The Jews likewise affirm, as Jerom says, that these Words of Scripture, which say, that Abraham came out of Ʋr of the Chaldees shew, that he was miraculously delivered out of the Fire, into which the Chaldaeans had cast him because he refused to adore it. 'Tis credible that these Chaldaeans did worship the Sun and Stars, which they looked upon as Eternal Fires, and that in keeping a perpetual Fire burning upon their Altars, they desired to keep and preserve a Resemblance of them continually be∣fore their Eyes. CHAOS, Confusion, a Mixture of all the Elements, which the Poets feign was from all Eternity, before the Stars were placed in that Order in the which they now appear. Manilius confesses, that Hesiod makes the World to be produced out of this Chaos in his Theogonia, where after he has pray'd the Muses to teach him what was the Original and Be∣ginning of the Earth, the Gods, Rivers and Seas, he brings in the Muses answering, that Chaos was the first Being, that the Earth fol∣lowed, then Hell and Love; Darkness and Night came out of the Chaos, and the Hea∣ven and Day sprung out of the Bosom of Night. Although this Chaos of Hesiod is very con∣fused, yet it is no hard thing to find that it is a counterfeit Description of that of Moses in Genesis. The Chaos which was a confused Heap of all Things, was before all other Beings in their proper and distinct Nature. The Holy Spirit which rested upon the Chaos, was that Love which Hesiod mentions. The Darkness covered the Chaos, and this is what the Poet calls Erebus and the Night, for the Greek Word  comes from the Hebrew Harah, which signifies Darkness. The Day as well as the Heaven proceeded from the Chaos or the Earth, because the Stars were really in the Chaos, as were also the Heaven and Firmament before God took them out of it. Hell also itself rose out of the Chaos, and kept its Name, for so Orpheus calls it in Ovid. Per chaos hoc ingens, vastique silentia regni. Metam. 10. Oppian assures us, that it was Jupiter, that dwells in the Highest Heavens, who raised all these Bodies and all the Parts of this vast Universe out of the confused Chaos, , Jupiter beate, in te omnia, & ex te orta sunt. We may ex∣plain that of Love, which Oppian speaks of the Agreement of second Causes. The Spirit, which according to Moses, animated the Wa∣ters of the Chaos and covered them in some measure, according to the Hebrew Text, to make them fruitful, may be accounted for Love. Diodorus Siculus mixing Fable, History and Philosophy together, makes the World to pro∣ceed from Chaos, as also do Euripides and Plutarch. Ovid among the Latin Poets speaks very di∣stinctly of the Chaos, which was before the Creation of the World. Ante mare & terras, & quod tegit omnia coelum, Ʋnus erat toto naturae vultus in orbe, Quem dixere Chaos, rudis indigestaque moles, Nec quidquam nisi pondus iners; congestaque eodem Non benè junctarum discordia semina rerum. Metam. 1. He then observes, that it was God who gave Order, Distinction and Light to this dark Chaos. We may say, that this Poet follows Moses closely, since he separates first the Heaven and Air from the Earth, makes the Waters to fall into the hollow Places of the Earth, out of which he causes Trees and Plants to spring; after this he forms the Stars, produces Fishes, Fowls, and the Beasts of the Earth, and concludes his Six Days Work with the Creation of Man, for Ovid ex∣actly follows this Order in God's Works, as they were all performed in the Six Days. Lastly, He describes the Creation of Man as the chief Piece of his Workmanship, in whom he put some Rays of his Holiness, Divinity, Dominion and Sanctity, yea, his own Image, that is to say, an Understanding penetrating into Heavenly Truths and Eternal Love. Sanctius his Animal, mentisque capacius altae, Deerat adhuc, & quod dominari in caeter a posset, Natus homo est. Sive hunc divino semine fecit Ille opifex rerum, mundi melior is origo, &c.... Finxit in essigiem moderantum cunctae Deorum: Pronaque cùm spectent animalia caetera terram,
Os homini sublime dedit, caelumque tueri Jussit, & erectos ad sidera tollere vultus. Metam. 1. These Verses clearly express that the History of Genesis teaches, that Man was created an holy and religious Creature, with whom God conversed, that he gave them Dominion over all the World, being of a Divine Original ani∣mated by his Spirit, honoured with his Image, and governed by his Laws. When Seneca in common Speech gives the Name of Chaos to Hell, noctis aeternae chaos, a∣versa Superis regna; he shews us, that that Part of the World still retains the Name of Chaos, as having in it Darkness, and Confusion of all Things. CHARISTIA, or DIES CHARAE COGNATIONIS, The Kinsmens Feast. This Feast was to be kept in the Month of Fe∣bruary in the Rustick Calendar, which still re∣mains at Rome upon an ancient Marble, but in Constantine's Time this Feast was called Charistia, which signifies the same thing. Valerius Maximus, L. 2. C. 1. N. 8. teaches us what it was: Our Ancestors, says he, appointed a solemn Feast, which they called Charistia, in which none met but Kinsmen and near Relations, that if there were any Difference among them it might be ended most easily in the Mirth of a Feast, Convivium etiam solemne majores instituerunt, id∣que Charistia apellaverunt, eui praeter cognatos & assines nemo interponebatur; ut si qua inter neces∣sarios querela esset orta, inter sacra mensae & inter hilaritatem animorum fautoribus concordiae adhibi∣tis tolleretur.Ovid also may be consulted about this Day. CHARITES. See Carites. CHARMIS, a Physician of Marseilles, who being ambitious to out-do others, condemned warm Baths, and bathed his sick Patients in cold Water, even in the Winter. CHARON. See Caron. CHARIBDIS, a Gulph in the Sicilian Sea near Messina, now called commonly Galofa∣ro, into which Ships being driven by Tempests, are wrecked by the Rocks that lie hidden under Water; which has given an occasion to the Poets to feign that Charybdis and Sylla were two terrible Sea Monsters, which swallowed up Ships; and that 2 Women having robbed Hercules of his Oxen were stricken with Thunder by Jupiter, and changed into that Gulph, which is scituated in one of the Streights, upon the Coasts of Sicily. The Hebrew Original of these two Names discovers plainly enough, who were the Authors of them, for Scylla comes from Secol, which sig∣nifies exitium, and Charybdis comes from chor obdem, i. e. foramen perditionis. Strabo gives the Name of Charybdis to a Place in Syria, between Apamaea and Antioch, where the Orontes sinks into the Ground, and runs 40 Stadia, before it rises again. These Words, In∣cidit in Scyllam cupiens vitare Charybdin, are be∣come a Proverb, to express, To fall from a less into a greater Mischief; or as we speak common∣ly, Out of the Frying-pan into the Fire. CHIMAERA, a fabulous Monster, which has, as the Poets feign, the Head of a Lion, the Belly of a Goat, and Tail of a Serpent, which, they say, Bellerophon subdued riding upon the Horse Pegasus. The Original of this Fable is taken from a Mountain of Lycia of the same Name which casts out Flames, the Top of it was a Desart where nothing but Lions inha∣bited, the Middle had good Pastures, which fed Plenty of Goats, and the Foot of it, which was marshy, was full of Serpents. So Ovid tells us, —Mediis in partibus hircum, Pectus & ora leae, caudamque serpentis habebat. And because Bellerophon was the First that dwelt upon that Mountain, 'twas feigned, that he slew the Chimaera. Pliny says, that the Fire of that Mountain was nourished with Water, and could not be extinguished but with Earth or Mud. Some say, that this Monster had Three Heads, the one of a Lyon, the second of a Goat, and the third of a Dragon, because that Mountain had Three Tops or Three Points, which resembled the Shapes of these Crea∣tures. Hesiod in describing a Chimaera, says, that this Monster had the Parts of Three Crea∣tures, a Lion, a Goat, and a Dragon, Ante leo, retroque draco, medióque capella. This Monster was nothing else but a Chiming of Words, for there were Three Captains which Bellerophon subdued, Ayrus, Arzalus and Tosibis, whose Names signifie these Three sorts of Creatures, Ayrus comes from ari, which signi∣fies a Lion, Arzalus from arzal, which is a kind of Wild-goat, and Tosibis is as much as to say, a Serpent's Head. Strabo says, it was a Mountain of Lycia which cast out Fires, upon the Top of which there were Lions, and in the Middle Goats, and at the Foot Serpents. Plutarch will have it to be the Name of an Arch-pirate who robbed in a Ship that had the Figure of a Lion in the Fore-part or Bow, of a Dragon on the Poop, and of a Goat in the Middle, whom Bellerophon conquered.
CHIRON, a Centaur, the Son of Saturn and Phillyra. Cato tells us, that Saturn being very much in Love with that Nymph, was afraid left Rhea his Wife should surprize him in the Pursuit of his Amours, and therefore changed himself into an Horse that he might enjoy her, which was the Cause that Chiron who was begotten of her, was born half a Man and half an Horse. Others makes him the Son of Ixion and the Cloud he embraced instead of Juno. He became an excellent Physician, and very skillful in the Knowledge of Simples, Musick and Military Discipline. Achilles was educated by him, and was made a skillful Wariour, for he fed him only with the Mar∣row of Lions and Bears, that he might put into him the Strength and Courage of those Crea∣tures, and taught him to ride an Horse and hunt, as Preparatives for War. He learned Physick of Aesculapius and Astrology of Hercu∣les. Clemens Alexandrinus tells us, that Chiron taught Men to worship the Gods, and sacrifice to them, the Method of administring Justice one to another, and the Form of Oaths. He was wounded by Hercules with an Arrow dipped in the Blood of Hydra, which fell by Chance upon his Foot, and put him to so great Pain by that Poison, that he could not en∣dure to live, although he was Immortal, where∣upon the Gods in Compassion made him one of the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac, called Sa∣gittarius. Lucian in his Dialogues of the Dead, where∣in he brings in Chiron and Menippus speaking, places him in Hell. Menip. I have heard, O Chiron, that tho' you were Immortal you wished for Death, how could you desire a Thing so little to be loved? Chir. 'Twas because I was weary of Life. Menip. But were you not satisfied and pleased to see the Light? Chir. No, because I did every Day the same thing, eat and drink and Sleep, and the Pleasure of Life con∣sists in Change. Menip. But how did you bear Death after you had left Life for it? Chir. Without any Trouble, because there is such an Equality among the Dead as I like well, as in a popular State where one is not greater than his Neighbour; and 'tis not material to me whether it be Day or Night, and besides, there is this Advantage here below, that we are not troubled with Hunger or Thirst, or other Inconveniences of Hu∣mane Life. CHLORIS, a Goddess of Flowers, called by the Romans Flora, who was married to the Wind Zephyrus. Ovid in his Fifth Book of Fasti. See Flora. There was another of that Name, the Daugh∣ter of Amphion and Niobe, who was slain with an Arrow by Apollo and Diana, because her Mother preferred her self before Latona. O∣vid, Lib. 6. of his Metamorphosis. CHORUS, the Chorus in a Comedy was but one Person only, who spoke in the ancient Composures for the Stage; the Poets by De∣grees added to him another, then Two, after∣wards Three, and at last more: So that the most ancient Comedies had nothing but the Chorus, and were only so many Lectures of Vertue, for as Horace says, they ought to en∣courage the Good, reconcile Enemies, pacifie the Enraged, applaud the Just, and command Frugality, Justice, Laws, Peace and Fidelity in keeping Secrets; intreat the Gods to debase the Proud, and pity the Miserable. Ille bonis faveatque, & concilietur amicis, Et regat iratos, & amet pacare timentes. Ille dapes laudet mensae brevis; ille salubrem Justitiam, legesque, & apertis otia portis. Ille tegat commissa, deosque precetur, & oret, Ʋt redeat miser is, abeat fortuna superbis. De Arte Poet. V. 195. CHRYSAOR, the Son of Neptune and Medusa, who had Gerion by Callirhoe, accord∣ing to Hyginus; but Hesiod in his Theogonia makes him to be born without a Father, of the Blood of Medusa, after that Perseus had cut off her Head. CICERO, M. TULLIUS, M. F. M. N. COR. CICERO; Marcus Tullius, Marci Filius, Marci Nepos, Corneliâ tribu Cicero. Thus was Cicero, the Prince of Roman Eloquence, call'd: Marcus was his Praenomen, because he was the elder Brother: Tullius was the Name of his Fa∣mily, because he was descended of the ancient Family of the Tullii, who were of the Kings of the Volsei, as we read in Eusebius's Chroniton. Plu∣tarch derives his Pedigree from Tullus Attius, King of the Volsci; which is confirmed to us by these Verses of Silius Italicus. Tullius aeratas raptabat in agmina turmas, Regia progenies, & Tullo sanguis ab alto: Indole prob quantâ Juvenis, quantumque daturus Ausoniae populis ventura in secula civem! Ille super Cangem, super exauditus & Indos, Implebit terras voce; & furialia bella Fulmine compescet lingue, nec deinde relinquet Par decus eloquii cuiquam sperare nepotum. MARCI FILIUS, his Father was called Marcus Tullius, who being a Man of a weak Con∣stitution, spent his Life for the most part at Ar∣pinum in Learning. Q. Calenus falsly asserts, that he exercised the Trade of a Fuller, and that he dressed Vines, and Olive-Trees.
MARCINEPOS, the Grandson of Mar∣cus, who dwelt at Arpinum, and who opposed M. Gratidius the Author of the Lex tabellaria, to give Vote by Scrutiny. CORNELIA, of the Cornelian Tribe, which was one of the 35 Tribes of Rome into which all the People were divided, and which included the Inhabitants of Arpinum. CICERO, because he had a Wart like a Chick-pea upon his Face. He was born on the Third of the Nones of January in the Consulship of Servilius Cepio, and C. Attilius Serranus, 103 Years before Jesus Christ, and in the Year of the Building of Rome 647. His Father was named M. Tullius and his Mother Helvia and not Olbia, as some falsely read it in Plutarch, as Eusebius and Paulus Diaconus in the Supplement to Eutropius prove. He came very young to Rome, where he spent his first Years in studying the Greek Learning, as he informs us himself in his E∣pistle to Titinnius. I remember, says he, that in my Child-hood one Plotius taught Latin at Rome, I was troubled that I was not one of his Scholars, because he was an ingenious Man and taught very well, but I was diverted from him by the Opinion of very learned Men, who thought that the Greek Learning improved the Mind better:  Equidem memeriâ teneo pueris nobis primum Latine docere coepisse L. Plotium quendam: Ad quem cùm fieret con∣cursus, quòd studiosissimus quisque apud eum exer∣ceretur, dolebam mihi idem non licere. Contine∣bar autem doctissimorum hominum auctoritate, qui existimabant Graecis exercitationibus ali meliùs ingenia posse. He studied Philosophy under Phi∣lo the Academick, Law under Scaevola, Rhe∣torick under Apollonius Molo. He travelled in∣to Greece, and tarried Three Years at Athens, where he applied himself to Phoedrus and Zeno Two Epicurean Philosophers, and Antiochus of Ascalon, a Person of rare Eloquence. He mar∣ried Terentia, and divorced her afterward, al∣though he had Children by her, viz. a Son na∣med Tullius, and a Daughter called Tullia and Tulliola, and married Popilia, who was very young, rich and handsome. Terentia said, he married her for her Beauty, but Tiro, Cicero's Free-man tells us, that it was for her great E∣state, with which he paid his Debts. The great Desert of this excellent Man being joined with his Eloquence, raised him to the chief Offices of the Commonwealth; he was first Praetor, then Quaestor and Consul, and in his Consulship he dissipated the Conspiracy of Catiline by his Vigilance and Care, for which he gained the Name of Pater Patriae. He ac∣cused Clodius, and prosecuted him vigorously, but at length he was forced to yield to the prevailing Interest and the Fierceness of Clo∣dius, and flie from Rome into Exile. But the Senate and all good Men bore his Absence so impatiently, that they caused him to be recal∣led soon. At his Return he found a Civil War kindled between Caesar and Pompey, and although at first he embraced Caesar's Party, yet at last he turned to Pompey, but after the Battle of Pharsalia he was reconciled to Julius Caesar, who was slain a little after in the Senate. Octavius Caesar, surnamed Augustus, succeeded him, and when that cruel Triumvirate of Antonius, Lepidus and Caesar was formed to the Ruine of the Commonwealth and all good Men, Cicero was abandoned by Octavius Caesar to the Resentment of Antony, whom he had made his Enemy by his Philippicks; so that he was banished, and pur∣sued to Death by Popilius Lanatus, whose Life he had saved a little before. He cut off his Head and his Right Hand, having taken him as he was flying in his Litter towards the Sea of Cajeta. His Head and Hand were brought to Rome, and laid by Antony upon the Orators Bench, from whence he had often spoken to the People, and delivered his eloquent Orations for the Defence of the publick Liberty. Fulvia the Wife of Antony, having uttered a thousand Re∣proaches against these sad Relicks, pulled his Tongue out of his Mouth, and pricked it seve∣ral times thro' with her Bodkin. He was slain in the 63d Year, 11 Months and 5 Days of his Age, upon the Ides of December, in the Year of the Building of Rome 710. We have several of his chief Pieces of Ora∣tory, but many are lost through the Injury of Time, of which he gives us a Catalogue in his second Book de Divinatione. His Epistles are inimitable. His Brother Quintus came to the same unhappy End as himself, for he was also one of those that were banished with him, and being be∣tray'd by his own Servants, he was killed at the same time with his Brother Cicero. CIMMERII, a certain People of Scythia, which inhabited a Part of the Kingdom of Pon∣tus near the Bosphorus, called after their Name the Cimmerian; because they dwelt in a Coun∣try compassed about with Woods and always covered with thick Clouds, which caused a great Darkness, it gave an Occasion to the Proverb, which calls great Darkness Cimmeriae Tenebrae, such as were in Aegypt. Festus and some Au∣thors with him say, that there were certain Peo∣ple of that Name in Italy between Bajae and Cumae near the Lake Avernus, who dwelt in Caves under Ground, never saw the Sun, and never came out but in the Night. CINCINNATUS, a Roman Captain born in a mean Place, but great for his Vertue and Courage; as he was plowing a Field of Four Acres the People of Rome made him Dicta∣tor,
which they had not done but that the Affairs of their Republick were in a desperate Condition? He accepted of that Dignity un∣willingly, and having settled the Publick Af∣fairs in Seventeen Days, he left it freely, and returned to his Plough as before. CINCIUS, a Senator of Rome, who cau∣sed the Lex Fannia to be received, by which he moderated the superfluous Expences of pub∣lick Feasts. He was also the Author of the Law which was called Lex Muneralis, made a∣gainst such as bribed the People with Money to obtain any Office; it forbad those who can∣vassed for any Office to come clad in Two Gar∣ments into the Assemblies, to prevent their hiding of Money they used to bring to buy Votes. CINERARIUM, an Earthen-pot to ga∣ther the Ashes and Bones of burnt Bodies. CINERES and RELIQUIAE, the Ashes and Remnants of the Bodies burnt at Rome. When a Body was burnt, the Mother, Wife, Children, or other Relations of the Dead, cloathing themselves in Mourning, ga∣thered the Ashes and Bones that were not consumed by the Fire. They began it by in∣ocating the Dii Manes and the Soul of the Deceased, praying him to accept that pious Duty which they were about to pay him, then washing their Hands and pouring Milk and Wine upon the Fire, they gathered the Ashes and Bones and sprinkled them with Wine and Milk. The first Bone which they gathered was called Os rejectum, according to Vao, or exceptum, because it was made use of to finish the Remainder of the Funerals. The Reliques being thus sprinkled, they put them into an Ʋrn made of different Materials and wept over it; they catched their Tears in small Glasses, called Lacrymatoria, which they put at the Bot∣tom of the Urn, then the Priest sprinkled the Urn and all present to purifie them with a Branch of Rosemary, Laurel or Olive, (as Ae∣neas did at the Funeral of the Trumpeter Mi∣senus) and dismissed the Assembly with these words, I licet, you may go, or depart. Here we might observe the Difficulty, how the Ashes and Bones of the Dead could be ga∣thered when they were mixed with so many Animals and other Things, which were burnt with the Body, but we may find this Difficulty cleared under the Word Cadaver. CINNA, a Roman Captain who was Con∣sul Four Times in the Days of Sylla and Ma∣rius. He was expelled out of Rome by Cneus Octavius, because he endeavoured to recall the banished Slaves and make them free. He join∣ed with Marius and the banished Slaves, and invading Rome made a great Slaughter among the Citizens. He exercised so much Cruelty and Rapine, that he became intollerable among his own Soldiers in his Army who thereupon slew him at Ancona. There was another of this Name who was much beloved by Caesar Augustus, and prefer∣red by him to the great Offices of the Com∣monwealth; when he died he left all his Goods to Augustus, as an Acknowledgment of his Fa∣vour. Some reckon a Third of the same ame, who was pulled in Pieces by the Peo∣ple at the Funeral of Julius Casar, because he was suspected to have been one of the Con∣spirators against him. CINTHIUS, an Epithet given to Apollo from a Mountain of the same Name in the Isle of Delos, where he was brought up, and where he had a Temple. —Cinthius aurem Vellit & admonuit. Virg. Bucol. Apollo pulled me by the Ear and admonish∣ed me. CINXIA, an Epithet which the Poets give Juno, because they make her the God∣dess that presides over Marriages, when the Husband takes away the Girdle from his Spouse in the first Night of their Marriage. CINYRA, is an Hebrew Word, which was after used both by the Greeks and Latins. The Fable makes Cinyras King of Cyprus, and will have him to be the Inventor of the In∣strument called Cinyra, as Suidas says, in Ci∣nyra, at the Time of the Trojan War. Lastly, It says, that he contended with Apollo about the Excellency of Singing and Musick, which was his Ruine. But the Truth of Scripture and of History shew the Falshood of this Fa∣ble, deducing the Antiquity of Musick and of the Musical Instrument Cinyra from the Ages be∣fore the loud. Laban who was several Ages before the Trojan War, makes mention of this Instrument in Genesis, C. 31. CINYRAS, King of Cyprus, who com∣mitted Incest with his own Daughter Myrrha, which he had by Adonis. He was a Man so rich, that he gave Rise to the Proverb, The Riches of Cinyras, to signifie a very rich Man. CIPPUS, a Roman Praetor, who returning Victorious to Rome, seemed to have Horns upon his Head. The Diviners being consulted about this Prodigy, they said, it foretold his Regal Power as soon as he entred into the City. But that Great Man scorning to enslave his Coun∣try would never go into Rome, but chose ra∣ther to live in voluntary Exile than to be so injurious to the Commonwealth.
CIRCE, the Daughter of the Sun, and Perseis the Daughter of Oceanus, who married the King of the Sarmata. She was famous for Magick and Poisoning, if we may believe the Poets, she poisoned her own Husband that she might reign alone, as also several of her Subjects to try the Strength and Effects of her Poisons, which caused them to revolt from her, and drive her out of the Kingdom in Disgrace. She went and dwelt in an Isle near Tuscany, upon a Promontory which was called by her Name, The Cape of Circe; there she fetched down the Stars from Heaven by her Charms, and miraculously changed Scylla the Daughter of Phorcus into a Sea-monster, as also Picus, King of the Latins into a Bird called a Wood-pecker: The Navy of Ʋlysses being cast upon these Coasts, she by her Inchantments, chan∣ged all his Companions into Hoggs, which he sent to view the Country, upon which he was cast by a Tempest. Mercury kept Ʋlysses from falling into the same Misfortune, having given him the Herb Moly to preserve him from her Charms, and at the same time admonishing him, that when she struck him with her Red he should draw his Sword and threaten to kill her till she should offer to be Friends with him, and en∣tertain him, and engage her self by the Great Oath of the Gods not to hurt him in any thing. Ʋlysses followed Mercury's Advice ex∣actly, and Circe restored his Companions to their former Shape. CIRCENSES LUDI, the Plays of the Circus much used at Rome, in Imitation of the Olympick Games in Greece; these last were dedicated to Jupiter, and the former to the God Consus or the God of Counsels. They were vowed on the Seventeenth of the Calends of October, (i. e. Sept. 15.) and shewn the 9th of the same Calends (i. e. Sept. 23.) These Games con∣tinued Five Days. Five sorts of different Games were shewn: The first was the Race of Chariots, which was the most ancient and chief of the Roman Exercises and Divertisements, as it was of the Greeks. The second was Leaping, who should leap best and highest. The third was Quoits, which was a Piece of Stone or Plate of Iron, which they cast as far as they could. The fourth was Wrestling, in which Two Wrestlers naked and their Bodies all anointed with Oil, laid hold upon on another, and endeavour'd to throw each other upon the Ground, by tripping up one another's Heels. The fifth was Fighting at Fifty-cuffs, at which they armed their Hands with great Straps of a raw Ox-hide with Bosses of Lead, which they called Cestis, with these they struck each other smartly, and often killed one another. Upon the Day appointed for these Plays they went in the Morning to the Capitol, where all the Furniture for the Plays was ready, from whence they returned in good Order, and passed through the publick Places and principal Streets of Rome, and from thence to the Circus, where they took several Turns to shew the Pomp of the Plays the better. Before them went the Chariots which car∣ried the Images of the Gods, and of the most illustrious Romans; then came other Chariots, in which the Roman Ladies most finely dres∣sed rode, and several other Chariots after them. After this the Statues of the Gods were brought into the Circus, and the Roman Ladies took their Places to see the Sports. Those, who were to fight, appeared in the Starting-place for the Race, riding upon their Chariots drawn with Two, Four or Six Horses a Breast, who expected nothing but the Signal to enter the Lists. There were usually Four Companies of Fighters, or Four Squadrons distinguished by the Colours of their Garments. The First Squadron was called the Green, the Second the Blew, the Third the Red, and the Fourth the White. The Emperor Domitian added the Gold Colour and Purple to make Two other Squadrons who bore the Name of their Colour. The Spectators were divided into Parties for the Combatants, some wagering for one Squa∣dron, and others for another. The Names of the Combatants were drawn by Lot, and matched after this manner: They took an Urn into which they cast Balots of the Bigness of a Bean, on which was written an A or a B, or some such like Letter, and always Two of a Sort: Then the Champions came up one after another and made their Prayer to Jupiter, and after that they put their Hand into the Urn; immediately one of the Judges took every ones Balot, and matched those that had Letters alike: If the Number of the Fighters was unequal, he that had the odd Let∣ter was to fight the Conqueror, which was no small Advantage, because he came fresh to fight against one who was already tired. This done, the Lists were opened at the Sound of the Trum∣pet, and when the last Signal was given by the hanging out a white Flag, they entred the List, and they run who should get first to the End of the Race: They were to turn first seven times, and afterwards five times about certain Posts without touching them, in which they shewed great Art. This is what Horace tells us in these Verses: —Metaque fervidis Evitata rotis. Od. 1. Lib. 1.
I will explain the other Plays of the Cirque, in an Alphabetical Order. CIRCIUS. See after Circus. CIRCUS, a great Building of a Round or Oval Figure, erected by the Ancients to exhibit Shews to the People. There are some Ruines of the Circus's yet to be seen at Rome, Nismes, and other Places. The Romans were great Lovers of the Circensian Games, as this Verse of Juvenal testifies, —Atque duas tantùm res anxim optat, Panem & Circenses. Some will have the Name to come from Circus, to whom Tertullian attributes the Invention of them. Cassiodorus says, that Circus comes from circuitus. The Romans at first had no other Circus for their Races, than the Shoar of Tiber, with the Bank on the one side, and a Pallisade of Swords standing upright on the other, which made these Races dangerous, as Servius ob∣serves: From hence it is, that Isidore says, that these Sports were called Circenses, from circum enses: But Scaliger laughs at this Etymology. Tarquin was the first that built a Circus at Rome between the Aventine and Palatine Mounts, as Dionysius Hallcarnassaeus tells us. It was 2205 Foot long, and 950 Foot broad, which was the Reason it was called the Great Circus. Julius Caesar adorned it with rich and magni∣ficent Buildings, which he encompassed about with fine Canals of Water, called Euripi, to represent Sea-fights in them. The Spectators, tho' very numerous, could see the Sports conve∣niently, for they sat on Benches one above another, in the Form of an Hill, so that they which sat before did not hinder those behind from seeing. Augustus enlarged the Circus, and erected a great Obelisk of 125 Foot high. The Emperor Claudius built Ornaments of Mar∣ble for the Dens of wild Beasts, designed for the Pleasures of the People, which till that time were made only of Earth or Wood. Caracalla caused divers parts of it to be painted and gilded, And lastly, Heliogabalus covered the Floor with Gold, and Silver-Dust or Sand, and was troubled he could not do it with Ivory; likewise by an excessive Luxury he filled the Pits with Wine, and represented a Sea-fight on it, as an ancient Historian relates. Some say, there were Eight Circus's in Rome, of which several were either through Vanity or Devotion built for the Ornament of the Ci∣ty: That of Flaminius was the most famous for Plays, and for the Glass-house, where they had the Secret to harden Chrystal, so as to resist Fire. Those of Antoninus and Aurelian were adorned with curious Obelisks, and divers other Ornaments. CIRCUS FLAMINII, the Circus of Flaminius was a large Place compassed about as other Circus's were, with several rows of Benches one above another, Galleries, Porches, Shops, and other Buildings: It bore the Name of the Consul that built it. The Senate often met there when they came down from the Ca∣pitol. It was appointed for some Sports, as the Apollinarics, and Horse-races, and for the As∣semblies of the People by their Tribes, which was the most general way of meeting, because the 35 Tribes, with the Inhabitants of the Ci∣ty included all the People of Italy, which met there. CIRCIUS, the Wind, which is about the Caurus, and is called North-West. Augustus built a Temple to the Wind Circius among the Gauls, who were much troubled with it, because it blew down their Houses; yet these People thought themselves much benefited by it, be∣cause it cleared the Air. Hear what Seneca says of it; Galliam infestat Circius, cui aedificia quas∣santi tamen incolae gratias agunt, tanquam salubri∣tatem coeli sui debeant ei. Divus certè Augustus templum illi, cum in Gallia moraretur, & vovit & fecit. CISIA, Coaches with two Wheels. The An∣cients had these Coaches with two Wheels, which they called Cisia, which they used for greater Conveniency and Expedition. Cicero calls them Flying Chairs. CITHAERON, a Mountain in Baotia, at whose Bottom the River Asopus runs. It was consecrated to Bacchus, and his Orgiae were ce∣lebrated there, as Ovid tells us, Lib. 3. of his Metamorphosis. CLAROS, a small City of Ionia, hereto∣fore famous for the Oracle of Apollo, who from them was surnamed Clarins. There was a cer∣tain Fountain, whose Water inspir'd Men to de∣liver Oracles, when it was drank, but it also shortned their Lives. Strabo informs us, that Calchas the Diviner returning home by Land, after Troy was taken with Amphilocus, the Son of Amphraus, passed through Claros, where he found much more ex∣pert Diviners than himself; for, when Calchas to try one of them, asked him, How many Pigs a Sow, that was big, should bring forth; Mopsus, who was the Diviner, answered, That she should have but three, two Males, and one Female, which proved true. But Calchas not being able to give an Answer in his turn to this Question, How many Figs a Fig-Tree had, and Mopsus tel∣ling him how many, he was so discontented, that he died of Grief to see himself out-done in his
own Art. Nearcbus derives this Word Clros from , a Lot, because it fell to Apollo in the Division. Some Authors say, it comes from , to weep, because Manto the Daughter of Tiresias the Diviner, to whom the Foundati∣on of that City is attributed, flying from Thebes after the Epigoni had destroyed it, landed in those Parts, where pouring out her Tears, she made a Fountain, which gave Name to that Place. It is also an Isle in the Archipelago, between Tenedos and Soio, dedicated to Apollo, as Calli∣machus testifies in these Verses, , , &c. CLAUDIA, a Vestal Virgin, who taking too much Care in dressing her self, caused her Behaviour to be suspected, and her Chastity to be questioned; but she deared her self by a Prodigy, that happened thus: For she seeing the Ship, which brought the Statue of Cybele the Mother of the Gods, sticking in the Sand, so that it could not be got ashoar by all the Arts and Labour they could use, pray'd to the God∣dess to clear her in Publick, and immediately casting her Girdle upon it, she pulled it to Land without any trouble, which undeceiv'd the Peo∣ple, Ovid, L. 4. Fastorum. CLAUDIANA; the Claudian Family, very il∣lustrious amongst the Romans, from which several of the Emperors were descended, as Claudius and Nero. It came from Appius Claudius, King of the Sabines, from whom came Appius Claudius, who paved the Way called from his Name, Via Appia, and made the Conduit at Rome; as also Appius Claudius Caecus, and Appius Claudius Crassinus, who made himself Dictator. See Appius. CLAUDIUS PULCHER, who lost the Battle against Asdrubal, at the Seige of Lili∣baum. His Defeat is attributed to the Con∣tempt, which he cast upon a Presage made from the Holy Poultrey; for when the Coop was brought before him, that he might take the Augury himself, he perceived, that the Poul∣trey were not at all moved by the Corn they gave them, whereupon he cast the Coop and holy Poultrey into the Sea, saying these Words in Raillery: Let them drink, since they will not eat. CLAUDIUS, the Roman Emperor, who was the Son of Drusus, the Nephew of Tiberius, and Uncle of Caligula, whom he succeeded after his Death. Seneca has given us a Descrip∣tion of the Person and Intellects of this Emperor Claudius in his Apocolocyntosis, where he imputes to him all imaginable Defects. Suetonius tells us, that he was not ill made. It is true, that he had weak Legs, and a Trembling in his Head, but these Defects were caused by Poison given him when he was young, which made him simple, forgetful and timerous, so that he gave himself up to be governed by his Freemen: He had a fat Neck, and his Lips were always foaming with Spittle, which, some think, is represented up∣on his Medals, as well as mentioned by Histori∣ans, with all other Signs of Weakness, which be∣trayed the Defects of his Mind. Nevertheless he seemed desirous to make amends for these Imperfections by his Study, for he applied him∣self closely to the Greek Tongue, History and Grammar. He likewise composed a Book be∣fore his Reign, to prove the Necessity of add∣ing Three Letters to the Latin Alphabet, and when he was Emperor he put them into it with ease, but they died with him, for we find them only in the Inscriptions of his Time. He exe∣cuted the Office of a Censor with great Severi∣ty, and restrained the Liberties of the Theatre by most rigorous Edicts: He was exasperated by the Insolence of the People, who publickly affronted the most eminent Roman Ladies; and Publius Pomponius, who had been Consul, be∣cause he had made a Play which was acted. He forbad also lending Money to the Children un∣der Age, because to save themselves from the Hands of their Creditors, they were tempted to seek the Lives of their Fathers. Afterwards he finished the Aquaeducts, begun by Caligula, which brought the Water from the Simbruin Fountains into the City, and made some Regulations in the Science of foretelling Things to come by the Entrails of Beasts. He put his Wife Messalinae to Death, who was one of the lewdest Princesses that ever lived, for she was married to Silius in publick, while her Husband was alive. He after married A∣grippina the Daughter of Germanicus, and his own Niece, who poisoned him some Years after with a Dish of Mushrooms by the Help of Locusta, a Woman famous for Poisoning, and the Empe∣ror's Physician, named Xenophon, who pretend∣ing to help his Vomiting, put a poison'd Fea∣ther into his Throat, of which he died. CLAUDIANUS, Claudian, a Poet known over all the World, whom all learned Men agree to come nearest the Majesty of Virgil of any that have endeavoured to imitate him, and to have been least infected with the Corruptions of his Age. His Invectives against Ruffinus and Eutropius are the best Pieces he has written, and perhaps nothing can be more compleat in their kind. Scaliger in his Trea∣tise of Poetry, says, that he was tired with the
meaness of his Matter, but he supplied all De∣fects by his Readiness of Wit, for his Fancy is happy, his Expression apposite, his Verse un∣affected, his Judgment accurate and his Orna∣ments pleasant for their Ingenuity. CLAVUS, a Nail. In the Consulship of L. Genutius and L. Aemilius Mamercus, in the Year 4352. according to the Julian Account, 3690 of the World, and 362 before Jesus Christ, the Plague continuing to lay waste Rome, com∣pelled the Romans to flie to the Ceremony of driving a Nail, which had never been done be∣fore but to keep an Account of the Years, ac∣cording to an ancient Law, That the Great Prae∣tor should drive a Nail on the Third Day of September. From this Time this Political Cere∣mony was turned into Superstition, and simple People were made to believe, that this Action would be effectual to avert publick Calamities, and to fasten them, as I may say, with this Nail. This Nail was made of Brass, and it was dri∣ven into the Wall behind the Chappel of Mi∣nerva, in the Capitol, on the Right-hand of the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus; and to per∣form this Ceremony a Dictator was made. LATUS-CLAVUS, or LATI-CLA∣VIUM, or TUNICA-CLAVATA; and ANGUSTUS-CLAVUS, or ANGU∣STI-CLAVIUM, a Gown or Coat, which the Roman Senators and Knights and High-Priests wore, upon which were set Buttons ha∣ving Heads like Nails, more or less wide, ac∣cording to the Quality of the Persons or Of∣fices. This Coat thus adorned with Buttons in the Shape of Nail-heads was a Mark of Di∣stinction, Senators wore them large, and so were called Laticlavii instead of Senatores, as Suetonius calls them Bini Laticlavii, for Two Senators, and when they were degraded this Coat was taken from them; on the Contrary, Knights wore a Coat with Buttons more nar∣row, and from thence were called Angusti∣clavi. The Senators did not gird this Coat, and from thence it was called Tunica recta, where∣as the Knights wore a Girdle about it. The Priests likewise might wear the Coat with large Buttons when they sacrificed, called from thence Laticlavus Sacerdotalis. In the Times of the Emperors the Coat with large Buttons was bestowed as a Mark of Honour and Distinction upon the Governours of Provinces and such as had served the Em∣peror faithfully, as the blew Garter and Mar∣shal's Staff is in France. They laid aside this Ornament in Times of publick Mourning or Calamity as a Sign of Sorrow. CLELIA, whom Dionysius Halicarnassaeus names Valeria, and makes her the Daughter of the Consul Valerius, being delivered for an Hostage to King Porsenna for the Security of a Truce, she cast her sell into the Tiber and swam over on Horse-back. King Prosenna, when she was brought back to him by the Consul Valerius, admiring her Courage, gave her an Horse finely equipped, and this is the Reason of the Statue on Horse-back, which the Romans have consecrated to Clelia's Vertue in the via Sacra. CLEMENTIA, Clemency, which the Ancients made a Goddess, and which they pictured holding a Branch of Lawrel in one Hand and a Spear in the other, to shew that Gentleness and Pity belonged only to victorious Wariours. The Romans dedicated a Temple to her by the Order of the Senate, after the Death of Julius Caesar, as Plutarch and Cicero relate. The Poet Claudian describes her as the Gardian of the World. The Emperors Tiberius and Vitellius caused her to be stamped upon their Moneys. CLEOBIS and BITO, the Children of the Priestess of Argos, who died both at the same time after they had drawn their Mother upon her Chariot to the Temple. And these are the Men which Solon calls the most happy, in his Answer to Croesus in Charon, or the Con∣templator. See Bito. CLEOPATRA, Queen of Aegypt, Daughter of Ptolomy, surnamed Dionysius, the last King of Aegypt. She was first beloved by Julius Caesar, who gave her that Kingdom a∣gain after he had conquered it, and by him she had a Son named Caesario, but after Mark An∣tony fell so passionately in Love with her, that he was not content to give her the Provinces of the lower Syria, Phoenicia, the Isle of Cyprus, &c. but promised to give her the whole Roman Empire in Requital of the Pleasures he had with her: For Love of her he divorced his Wife Octavia the Sister of Augustus, which so much incensed that Prince that he declared War against him. Antony, though he had the Assistance of the Aegyptian Army, fell by the Victorious Arms of Caesar near the Promontory of Actium: Cleopatra fled to Alexandria in Ae∣gypt, and seeing that she could not gain Cae∣sar's Favour to her Children, and being un∣willing to be made use of as a Captive to the Conqueror's Triumph, she killed her self by the biting of an Asp upon the Tomb of An∣tony her Lover.
CLEPSYDRA, an Hour-glass made with Water. The Use of Clepsydrae was very ancient among the Romans, and there were several sorts of them which had this in common to them all, that Water ran by gentle Degrees through a narrow Passage from one Vessel to a∣nother, in which rising by little and little lift∣ed up a Piece of Cork which shewed the Hours in different Ways. They were all subject to Two Inconveniences, the first is that which Plutarch takes notice of, that the Water passed through with more or less Difficulty, according as the Air was more or less thick, cold or hot, for that hindred the Hours from being equal; the other is, that the Water ran faster at first when the Vessel from whence the Water came was full than at last; and to avoid this Inconvenience, it was, that Orontes found out his Clepsydra, which is a small Ship flotting upon the Water, which empties it self by a Syphon which is in the Middle of it, for the Ship sinketh according to the Quantity of the Water which comes out of the Syphon, which makes it always run with the same Force, because it always receives the Water near the Surface. We make use of Hour-glasses of Sand instead of the Clepsydrae of the Ancients. Clepsydrae were more especially used in Win∣ter, because the Sun-dials were not useful in that Season. The second sort of Clepsydrae was such, as without changing the Dial made the Hours sometimes longer and sometime shorter by the Inequality of the Index or Hand, which de∣pended upon the Management of the Water, as Vigruoius says. This was performed by ma∣king the Hole through which the Water passed larger or smaller; for in the long Days when the Hours were longer, the Hole being made narrower, it convey'd but a little Water in a longer time, which caused the Water to rise and fall slowly, and so made the Counterpoize which turns the Axle-tree, to which the Index or Hand is fastened, to more slowly. CLIENS, a Client, among the Romans was a Citizen who put himself under the Pro∣tection of some Great Man, who in Respect of that Relation was called a Patron. This Patron assisted his Client with his Protection, Interest and Goods, and the Client gave his Vote for his Patron, when he sought any Of∣fice for himself or his Friends. Clients owed Respect to their Patrons, as they did owe them their Protection. CLIENTELA, the Protection which the great Roman Lords allowed the poor Citizens. This Right of Patronage was appointed by Ro∣mulus to unite the Rich and Poor together in such Bonds of Love, as the one might live without Contempt, and the other without Envy. CLIMA, or INCLINATIONÉS MUNDI, and INCLINAMENTUM, a Climate, which comes from the Greek Word , that is to say, to decline; it is intended to mark the Difference there is between the Countries of the World according to the Di∣stance they bear from the Pole or Aequinocti∣al Line, by reason of the Idea which the Ma∣terial Sphere gives us of this Distance, for the Countries which are distant from the Pole or Aequinoctial seem to decline or bend some more, and others less towards the Aequinoctial or Poles. The Ancients knew but Seven Climates, which passed through Meroe, Siena, Alexan∣dria, Rhodes, Rome, Pontus and the Mouth of the Boristhenes. Paris is in the Sixth Climate, A∣verroes who lived under the Fifth Climate preferred it before all others. The Moderns, who have sailed much farther towards the Poles, have made 23 Climates of each Side of the Aequator, according to the Number of Twelve Hours by which the longest Day is encreased from the Aequator to the Polar Cir∣cle, for they allowed the Difference of Half an Hour between one Place and another to make a different Climate, and so reckoned 24 Climates; and beyond the Polar Circle the Length of Days encreases so fast that they reckoned no Climates there. The common People call the Country that differs from a∣nother, a Climate either for the Change of Seasons or Nature of the Soil, or People that inhabit it, without any Relation to the long Days of Summer. CLIO, one of the Nine Muses who teaches to sing the Encomiums of Illustrious Men. She has taken her Name from the Greek Word , which signifies Glory or Renown. She is said to be the Daughter of Jupiter and Mne∣mosyne, the Goddess of Memory. CLOACA, a Sink, or Gutter under Ground, by which the Fifth of the City of Rome was car∣ried away. Tarquinius Superbus finished the great Sink, which Tarquinius Priscus had begun, which reach'd as far as the Senators Bridge, and emp∣tied it self into the Tiber. The Channel was very wide, and to make it, he was forced to dig thro' the Mountains, and Vaulted it over in several places of the City. It was built of great Stones in the Form of an Arch, so well fastened and cemented together, that the con∣tinual running of Water and Filth had not en∣damaged it in the Space of Seven Hundred Years. There were many other Sinks in the
City, which all fell into this Common-sewer. M. Cato and Val. Flascus Censors built one up∣on Mount Aventine. There were Officers ap∣pointed to take Care of these Works, and to have them repaired, who were called Curatores Cloacarum Ʋrbis. CLODIUS PUBLIUS, a Noble Roman of the ancient Family of the Clodii, a very debauched Man, who committed Incest with his Sisters, and fell in Love with Pompeia the Wife of Caesar. He was found one Day in the Palace in the Habit of a singing Woman, among the Roman Ladies, who celebrated the Mysteries of Ceres, of which he was accused by the Tribunes, but he escaped the Rigour of the Law by causing himself to be chosen Tri∣bune. He was one of Cicero's greatest Ene∣mies, who so persecuted him, as to cause him to be banished, and sell his Goods. He was slain by Milo sometime after; and Cicero un∣dertook the Defence of Milo, and was success∣ful in it. CLOTHO, One of the Three Destinies, who spin the Life of Man according to the old Fables. Clotho holds the Spindle and draws the Thread. She is represented in a long Gown of divers Colours, having a Crown on her Head set with Seven Stars, holding in her Hand a Spindle. Lucian places Clotho in Hell with Charon, and makes her to keep the Re∣gister of all the Dead, that Charon brings over in his Boat. Clotho. So it is, O Charon, ship this Croud, and in the mean time I will take my Register, and standing at the Wharfs, I will ask every one his Name, House and Town. Mercury shall take Care to put them in Order, ac∣cording as they come in. Let us begin with little Children, who have nothing to answer me, as I have nothing to ask them. CLYPEUS, & CLYPEUM, a Buck∣ler, a piece of defensive Armour which the Ancients used, and carried upon their Arm to secure them from the Blows of their Enemies: The Figure of it was Round, Oval, or Sex∣angular. In the middle of it was a Boss of Iron, or of some other Mettal with a sharp Point. CLYPEI, & CLUPEI VOTIVI, Devoted Bucklers, which were designed to re∣present a memorable Action of some ancient Hero, and to preserve the Memory of it in a Temple of the Gods, where it was hanged. The Names which the Latins gave these Buck∣lers were, Clypea, Clypes, Clypei votivi, because they were like the Bucklers used in War. Some ancient Grammarians, that they might seem more accurate than others, say, that Clypeus in the Masculine Gender signifies a Buckler for the War; and Clypeum in the Neuter, a conse∣crated Buckler; or rather Clypius with an i is a Buckler for fighting; and Clypeum, or Clupeum, one of those Bucklers vowed to the Gods: But Pliny, and others of the Ancients laugh at these Niceties. Trebellius Pollio uses these two Words, in a complaisant way, in his Life of Claudius the Goth. The Senate, says he, decreed this Em∣peror a Golden Buckler, which they ordered to be set up in the Palace of the Capitol, and upon which this Emperor was drawn as far as his Breast.  Illi Clypeus aureus, sive, ut Gram∣matici loquuntur, Clypeum aureum Senatûs to∣tius judicio in Romana curia collocatum est, e∣tiam nunc videtur, expressa thorace ejus vultûs imago. Salmasius upon this Passage shews, that these consecrated Bucklers were also called by the Greeks, Disci, Cycli, Aspides, which signifies properly the Bucklers used in War; Pinaces, which is Tables; Stylopinakia, Tables hung up∣on Pillars; Protomata, the upper Parts of a Man; Opla, among the Thebans, Arms; and Stetharia, among the Moderns, Busts or Pictures as far as the Waste. The ancient Heathens were very desirous to leave the Memory of their brave Actions to their Posterity, and to that end contrived to have the History of their Ancestors graven up∣on Bucklers. Homer speaks of several made by the most curious Artists, and among others Achilles's and Ajax's; from whence came the Custom of making them of Metal, that they might hang them in their Temples as a Monu∣ment of their Victories and other remarkable Actions, or at least to leave their Effigies to their Posterity. Livy tells us, that at the Conquest of the Carthaginians under the Command of L. Mar∣tius, the Romans got much Spoil, among which was found a Silver Buckler which weighed One Hundred and Thirty Eight Pound, upon which the famous Asdrubal of Barcha, one of the chief Commanders of that War was drawn, and that Buckler, which was called Clypeus Mar∣tius, was put into the Temple of the Capitol, to leave the Memory of that Conquest to Poste∣rity, and remained there till the Capitol was burnt. The same Author relates, that in the Tri∣umph, which Titus Quintius obtained for the Victory, which he had gained over Philip, King of Macedon, the Father of Demetrius, Ten Sil∣ver Bucklers, and one of solid Gold, which were found among the Spoils of the Enemies, were carried before him.
Some Years after in the Consulship of Marcus Tuccius, and P. Junius Brutus Twelve gilt Bucklers were dedicated and sent to the Ca∣pitol. Suetonius in the Life of Domitian, re∣lates, that the Senate to shew how odious the Memory of that Tyrant was, commanded that his Bucklers should be taken out of the Tem∣ples. Antoninus Pius dedicated a very noble Buckler to his Predecessor Adrian. These Bucklers did not only represent the Portraitures or Busts of these Eminent Persons, but all their History was engraven on them. Of this sort there were many at Cyzicum in the Temple of Apollonides the Mother of Attalus and Eumenes, upon which were engraven Hi∣stories in Relievo. Upon one of these Bucklers Pelias and Neleus, the Sons of Neptune, were drawn, who delivered their Mother from Im∣prisonment, as Plutarch assures us. Some Me∣dals shew us, what Fashion these consecrated Bucklers were of, and among others the Reverse of a Medal of the Emperor Augustus, to whom the Senate and People of Rome had consecrated a Buckler, in Remembrance that Phraares, King of the Parthians had sent him again the Ensigns of War which he had taken in his Victory o∣ver Crassus and Mark Antony, supposing that Augustus had not obliged him by Force to re∣store them: This pleased him so much, that he built a Temple to Mars the Revenger in the Capitol, where these Military Ensigns were con∣secrated with this Buckler. Vespasian also has made another Medal with a consecrated Buckler fastened to a Pillar be∣tween Two Lawrel-Trees, by the Order of the Senate; which is signified by these Letters Ex S. C. Ex Senatûs consulto. These Two Lawrels referred to those that were planted at the Em∣peror's Gate the first Day of the Year, or when they had obtained some Victory. Dio speaking of the Honours which the Se∣nate bestowed upon Augustus, says, that they ordered Lawrels to be planted before his Palace, to shew that he was always victorious over his Enemies; whence it is that Pliny very properly calls a Lawrel Caesar's Porter, the only Orna∣ment and faithful Guardian of their Palaces: Gratissima dominibus janitrix Caesarum, quae sola & domos exornat & ante limina excubat. There remains still another sacred Buckler, on which is represented that victorious Action which Scipio Africanus did at the taking of New Carthage in Spain; it is related at large in Livy: But, says he, Scipio calling the Spanish Ho∣stages, whom he had taken Prisoners, com∣forted them in their ill Fortune, and told them, that they were come into the Power of the People of Rome, who took more Delight in gaining Hearts by Kindness than in making them Subjects through Fear, and who loved more to have Foreign Nations for their Allies and Friends than to lay upon them an heavy Bondage. Then having taken the Names of all their Cities, he caused a List to be made of all the Prisoners, inquiring of them their Name and Country, and sent out Posts all Ways, that every Family concerned should come and re∣ceive his own, surrendring up to the Gover∣nours of the Cities that were present, their Citizens, and advising Caius Flaminius the Treasurer to treat the rest with all imaginable Civility. At the same time a very aged Ma∣tron crowded through the Throng of Hostages to cast her self at his Feet; (she was the Wife of Man donius the Brother of Indibilis, King of the Illergetae.) Her Petition mixed with Tears and Sobs was, that Scipio would please to re∣commend the Care of the Ladies to his Guards, and when Scipio answered, they should want nothing convenient for their Subsistance, she replied, 'tis not that that I am concerned for, for in this Disgrace we ought to be contented with any thing, but that which disturbs me is the Youth of these my Daughters, for as for my self Age secures me from all the Insolences which they may justly fear. (They were the Daughters of Indibilis, young and fair.) Then Scipio answered her, I cannot but follow the Custom of the People of Rome, and the exact Discipline which is observed in my Troops, that does not suffer any Man in the least man∣ner to violate the Respect which is due to your Sex, but your Vertue and Constancy, which even ill Fortune cannot triumph over, oblige me to take a more particular Care of your Per∣sons. Then he committed them to the Keeping of a Man whose Fidelity was well known, and gave him a Command to shew as much Respect and Favour to them, as if they were the Wives of his best Friends. A little after, there came to him a young Woman from among the Prisoners, of such a perfect Beauty, that she drew Respect from all the Spectators. Scipio being informed of her Country and Family, found that she was betrothed to a young Prince among the Cel∣tiberi named Allucius, with whom she was pas∣sionately in Love. At the same time he called her Parents and the Husband designed for this beautiful Virgin, with whom he had this Discourse. Young Man, my Soldiers ha∣ving discovered your Espousals to me, and having learned that you love her affectio∣nately, which her Beauty easily perswades me to believe, I am willing to favour your Passi∣on, although to speak freely to you, if I were permitted to enjoy the Pleasures of Youth, especially in a lawful Love, and the Cares of the Commonwealth were not wholly Masters
of my Heart, I should desire your Spouse, who so very well deserves the Affections of a fine Gentleman; but you know that she has been treated by me with the same Respect, as if she were with her Father in Law or her own Parents; I have kept her carefully for you, that I might return her to you a Pre∣sent worthy both of you and me; all the Re∣quital I desire of you is, that you will be Friends to the Commonwealth, and if you have as much Esteem for me, as the People of your Nation had for my Father and Uncle, satisfie your selves, that all the Romans equal us in Vertue, and that as there is no People in all the World whom you ought to fear more for an Enemy, so there is none that you can wish more for a Friend. This young Prince being astonished at this exceeding Bounty, and trans∣ported with Joy, took Scipio by the Hand and pray'd all the Gods to reward this Action, whose Merit he could never sufficiently ac∣knowledge. In the mean time, the Parents of this fair Lady seeing that he would free them without Ransom, brought him a consi∣derable Sum, and offering it to him pray'd him to accept of it as a Testimony of their Gratitude, assuring him, that it would be as great a Favour to them to accept it, as it was to release his Prisoner to them without using the Right of insisting upon Conquest. Scipio pretending that he was overcome with their urgent Intreaties, ordered the Money to be laid at his Feet, and turning himself to Allu∣cius, said unto him, I give you this over and above the Portion which your Father in Law will give you, take it from my Hand as a se∣cond Portion with which I present you. So he ordered the Sum which had been presented him to be carried to him, and him to lead away his Mistress. In fine, This young Prince being loaded with the Presents and Honours he laid upon him, returned home, and there extolled the Merits of Scipio, who was more like a God than a Man, and knew not only how to conquer by Arms, but by Kindness and Favours. Polybius who lived in the Time of this fa∣mous Roman, and was particularly acquainted with him, relates this Action in a fewer Words: He adds these remarkable Ones, which he spake to those Soldiers who presented this fair Lady to him: If my Fortune were limited to that of a private Person, you could not offer me a more acceptable Present, but being, as I now am, the General of an Army, you could not bring me one more disagreeable. CLYTFMNESIRA, the Daughter of Tyndarus, and Wife of Agamemnon, having heard from her Brother Palamedes that her Husband had brought a Concubine with him, which was Cassandra, she conspired immediately with Ae∣gysthus the Son of Thyestes, who was her Gallant, to put them both to Death; and so while he was sacrificing to the Gods for his Return, C∣temnestra slew her Husband Agamemnon and Cassandra with an Ax, but her Son Orestes re∣venged the Death of his Father Agamemnon by slaying the Debaucher of his Family and Mur∣derer of his Father. CLYTIA, a Nymph, and the Daughter of Oceanus, who was loved by Apollo and after∣ward forsaken by him, because through Jea∣lousie to Orcania she discovered the Love of that God with his Daughter: This Desertion was such a Grief to her, that she died of Sorrow, and was turned into a Flower called the Helio∣trope, which remembring the Love which she bore to him, turns it self always on the Side he is of to see him. CNEUS, a Name given to such among the Romans as were born with some Blemish on their Bodies, or some other natural Defect, which the Latins call Naevus. CNIDOS, a Sea-Town on the utmost Bor∣ders of the Chersonesus, which joins to Carias, famous for the Temple where is the Venus of Praxiteles of white polished Marble; whence it is that Horace calls her Venus Cnidiana. COCLES, the Surname of a Roman Citi∣zen named Horatius, who alone opposed the In∣vasion of the Tuscans when they were ready to enter into Rome over the Bridge Sublicius, till it was broken down; and then he cast himself immediately into the Tiber, being much wound∣ed in the Thigh, and escaped to the other Side. The Consul Publicola in Gratitude erected his Statue of Copper in Vulcan's Temple. COCYTUS, one of the Rivers of Hell ac∣cording to the Poets, which comes from these Greek Words , to weep, lament and Groan. Homer places this River in the Cim∣merian Country, and will have Hell to be this very Country of the Cimmerians, one Day's Journey from Circe, which is a Mountain in the Country of the Latins. CODRUS, the last King of Athens, who lived in the Days of Samuel. He devoted him∣self to Death for his Country, for going in Dis∣guise into the Midst of his Enemies, they slew him unknown, and by his Death his Countrymen got the Victory over the Peloponesians, to whom the Oracle had promised it, if they did not slay their Enemies King. The Athenians being Con∣querors would not have another King, that they might honour his Memory the more. So end∣ed the Kingdom of the Heraclidae, who were descended of Hercules, and their Common-wealth was governed by yearly Magistrates to the Time of Solon the Law-giver.
There was also a very bad Poet of that Name, of whom Horace speaks. —Rumpantur ut ilia Codro. COELIUS, a Mountain which was first, called Quercetulanus, because of a Forest of Oaks which was upon it. It was afterward called Coelius from Coelius Vibenna, who brought an Aid of Tuscans to one of their Kings, (either to Tarquinius Priscus, or some other, for Histo∣rians do not agree about it,) and received this Mountain for his Habitation with the adjoining Fields as far as the Place where there is now a Market, because his Soldiers were very nume∣rous; and the Street is still called by their Name, The Tuscan-Street. This Mountain was built and made one of the Divisions of Rome: It was burnt in the Reign of Tiberius, but he rebuilt it, and or∣dered that instead of Mount Coelius, it should be called Augustus's Mount, because the Statue of Tiberius, which was at a Senator's House na∣med Junius, was the only Preservative of it from so great a Conflagration. COELUS, or COELUM, the Heaven, which the Greeks call , either from  video, to see; or from the Hebrew Word Or, that is to say, Lucere, to shine, or our, which is urere, to burn in Flame, from whence the Latins have also derived Aurora. This Heaven was the first Object of false Worship, and Men took it for an Universal Nature, which it contains; whence it bears the Name of Jupiter, as if Jupiter were the Soul, and the Heaven, the Body of the whole Uni∣verse. This was the Opinion of Ennius when he said, Aspice hoc sublime candens, quem invo∣cant omnes Jovem. Phurnutus makes  to come from , that is to say, a Guardian or Conservator, because the Heavens and the Stars were the first false Gods, who were honoured as the Conservators of the World. COELUM, the most ancient of the Gods, had for one of his Children Time named Sa∣turn, who with a Cut of a Sickle deprived his Father of his Genitals, which he cast into the Sea, and by the Froth which came of the Stir∣ring of the Waves Venus was born. 'Tis no hard thing to guess why Coelum is said to be the first of the Gods, and the Father of Saturn or Chronos, since 'tis evident that the Motions of the Heavens make and measure the Duration of Time. When Saturn is said to have deprived his Father Coelus of his Genera∣tive Faculty by castrating him, it is because in Time the Fruitfulness of the Heavens ceased to produce new Beings, learing the Propagation and Multiplication of Creatures once formed to Venus, and so 'tis feigned that Venus was born of the natural Parts of Coelus and the Froath of the Sea; as Macrobius, Aiunt Saturnum abcidisse patris pudenda, quibus in mare projectis, Venerem procreatam, quae à spumâ unde coaluit,  nomen accepit. COENA, Supper from  or , i. e. communes, because the Ancients usually supped together in Companies, but dined alone: Sup∣per was the best Meal. They broke their Fast in the Morning very lightly with a Piece of Bread dipped in pure Wine, which Meal they cal∣led Jentaculum, and in Greek  and , from , which signifies pure Wine, The second Meal was the Prandium or Dinner from  the Morning and , or from , which signifies plain and very moderate. They had a Fourth Meal, which they made sometimes, which they called Commissatio or Commessatio, a Collation or a Meal after Supper. Suetonius makes mention of these Four Meals in his Life of Vitellius, Epulos trifariàm semper, in∣terdum quadrifariàm dispertiebat: in jentacula, & prandia, & coenas, commessationesque, &c. These Suppers were made after different Manners. There was one called Coena recta, a Splendid Supper, with which the Roman Nobles treated their Mistresses and Friends, who had at∣tended them in their Visits, or in the Execution of their Offices. They that would avoid the Expence and Trouble of these Suppers, gave them Bread and Meat instead of them, and this Distribution was called Sportula. Domi∣tian took away these Allowances, and restored the Feast called Coena recta; for Suetonius tells us, sportulas publicas sustulit, revocatâ coenarum rectarum consuetudine. COENA DAPSILIS, a plentiful Feast, whether this Word comes from dapes, which signifies Daintles, or the Greek Word , Abundance of all Things. COENA ACROAMATICA, from the Greek , which signifies pleasant and merry Discourse. It was a Supper at which many witty Jests were spoken for Diversion. There was moreover, COENA AD∣VENTITIA, INTERVALLATA, NOVEMDIALIS, & DUODENA∣RIA, called by the Greeks , be∣cause the Guests were Twelve in Number, cloathed like Gods and Goddesses. There was also another Supper called Pontificalis, which the High-priest made upon the Day of his Con∣secration. They supped usually about the Ninth Hour in the Day-time, that is, about Four a Clock in the Afternoon, but in the Spring and Au∣tumn
about Three a Clock, and in Winter at Two; for the Romans, as well as Greeks, often changed their Time, supping sometimes at one Hour and sometimes at another, as we may ob∣serve in their Authors. They put on a Gar∣ment when they sat down to Table called Vestis caenatoria, or Pallium coenatorium, of which Mar∣tial makes mention. There was then a Table spread between Three Beds, upon which they eat; another which they used for a Cup-board called Abacus, upon which they set Glasses, Fruits, &c. Var∣ro speaks of Four sorts of Tables, that on which they eat, another square one called Ʋr∣uarium, on which they set their Pots, Dishes, Flagons and Basons; a Third called Cyliban∣tium, from the Greek , which signifies a Drinking-Cup or Bowl, and the Fourth called Cartibulum, whereon they cut the Meat, which was after served up in Portions to each Guest. Round about the Beds and Tables was a kind of Bench a little raised, upon which they set their Children who eat with them, as Sue∣tonius testifies in the Life of the Emperor Claudius, C. 32. Adhibebat omni coenae & liberos suos cum pueris, puellisque nobilibus, qui more ve∣teri ad fulcra lectorum sedentes vescerentur. They used no Table-cloaths, they had Servants which were employed to wipe the Table when they took away the Dishes and set on another Ser∣vice, and others were appointed to sweep a∣way what fell from the Table and the Spit∣tings, others held great Fans to cool them or drive away the Gnats, and others gave them Drink and Meat; as Horace tells us. His ubi sublatis, puer altè cinctus, acernam Gausape purpureo mensam pertersit, & alter Sublegit quodcunque jaceret inutile, quodque Posset coenantes offendere. Sat. 8. Lib. 11. They were served usually with Three Courses; The first Course when they sat down to Ta∣ble was called Antecoena, or Gustatio, at which they set on Mulberries, Eggs, or such like Things; the second was called Coena, or Caput Coenae, when they set on more dainty Meats, and the third was the Disert, called Bellaria, Mensa pomorum; as we read in Suetonius, Coenam ternis ferculis praebebas, speaking of Augustus. At the Beginning of their Meal they drunk a Glass of Greek Wine, but Caesar at the Feasts which he made for the People had Four sorts of Wines brought, viz. of Chios, Lesbos, Fa∣lernum and Memertinum. At the Beginning and End of the Supper they made Libations of Wine to their Gods, and then drank every one out of a very large Bowl which was filled with Wine, having made their Libations out of it, according to Sil. Ital. Nec priùs aut epulas aut muneragrata Lyaei Fas cuiquam tetigisse fuit, quàm multa precatus In mensam...... sacrum libavit honorem. Virgil speaks of the Libations made at the End of that Treat which Dido gave Aeneas, Lib. 1. Aeneid, V. 727. Postquam prima quies epulis, mensaeque remotae Crateras magnos statuunt, & vina coranant.... His Regina gravem gemmis auroque poposcit, Implevitqne mero pateram. —Tum facta silentia tectis. Jupiter (hospitibus namre dare jure loquuntur).. Dixit, & in mensâ laticum libavit honorem: Primaque libato summo tenus attigit ore: Tum Bitiae dedit increpitans,..... Post alii proceres, &c. We have the Description of a Wedding by Lucian, in a Dialogue, entituled, the Lapithae. The Guests being all come, and it being time to go to Supper, the Women who were many, and the Bride in the midst, cover'd with a Vail, took the Right-hand, and the Men sat down quite opposite to the Ladies: At the upper End the Banker Lucritus, then Ari∣staenetus; afterwards Zenothemis and Hermo: After them sat down the Peripatetick Clodi∣mus, then the Platonist, and afterwards the Bridegroom, then my self, Zeno's Tutor af∣ter me, then his Pupil.We eat our Meat pretty peaceably at first; for there were a World of Dishes, and those well dress'd. After having indulg'd our Ap∣petite for some time, came in Alcidamas the Cynick: The Master of the House bid him Welcome, and wish'd him to take a Seat by Dionysodorus, You would think me very ef∣feminate, said he, should I sit down at Table, or lie almost along on a soft Bed, and Purple Cushions, as if one went to sleep, and not to eat. I will stand, and feed my self here and there after the Manner of the Scythians, &c. In the mean while the Healths went merrily round, and they entertain'd one another with various Discourses. The Servants delaying to serve up a new Course, Aristaenetus unwilling a Moment should be lost without Divertise∣ment, had a Buffoon introduced to make the Company merry. He began to shew a Thou∣sand extravagant Postures, with his bald Head and Body all disjointed, and to chaunt Verses, in Aegyptian Dialect, after which he fell to breaking his Jests upon the Company, every Man laughing at what was said, and taking all in good part. The last Service was brought up, which was to every Man a Fowl and a piece of Venison, Fish and the Disert; in a word, every thing that might be honestly eat or car∣ried away.
COGNOMEN, a Sirname. It was properly the name that distinguish'd the lines of a Pedi∣gree in the same race in eadem gente. For ex∣ample, when Livy said that the race of the Poti∣tians was divided in twelve Families; for Gens and Familiae, were as the whole, and its parts. Those that were of the race were called Gen∣tiles; and those of the same Line or Family were called Agnati: As we may observe in the Royal Race of France, often divided in several Bran∣ches, as Valois, Bourbon, Orleans, Montpensier, &c. so when 'tis said the Family of the Caesars was of the Julian Race, Julian is the general Name of the Race, nomen gentis, and Caesar is the Name of the Family, cognomen familiae. The word Cognomen includes also the Sirnames given upon some particular account, as when Salust says of Scipio; Massinissa in amicitiam recep∣tus a Publio Scipione, cui postea Africano cognomen fuit ex virtute; and Tully speaking to Pomponius, who was Sirnamed Atticus, because he had been brought up a Scholar at Athens, tells him; Teque non cognomen Athenis solum deportasse, sed humanitatem & prudentiam intelligo. If we consider this, we shall find that there are no Sirnames that we call cognomina, and di∣stinguish the Families, but were given at first upon some particular occasion, seeing the pro∣per Names themselves, praenmina, were at first given upon some like account. These Sirnames were hereditary to all the posterity of the same Family; however, they might change them, or add some other new Name to them; and sometimes, besides the Name of the private Family, they took the Name of the Race, or the Tribes in the Abla∣tive case, as C. Verres Romaleâ; Servius Sulpitius Lemoniâ; that is, ex Romuleâ ex Lemonia Tribu. The Romans plac'd sometimes the Sirname of the private Family before the general Name, cognomen antenomen gentis, says Manucius; and so Tully said Gallo, Balbi Cornelii, Papum Emilium; and Livy, Paulus Aemilius Cos, and the like; tho' Gallus, Balbus, Papus and Paulus were the Sir-names of a Family, and not the Forenames. And sometimes the Sirnames became Names, as Valerius Maximus tells us. COLISEUM, 'tis the Amphitheater that Vespatianus built in Rome, and his Son Titus De∣dicated. Philander's opinion is, that this word Coliseum, is said, quasi coloseum, because of Nero's Coloss that was near it; tho' that Name be nei∣ther general nor common to other Amphithea∣ters, but particular to that famous Amphytheater, the remainders whereof are yet seen at Rome. COLLATINUS, Sirnamed Tarquinius, Lucretia's Husband, the first Man that was made Consul with Junius Brutus, after the Kings were driven away out of Rome, for the Rape commit∣ted on Lucretia, by the Son of Tarquinius Super∣bus. But Collatinus being of the Tarquinian Fa∣mily, abdicated his Consulship, and retired to Alba, that all called by the Name of Tarquinius might be banished out of Rome. COLLEGIUM, College, A Name given to the Assembly of some Societies and Corpora∣tions. The Romans had Companies of Work∣men, Tradesmen and other Callings, former∣ly called Colleges, that had their Patrons and Governors. They were Instituted by Muma. COLLEGIUM AURIGARIO∣RUM and AURIGARUM, The College of the Coachmen, who in the publick Games of the Circle, disputed with their Adversaries, the Prize proposed to the best Drivers. They composed Colleges or Societies, that were di∣stinguished one from another by Colours: Gru∣ter in his Inscriptions mentions four princi∣pal colours, Russatam the red; Prasinam the green; Venetam the blue; Albatam the white. 'Tis thought the Ancients would represent by these colours, the four Seasons of the Year, in which Nature puts on new cloaths; each Par∣ty representing a Season by his colour: The Green represented the Spring, the Red the Sum∣mer, the Blue the Autumn, and the White the Winter, covered with Ice and Snow. COLLEGIUM AUGURUM, The College of the Augurs: Romulus was the first Insti∣tutor of this College, which was composed of three Men, to whom Servius Tullius added ano∣ther; and it continued so till the Year 454, for then, during the Consulship of Q. Apuleius Pansa and M. Valerius Corvinus, the Tribunes of the People created five Men more, taken out of the people: And now this College was compos'd of nine persons till the time of Sylla, who in∣creas'd their number to fifteen according to Flo∣rus, or twenty four according to Alexander ab Alex. COLLEGIUM AESCULAPII and HYGIAE, The College of Aesculapius and Health, It was a Society or Congregation of 60 persons, who at certain days in the Year met at an appointed place to offer Sacrifices, in the behalf of those that were willing to implore the help of Aesculapius and Health, and there they entertained one another. COLLEGIUM DENDROPHO∣RORUM, The College of the Dendrophori. This College is often recorded in the Ancient In∣scriptions upon Marble, and yet 'tis hardly known what sort of people these Dendrophori were. The Learned are divided upon this point. Salmasius in his Commentaries upon the life of Caracalla, written by Sparsianus says, that the Dendrophori were those Men, who in the processions made in the honour of the Gods, carried Branches of Trees, accord∣ing to the Aetymology of the word Den∣drophores , which signifies, he that car∣ries a Tree; wherefore the Epithet of Dendropho∣ros was given to Silvanus, in an ancient Inscrip∣tion
recorded by Gruter, because this God is commonly represented carrying a Branch of a Pine-tree, or some other tree. The title of the Theodosian Codex, concerning the Heathen and their Temples, seems to fa∣vour this opinion in the 20th Law. 'Tis just, says the Text, that all the places, that the Dendrophori, and other Heathen Professions have possessed, and were appointed for the keep∣ing of Feasts and distribution of Money, be applied to the Revenues of our House, hav∣ing first banished the Error that had given birth to them.According to this opinion Dendrophori was not the name of a Trade, but of Religion or Superstition. However, the contrary opinion, which most part of the Learned hold, is not unlikely, for they say that the Dendrophori were Timber-Merchants, who dealt especially for the use of the War and Engines. Wherefore they were commonly joined in the same College, with those that had the care of the Engines and ne∣cessary Timber for the Camp, called Fabri, and even with those called Centonarii, which was a Trade for the War. These Centonarii were joined together with them, in the 8th Title of the Theodosian Codex, by which the Emperor Constantine commands, that in all the Towns where the Dendrophori shall be found, they shall be received into, and re-united to the Corpo∣ration of the Centonarii and Master Builders, called Fabri. 'Tis true, that from hence we cannot certainly know what was their Trade. but it seems that it was a Society of Workmen, who had a near relation with those that sup∣plied the things necessary for the Camp; where∣fore they were created by the Senate, or were under the direction of a Quindecim-Vir, or one of the Fifteen Men, whose Office is fully descri∣bed in another place. The College of the Centonarii, which was a Military Trade, were those Men who fur∣nished the Army with Tents, and other train of War, called by the Romans Centones. The College of the Masters of the Timber and warlike Engines, called Fabri and Tignarii, was a Body of Workmen, who furnished the Timber necessary for the Army both by Sea and Land. COLLINA PORTA, the Gate Colli∣na at Rome upon Mount Quirinal, near the Tem∣ple of Venus Ericina. COLONIAE, Colonies; they were made up of some Inhabitants of Rome, who were sent into the conquered Towns, built without the City of Rome. These Colonies were called after the Names of the Emperors that founded them, not only by the general Name of Caesar or Au∣gustus, for these Titles were common to all the Emperors; but were also called by their pro∣per Names that distinguished them from their Ancestors; so the Colony of Patras is called Neroniana, in a Medal that we have of Nero, on the reverse whereof we read Genio Coloniae Neronianae Patrensis. COLOPHON. A Town very famous in Ionia, especially for the antient Temple of Apollo Clarianus, which (if we except that of Ephesus) was the most remarkable of all Ionis, tho it was not quite finished, as Pausanias tells us, in his Achaicks, but yet very famous for the Oracles that Apollo pronounced there. The Temple was not built in Colophon itself, but in Claros, a little Town in the Territory of Colo∣phon. There was also a Mountain and a Wood dedicated to Apollo Clarianus. COLOSSUS, A Coloss, a statue of a Prodigious size, and the shape of a Gyant. The Coloss of Rhodes was a statue of Apollo, so high, that Ships past with full Sails betwixt its Legs. It was the workmanship of Chares, a Disciple of the renowned Lysippus; he was 12 years about it, and it was overthrown by an Earthquake 56 years after it was erected; they loaded 900 Camels with the Brass this Coloss was made of. The basis that supported the statue, was of a Triangular Figure, its extremities were su∣stained with 60 Pillars of Marble. There was a winding Stair-case to go up to the top of it; from that place one may discover Syria, and the Ships that went into Egypt, in a great Looking-glass that was hung about the neck of the statue. COLUMNA, Around Pillar to bear up a Building, or adorn it. There are Pillars made of Wood, Stone, Marble, Brass, Jasper, Lapis Lazuli, &c. There are some wreathed, channelled, detached, &c. to make them ap∣pear bigger, or more agreeable to the sight. The diversity of these Pillars give the name to the five orders of Architecture; the Tuscan, Dorick, Ionick, Corinthian and Composite. In the Temple of Diana of Ephesus, there was 127 Pillars all of a piece, and 60 Foot high, which had been erected at the charges of so many Kings. COLUMNA TRAJANI, The Pil∣lar of Trajan. This Pillar was set up in the middle of a place that the Emperor Trajan had adorned. It was 128 Foot high; they went up to it by a Stair-case of 185 Steps, and 45 Win∣dows. There were represented round about it in basso relievo, the noble Acts of that Prince. The Senate set up this Pillar in honour of Trajan, in the time of the War against the Parthians; and after his death they brought his Ashes in a Golden Urn from Seleucia, a Town in Syria, where he dyed, and placed the Urn on the top of the Pillar. COLUMNA ANTONINI, The Pillar of Antoninus. This Pillar was in the Field of Mars, and was 176 foot high, with a Stair-case of 106 steps, and 56 Windows, and a statue at the top of it representing Antoninus.
COLUMNA MILLIARIS, A milliary Pillar; the Antients made use of this Pillar to mark out the Miles or the Leagues from one place to another. COLUMNAE HERCULIS, The Pil∣lars of Hercules. These Pillars are two Moun∣tains situated at the mouth of the straight of Gibraltar, one called Calpè, the other Abyla, both opposite one to another. The fabulous Anti∣quity thought that Hercules himself had set up these 2 Pillars to serve for limits of his exploits. COLUMNA AUGUSTI, The gol∣den Milliary, a pillar that Augustus set up in Rome, where the Highways of Italy met. COMES. This word Comes signified at first those persons who waited on the Magi∣strates in Provinces, as Treasurers, Lieute∣nants, Secretaries, Provosts, Registers, and all other inferour Officers, whereof we have many instances, even in the time of the Com∣monwealth. In the Emperor's time this word was employed to express those that were of the Family, or the attendance of the Prince; according to this signification, the Councellours of State were called COMITES CON∣SISTORIANI. COMES ORIENTIS, The Go∣vernour of the East. This Governour had 15 Provinces under his Government, and the particular Governours gave him an account of their respective administration, and if any of their had prevarricated, he punished them according to their misdemeanour. COMES REI MILITARIS, He commanded the Soldiers in the Armies, and had an equal authority with the Captains of the Provinces. COMES STABULI, The Great Ma∣ster of the Horse. He was to take care that the Provinces should deliver the Horses, that they did owe every year to the Emperor, wherefore these Horses were called Equi Cano∣nici. This Officer was very much respected in the Roman Empire, as the Great Constable was formerly in France, or the Master of the Horse is now in England. COMES SCHOLARUM. This Of∣ficer was an inspector over all the subaltern Officers of the Emperor: there were eleven classes of them, that were employed about the Affairs of the Prince, in the Provinces and the Armies. Each classis had his chief Comman∣der, who was called Comes or Caput Scholae. COMES SACRARUM LARGITI∣ONUM, The Treasurer of the gifts and libe∣ralities or alms of the Prince, which he destri∣buted among the Souldiers and the people. In the time of the Commonwealth these Treasu∣rers were called Questors. Some Emperors suppressed them, and some others restored them again; but Constantine the Great institu∣ted two Treasurers to manage his Reve∣nues, and both were called Comites. The fond of this grant or bounty money was raised in the Provinces, and sent into the Prince's Coffers, called Arcae Largitionum; the collectors established to collect this money were called Exactores, Canonicarii. COMES PRIVATARUMRERUM DOMUS DIVINAE, The Treasurer of the casual forfeitures: He gathered the money that fell to the Prince by chance, as forfei∣tures, and other escheats, or goods of mortmain. COMES DOMESTICORUM E∣QUITUM & PEDITUM, A Collonel of the Archers of the Emperors guards, esta∣blished by the young Gordian. There were be∣fore the Emperor Gordian's time some compa∣nies of Guards, but he raised some more, both horse and foot, for his own guard, to attend always his person, wherefore they were called Protectores domestici praesentales. They were in all 3500 chosen and strong men, born in Armenia. Justinianus added to that number 2000 more, who were called Supernumerarii. They were commanded by three Officers, the first was Comes, the second Tribunus Protectorum, and the third Primicerius Protectorum. COMES PATRIMONIJ, Trea∣surer of the Demesn, he received the money for the maintenance of the Prince. COMES CASTRENSIS BALA∣TIJ, The Lord High Steward of the Princes Houshold. He took care of the Prince's Ta∣ble, and commanded all the Officers and wait∣ing Gentlemen of the House, called in gene∣ral Mensores, i. e. Mensa Regis Servientes; he com∣manded also the Lampadorij, i. e. those that lookt after and carried the Lamps, &c. COMITIA. Assemblies of people, which were threefold; for either they were made up by Wards or Curiae, and then were called Comitia Curiata, or by Tribes Comitia Tributa, or by hundreds, Comitia Centuriata, ac∣cording to the division of the Roman people. In the first Assembly, where they chuse the inferiour Magistrates, no man was allowed to vote but the Citizens of Rome. In the two o∣ther Assemblies, not only the Citizens of Rome had a right to vote, but also the Inhabi∣tants of the Colonies and Municipal Towns. In these great Assemblies they chose the great Magistrates, and took into consideration the most important affairs of the Commonwealth. Vide infra Centuriata, Curiata, and Tributa. COMITIUM, The place where the Assemblies met at Rome. It was one side of the Forum Romanum, or the place of Rome. This place was covered, and there was a kind of Scaffold or High and spacious Theatre called the place for Orations, adorned with Bows, or four Decks of Ships taken from the Antiates, in the first memorable Sea-fight the Romans were ingaged in. From this place
they administred Justice, made Speeches, pro∣posed Laws to the people, and generally made all their deliberations with them. There they did choose also most part of their Magi∣strates, wherefore the Candidates when they came to this place, used to lay aside all their grandeur, and shewed themselves familiar with all sorts of people, caressing and intreating some of them, bribing the others, and making their best to get a vote, being accompanied in these occasions by such of their friends and relations who had the greatest interest. COMMODUS. See after the following article. COMOEDIA, a Comedy, a Play com∣posed with art, either in prose or verses, to re∣present some humane action, agreeable and not cruel. The Comedy was first acted in some Villages, as it appears by the word , and Susarion was the first Author of it, as Thespis of the Tragedy, according to Suidas, Polydorus Virgil and Ludovicus Vives affirm that the Romans had their Comedy from the Greeks. The first representation of Comedy at Rome was under the Consulship of Caius Sulpitius Peti∣cus, and Caius Licinius Stolon, 390 years since the foundation of Rome, and 364 before the co∣ming of our Saviour. They were acted for the first time in the Island of the River Tiber, and afterwards upon Stages, Messala and Cassius, one of Caesar's Murtherers, being then Cen∣sors; as 'tis related by Valerius Maximus Appia∣nus, and St Austin, l. 1. de civitate Dei. Aristophanes has excelled in Comedies; in that which is entituled Plutus, he tells us, that that God, having at first a clear sight, did look only upon just men, but that Jupiter having blinded him, Riches since that time are in∣differently shared among good and bad men. It was some time after attempted to reco∣ver his sight, but Penia, which is poverty it∣self, opposed it, shewing that Poverty being the Mistress of Arts, Sciences and Vertues, they would be in danger of being lost if all men were rich. They would not hearken to her wholsom advice, Plutus recovered his sight in the Temple of Aesculapius, and from that time the Temples and the Altars of the Gods, even of Jove himself, were forsaken, all men sacrificing to the only Plutus. The ancient Comedy was a Satyr, to banish vice, and countenance virtue. When Horace says that Comedy should be kept within the bounds of Laws, lege regi, he doth not say that it should be suppressed. Donatus assures us, in his Book concerning Comedy, that antient Poets did not bring in Fictions as the Modern have done since, but represented the dealings of men, not sparing even the names of persons. COMMODUS, Son to Marcus Aurelius, a Roman Emperor. The Inclinations of his mind were worse than the Shape of his Bo∣dy; for he had nothing of his Fathers good nature, tho his Face had something of his features. His cruelties and debaucheries, so opposite to the clemency, sobriety and wisdom of Marcus Aurelius, perswaded the people that he was not his legitimate Son, ad that his Mother had got him by a Gladiator, whom she loved: and really he pretended to be a skilful Gladiator himself, a good Coachman, and a good Player. Some Authors give this description of him, that he had a wild look, sparkling eyes, and an ill composed discourse, like a Drunkard, whose actions he was imitating. Marcus Aurelius took notice of his ill nature, and used all his endeavours to correct it, having provided the best Masters for him, but nature prevailed upon education. He took after Fan∣stina his Mother's debaucheries, and as soon as his Father was dead, he removed all the good men about him, because their presence and care were troublesome to him, and a bridle to his loose way of living. His vanity was brought to such an excess, that he would be called the young Jupiter, and the Roman Hercu∣les, affecting with an unparallelled Foppery to dress himself in a Lions Skin, and to wear a massy Club like Hercules. At last Commodus be∣came so incommodious to all Mankind, that he was kill'd by his own Servants, they not being able to bear any longer his extravagancies. The Senate and the people did express an extraor∣dinary joy for the same, seeing themselves de∣livered from a Monster, and an enemy to all men. During his life, they flattered him with a thousand Encomiums, so far, that they cal∣led his Reign the Golden Age, and bestowed upon him the Epither of Hercules, calling him the invincible and the Peace-maker of Man∣kind. There remains still a Medal of this ambitious Prince stampt at Nicca, with these words written in the Ring thereof. , i. e. All the world was happy under the Empire of Commo∣dus. We have besides on the reverse of a Golden Medal, and of another great one of Brass, both stampt for the same Emperor, these words, PROVIDENTIAE AUG. with two stand∣ing Figures, one representing Commodus like Hercules (for he affected to be dressed in a Lions Skin, and called Hercules Commodianus, and to have Sacrifices offered unto himself as if he had been a God) his right Foot upon the fore Deck of a Ship, in remembrance of some ex∣ploit he had performed at Sea; the other Fi∣gure represents a Woman, whose head is dres∣sed in an Elephants Skin, with a Serpent at her Feet, which was the ordinary emblem, the
Romans used to represent Africa abundant in Elephants. She presents Commodus with a handful of Ears of Corn, to shew the vigilancy of that Prince in sending to Africa and Egypt for the Corn that Italy and the whole Empire might stand in need of. Wherefore Lampridius says in the life of Commodus, that he fitted out a Fleet every year for Africa, that in case the Corn of Alexandria fell short, they might be supplied from Africa. Before the Reign of Commodus, they sent out of Italy to fetch Corn from Africa, but there was neither a Company of Corn Merchants settled, nor a Fleet appoint∣ed for that purpose, as there has been one for Alexandria ever since the time of Augustus. There was also Gold, Silver and Brass stampt by the order of Commodus, whereon his Head is represented covered with a Lions skin, and on the reverse appear a Bow and Arrows, and a Quiver, with this motto HERCULI RO∣MANO AUGUSTO. He design'd to change the name of the City of Rome, and have her called after his name Commodiana, and therefore in his Letters he took the following titles, Imperator Caesar Lu∣cius Aelius Aurelius Commodus Augustus, Pius, Felix, Sarmaticus, Germanicus, Maximus, Bri∣tannicus, Paccator orbis terrarum, Invictus, Romanus Hercules, Pontifex Maximus, Tribunitiae potestati XVIII. Imperator VIII. Consul VII. Pater Patriae; Consulibus, Praetoribus, Tribunis Plebis Senatuique Cummodiano felici salutem. COMPITALIA. The Feasts institu∣ted by Servius, which were commonly kept in January, the day before the Ides (which is the twelfth day of the month) and in May the sixth day before the Nones (which is the second day according to the old Roman Calendar.) This word Compitalia, comes a compitis, for at such days in all the cross ways both of the Town and Country they offered Sacrifices to the Gods Lares, which were certain Daemons, or Dome∣stick Gods, protectors or keepers of the fami∣lies. Macrobius tells us in his Saturnalia, that they Sacrificed formerly young children to these Lares and Mania their mother, for the conserva∣tion of the whole family. But Brutus, having expelled the Kings out of Rome, interpreted otherwise this Oracle of Apollo, ordering that instead of the heads demanded by the Oracle, they should take Poppy's heads, and in this sense he would have the Oracle to be inter∣preted. And the same Author tells us, that instead of children, that were before immola∣ted to these Gods, they made effigies of men and women with straw, which they did offer in Sacrifice, with some round woollen balls, for so many slaves as there was in the fa∣mily: as Festus reports, Quibus tot pilae, quot capita servorum; tot effgies, quot essent liberi, po∣nebantur, ut vivis parterent, & essent his pilis & simulacris contenti; they offered them as many Balls as there was Slaves, and as many Effigies as there were free Persons in the Fa∣milies, that they might not hurt the Living, and be contented with these Offerings. Dionysius Halicarnasseus tells us in his Antiqui∣ties, that this Feast was celebrated after the Sa∣turnalia, viz. at the beginning of January, and that it was proclaimed in these words, Die nono post Kalend. Jan. Quiritibus Compitalia erunt. This Peast was kept by the Slaves, according to the Institution of Servins, in remembrance of his Fortune, that being born a Slave, yet he be∣came King of the Romans. And Tully says, in the 7th Book of his Epistles to Atticus, that he would not go into the House of Albus, lest he should be troublesom to his Slaves, who were about Solemnizing the Compitalia, Ego quoniam Compitalitius dies est, nolo eo die in Albanum venire molestus Familiae. COMUS, the God of rejoycing and feast∣ing, and President at Dances and Debaucheries. Philostratus in the third Book of his Pictures, re∣presents him young and fair, with a red face by too much drinking, a lighted Flamboy in his hand, which he holds down to the very ground, and seems to burn his Legs with it. He is crowned with Garlands of Flowers, a∣mong Feastings and Pleasures. CONCORDIA, Concord; a Divini∣ty much respected among the Romans. Tiberius dedicated her a Temple in Rome, which he built by order of Livia his Mother. On the Coin or the Medals of the Emperors, there is the figure of Concord, holding up a Cup with one hand, and the Cornucopia, or Horn of Plenty with the other, to shew that plenty of all things at∣tends a State, where the People live in good correspondency and concord. She is also re∣presented by two Images holding one another by the right hand. On the Medals of Marc-Anthony, we see Concord under the Emblem of two Serpents ty'd below, and raising up in the figure of a Bow, to compass an Altar, on which lies the head of Augustus, to represent the concord of the Triumvire. On the Medals of Caesar Augustus, Concord holds with one hand the Horn of Plenty, and with the other she presents some Fruits to Lepidus, Anthony, and young Caesar Trium-vits, with this Motto, Salus Generls Humani. The Crow was particu∣larly consecrated to Concord, as Aelianus relates, for he tells us, that it was the custom among the ancient Romans, when they married to call upon the Crow; that is to say, the Con∣cord that should be between married People. Policianus in his Miscellaneous Works confirms this opinion, and tell us, that he has a Medal of the young Faustina, Marcus Aurelius's Daugh∣ter, on the reverse whereof was represented a Crow, the Symbol of Concord, with the word Concordia.
CONFARREATIO, the Ceremony of the Confarreation was observed in certain Mar∣riages, by eating together a Cake of Wheat. Tacitus tells us, It was the custom to Name three Persons of a Patrician Family, whose Fathers had observed in their Marriages the ceremony of the Confarreation, but that cannot be practiced now, because this Cere∣mony was neglected, or is too hard to be pract∣ised, or rather out of the little care they took of things belonging to Religion, or in fine, because Priests and their Wives had a right to be emancipated from the Paternal Au∣thority, in consequence of that Dignity. CONGIARIUM, a certain Sum of Money, which the Roman Emperors distributed from time to time among the People, and this Liberality was called among the Latins Congiari∣um; but the largesses that the Emperors bestow∣ed among the Soldiers were called Donativum. Tacitus speaking of young Caesar tells us, that he gave the Congiarium to the People, and the Do∣nativum to the Soldiers, Congiarium populo, Dona∣tivum Militibus dedit. During his Reign he be∣stowed often this Liberality upon the People, and gave them thirty little Sesterces to each of them, sometimes 40, and sometimes 150, as 'tis recorded by Suetonius. Children were not excluded of this Liberality in the Reign of Au∣gustus, though before that time, Children that were not above twelve Years old, had no share in it. CONGIUS, a kind of Measure contain∣ing six Sextaries, the Sextary two Hemines, and the Hemine nine Ounces, and was about our Gallon. CONISTERIUM, in Greek sig∣nifies Dust. There was some dust kept in this place for the Wrestlers, who were used to spread some upon one another, that they might take a better hold upon the anointed Bodies of their fellow-wrestlers. CONSECRATIO, a Consecration of the Roman Emperors by the Senate and the Peo∣ple after the Emperor was dead. These are the Ceremonies observed at this Consecration or Deification, as they are related by Herodianus. The Emperour being dead, the whole City sad and mornful was complaining of her loss. They set a waxen Statue of the Emperor upon a Bed of State, at the entry of the Imperial Palace; The Senators were at the left hand dress'd in Mourning Cloaths, and on the Right stood the Roman Ladies dress'd in white Cloaths, keeping all a sad and mournful silence for seven Day together. During that time, the Physici∣ans came from time to time to feel the Pulse of the Patient, saying that his Illness was worse and worse. The seventh day being expired, they published his Death, and all things being prepared for his Obsequies, the chief among the Knights and Senators carried the Bed up∣on their shoulders along the Holy Street, as far as the Old Market-place, (where Magistrates us'd to resign their Offices) attended with mournful Songs, and the noise of Instruments. Afterwards they carried him out of the Town into the Field of Mars, where was a Funeral Pile, dress'd and prepared with sweet Perfumes. The outside of the Funeral Pile was adorn'd with Joiners Work, and rich Stuffs embroider∣ed with Gold, with Ivory Statues and several Pictures. This sumptuous Monument was di∣vided in three Stories, and the Corps was laid in the middle one; then they began the Horse-Race, and the Fights of the Gladiators in Honour of the Dead. And after the Games were over, the Successor to the Empire, hold∣ing in his Hand a burning Torch, set the Fu∣neral Pile on fire, and immediately after an Eagle was seen flying up from the top of it, in the middle of the Fire and Smoak; This Eagle carried away the Soul of the Dead into the company of the Immortal Gods (as they thought) and then presently they worshipped him, erect∣ed Altars to his Honour, and ordained Priests and Sacrifices for him at Rome, and the other Cities of the Empire. Seneca makes a pleasant Jest upon the Apotheosis or Deification of Clau∣dius, which deserves to be the Readers curiosity. CONSECRATIO PONTIFI∣CUM, The consecration of the Roman Pontiffs. Prudentius relates in what manner the highest Priest was consecrated among the Pagans. They let him down into a hole, dressed in his Priestly habit, and covered the hole with a plank bored through in many places; then the Victimarius, or the Butcher-priest, and the o∣ther Ministers attending the Sacrifices, brought upon the plank a Bull adorned with Gar∣lands of Flowers, and having thrust the Knife into his Throat, his blood was shed, poured upon the plank, and dropt down through the holes of it upon the Pontiff, who did rub his Eyes, Nose, Ears, and his Tongue itself with it. After this ceremony, they took him out of the hole allover bloody, and saluted him with these words, Salve Pontifex Maxim; and having changed his cloaths, conducted him to his House, where was a great Feast ready for them, the description whereof we have from Macrob. Summus Sacerdos nempe sub terram scrobe Actâ in profundum consecrandus mergitur, Mirè insulatus festa vittis tempora Nectens, coronâ tum repexus aureâ Cintu Gabinio Sericâ fultus toga: Taulis supernè strata texunt pulpita, Rimosa rari pgmatis compagibus, Scint subine vel terebrant aream, Crebroque lignum perforant acum,
Pateat minutis ut frequens hiatibut: Huc taurus ingens fronte torvâ & bispidi Sertis revinctus aut per armos floreis, Aut impeditus cornibus, deducitur: Hic ut statuta est immolanda bellua, Pictus sacrato dividunt venabulo, Eructat amplum vulnus undam sanguinis Ferventis, inque texta pontis subditi Fundit vaporum flumen & latè aestuat. Tam per frequentes mille rimarum vias Illapsus imber tabidum rorem pluit, Defossius intùs quem sacerdos excipit Guttas ad omnes, sturpe subjectans caput, Et veste & omni putrefactus corpore: Qui nos supinat, obvias offert genas, Supponit aures, labra, nares objicit, Oculos & ipsos proluit liquoribus, Nec jam palato parcit, & linguam rigat; Postquam cadaver sanguine egesto rigens Compage ab illa Flamines retraxerint, Procedit inde Pontifex visu horridus, Ostentat udum verticem, barbam gravem, Omnes salutant atque adorant emiùs. CONSENTES DIJ. They were Gods which the Heathens thought Members of the Councils of the Gods, and principally of Jupi∣ter, St August lib. 4. de civit. Dei. cap. 23. CONSTANTINUS, sirnamed MAG∣NUS. Constantine the Great, Son to Constanti∣us and Helena. He defeated Maxentius the Ty∣rant with the standard of the cross, the sign whereof appeared to him in the air, with these words written upon it, , in hoc vince. He was instructed in the Christian Re∣ligion, and baptized by Silvester Bishop of Rome. He gave liberty to the Christians, built many Churches, and endowed them very rich∣ly. He gave to Pope Silvester and his Suc∣cessors the City of Rome to be their own, with all the Imperial Badges, after he had transfer∣red the Seat of the Empire to Constantinople, called the New Rome He died in the sixty sixth year of his Age, and the 31st of his Reign. CONSUALIA. Feasts instituted by Romulus, according to Livy, when he stole the Sabine Virgins; for he had found an Altar under ground, says Plutarch, dedicated to God Consus, or the God of Counsel; and this Altar was always kept covered till the Feast of Con∣sualia, when they had Horse-races in Neptune's Honour. CONSUL, a Soveraign Roman Magi∣strate, that was created upon this occasion. Lucretia, Collatinus his wife, having been ravish∣ed in a country house by the son of Tarquinius Superbus in the absence of her husband, came to Rome, and cast herself at the feet of Spurius Lucretius her father, and entreated him to call his friends, before whom she plainly related how she had been abused by the son of Tarqui∣nius: and withal told them, 'Tis for you to revenge your honour, for mine shall be wash'd preseutly with my own blood, which I will shed pure to the Gods. After she had spoken these words, she thrust a Dagger into her breast, and expired in the presence of the whole assembly. This tragick death exaspera∣ted the people, and encouraged them to at∣tempt the recovery of their liberty, and to shake off the Royal Authority. Wherefore they esta∣blish'd a kind of Government mixt of Aristo∣cracy and Democracy: the people chose every year two Magistrates, whom they call'd Con∣suls, because they took care of their Country, and gave counsel to their Country-men. They enter'd upon this publick office the thirteenth day of December. Their garments were enrich'd with Purple, like those of the Kings: and were attended like them with Lictors or Serje∣ants, who carried bundles of Rods or Axes; they owned no Superiours but the Gods and the Laws; but when the time of their Magi∣stracy was expired, they were liable to be im∣peached before the people, and to give an ac∣count of their administration. The Senate was the Councel of Consuls, and judg'd of all sorts of affairs, but without prejudice to the right of appealing to the people. The first Authors of the Roman Liberty, viz. Lucius Junius Brutus, and Lucius Tarquinius Collati∣nus, were created Consuls in the year of the creation of the world 3545, Julian Period 4205, before the birth of our Saviour 509, and from the foundation of Rome 244. Tarquinius Colla∣tinus was put out of his Office before the year of his Consulship was expired, Brutus forc'd him to leave it off, because he was of the Tarquinian Family, and Publius Valerius was chosen in his room to fulfil his time. The Consuls were chosen every year in the Field of Mars, by the Roman people assembled by hundreds. In the first times of the Com∣monwealth, no man could pretend to this dig∣nity, but such as were of the Patrician Family, viz. Noblemen; but afterwards the people obtained that one of the Consuls should be ta∣ken out from among them, and Sextius was the first Consul chosen out of the people, notwith∣standing the opposition of the Nobility, as it is related by Livy. Comitia Consulum adversâ no∣bilitate habita, quibus L. Sextius de plebe primus Consul factus est, in the year 388. Plinius Junii tells us, that Licmins Stolo who had been Tribune with Sextius, was the first Consul taken out of the people; but all other Authors are of a contra∣ry opinion. This Magistrate wore a Gown edged with purple; he had the priviledge of sitting upon the Sella Curulis, or a chair of State made of Ivory, carrying in his hand a Royal Staff of Ivory, called Scipio Eberneus, with an Eagle at
the top of it, as a Badge of his dignity and power. Twelve Mace-bearers went before him for a months time, (for the Consuls had agreed among themselves, that the Twelve Mace-bearers should go only before one of them, lest they should fright the people) which time being expired, there should be then but a Sergeant walking before him, and the Mace-bearers should follow him, car∣rying neither bundles of Rods nor Axes, as Suetonius relates, Antiquum retulit morem, ut quo mense fasces non haberent, Accensus ante cum iret, lictores pone sequerentur. Which was only practi∣ced when the Consuls were both at Rome: for in the Provinces each of them kept the badges of his Power. A Consul was commonly chosen, at Forty three Years of Age, which was called Tompus legitimum; but this was not always observed, for Valerius Corvinus was but three and twenty Years old when he was chosen; Scipio Afri∣canus was chosen at four and twenty, as also Marius, Pompey and Augustus, all before they were forty three Years old. Besides, it was requisite he should have exer∣cised other Offices, as that of Quaestor, Aedilis, and Pretor, which was no better observed than the first required condition, for Pompey had ne∣ver had been a Quaestor nor Pretor, when he ob∣tained the Consulship. Their Authority and Power was of a very great extent, so long as the Commonwealth subsided; as it appears by these words of the Law of the twelve Tables, REGIO IMPERIO DUO SUNTO: IIQUE PRAEEUNDO, JUDIC AN∣DO, CONSULENDO, PRAETORES, JUDICES, CONSULES APPELLANTOR: MILITIAE SUM∣MUM JUS HABENTO: NIMINI PARENTO. This gives them a Royal Power, as Tully calls it in the third Book of the Laws; viz. a supream Authority above all the other Magistrates; fa∣stigium dignitatum, says Livy, and the same Au∣thor calls also their Power Immoderata & Infini∣ta potestas, an infinite and unlimited Power. But this authority was much lessened under the Emperors, who took upon themselves the whole Soveraign Power, leaving only to the Consuls the badges of their dignity, and the power of calling the Senate, and administring justice to private men. In the last times of the Commonwealth, and under the Emperors, they entered upon their Magistracy the first day of January, be∣ginning with it the year, which was called af∣ter their name. The Senate in a Body, and the people, came very early to their Houses to wa them, then accompanied them to the Capitol. Spartianus calls that ceremony Offici∣um novorum Consulum, & Auspiciis interesse, be∣cause being arrived at the Capitol, they took the Augure, and each of them sacrificed an Ox to Jupiter, Consulibus, quo die Magistratus iniere, immolantibus singulis Jovi bovem, ut solet. The Sacrifice being over, they came down to the Senate with the same attendance, where, in the time of the Emperors, they gave thanks to the Emperor, and took the Oath of Allegi∣ance; and few days after thanked the people from the place appointed for publick Speeches. This ceremony ended with a largess of Money or Provisions, which they bestowed upon the people, and sent some presents to their Friends, which were called Nunera Consularia, and Sportulas Consulares, says Cassiodorus. Afterwards the Emperors Zeno and Leo, forbad these li∣beralities, and instead of it, ordered they should pay a certain summ for the repairing of the Aqueducts. They used also to entertain the people with Shews, Fights of Gladiators, Wild Beasts, and other Spectacles, of which the Ro∣mans were fond almost to folly. After they had drawn Lots about the Pro∣vinces where they should govern, or that the Senate and the people had appointed them without drawing Lots, (which was sometimes practiced) they went to the Capitol to make their vows and prayers, nuncupabat vota, for the prosperity of the Armies of the Common-wealth, then went out by the Gate through which they were to repair to their respective Provinces, having put on their Armour, and attended by their Mace-bearers, and other Officers likewise with their Armoury on. At their going away, the Commonwealth fur∣nished them with all things necessary for their Journey, Houshold-goods, Furnitures, Cooks, &c. Augustus paid them a Summ of Money, to furnish themselves with all these things. They were not allowed to leave their Province, nor the command of the Armies, without an express order from the Senate, neither be∣fore their Successors were arrived there. At their return they made a Speech to the peo∣ple, which ended by a protestation that they had done nothing, neither against the Laws nor the good of the Commonwealth in all the time of their administration. Itaque abiturus Consulatu, jurasti te nibil contra leges fecisse, says the younger Pliny to Emperor Trajan. CONSULATUS, The Consulship, the office or dignity of a Consul. During the time of the Commonwealth, the Consulship was annual, except in case of death or some misdemeanour of the Consul; for Quintius Cincinnatus being Dictator, forced Lucius Mi∣tius then Consul, to quit his office, becausebe did not prevent the Enemies from besieging him in his Camp. He who succeeded the deposed Consul, con∣tinued no longer in it, than the time his Pre∣decessor was to enjoy it; and sometimes there was none chosen to fill up his place; for when
Cinna was killed, Carbo his Colleague served out his time; as also Sextus Caesar in the room of Rutilius his Colleague, killed in the War of the Confederates. Under the Reign of the Emperors the time of the Consulship was not fixed, it lasted often but two or three months, and sometimes lon∣ger. Dion tells us, that Julius Caesar made this alteration in the year DCCVIII. of the foun∣dation of Rome: for having quitted his Con∣sulship before his year was out, to finish what remained of it, he created Q. Fabius and C. Trebonius: and the first of them being dead the last day of his Consulship, he put in his room Caninius, for the remainder of that day: and this gave occasion to Tully, to say of him in a jo∣king way, that he had shown so great a vigi∣lancy in his Consulship, that he never slept all the while he was Consul. Augustus followed the example of his Prede∣cessor, that he might gratify many people, as Suetonius says in his life; for of his six Con∣sulships, some lasted nine months, some six, some others four or three months. Tiberius and Claudius shortened yet this time, and the Emperor Commodus made five and twenty Con∣suls in one year. Yet, to keep something of the antient cu∣stom, they chose always a Consul at the Ca∣lends of January, and the year was called after his name. He was called Consul ordinarius, the others were called Suffecti. This explains us what Suetonius says in the life of Domitianus, In sex Consulattbus unum ordinarium tantum gessit; and what Symmachus says, Delatus est a clemen∣tissimis Principibus ordinarius consulatus, he was made Consul the first of January. Constantine the Great restored the antient custom, and ordered that the Consulship should be for a whole year, making yet some titular Consuls, as Julius Caesar had done, ac∣cording to Suetonius. Cassiodorus relates a formular made use of by the Emperors in conferring the dignity of a Consul, which may be seen lib. 6. Ep. 21. A Catalogue of the Roman Consuls. And an Abridgment of all the me∣morable deeds, that were transacted during their respective Consulate. THe Romans having driven away Terqui∣nius Superbus, resolved never to suffer any more the Government of Kings, and established a kind of Government mixt of Aristocracy and Democracy; the people chose every year two Soveraign Magistrates, called Consuls, because they bestowed their Counsels and care upon their Country. Their authority was equal, and had no other limits, but the time. They were cloathed with pur∣ple like Kings, and had Serjeants as well as they, or Mace-bearers, carrying bundles of Rods with an Ax bound up in the midst of them, owning no Superiours but the Gods and the Laws. The Senate was the Council of the Consuls, and judged of all sorts of af∣fairs; but there was appeal from them to the people. They had also other Judges and in∣feriour Magistrates, of whom we shall speak in the sequel of this Book. This change hap∣pened in the year of the creation of the world 3545. of the foundation of Rome 244. and be∣fore the birth of our Saviour 509. The first Consuls were the Authors of the publick liberty, viz. LUCIUS JUNIUS BRUTUS, and LUCIUS TARQUINIUS COLLATINUS; This last was not only forced to quit his Consulship, but also to go out of Rome, be∣cause his name was the same with that of the banished Tarquinius, and PUBLIUS VALERIUS was chosen Consul in his room, to make an end of the year. Brutus having called the people together, and caused them to take an Oath, that they should never submit themselves to the Royal Authority; afterwards he increased the Se∣nate with three hundred new Senators, and was killed at the head of the Horse, fighting a∣gainst Aruns Tarquinius his Son. The Ladies mourned a whole year for him, because they lookt upon him as the Revenger of violated chastity in the person of Lucretia. Valerius chose for his colleague in the room of Brutus, either Titus Lucretius, as Livy says, or Spurius Lucretius Tricipitinus Father to Lucre∣tia. Anno Mundi 3547. Romae 246. M. HORATIUS PULVILLUS, P. VALERIUS. Horatius dedi∣cated the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, which Tarquinius had built: he signalized his cou∣rage at the Siege that Porsenna King of Tuscany had laid before Rome; who having seized up∣on Janiculum Castle attacked the Sublician Bridge which had a communication with the Town, and had almost got possession of it, but Hora∣tius alone made head against the Enemies at the entry of the Bridge, whilst his own men were cutting it down behind him, and then threw himself down into the Tiber, and got safe into the Town, having received no wounds in the very midst of the Darts his E∣nemies flung at him. A. M. 3548. R. 247. M. VALER VOLUSIUS, PUBLIUS POSTHUMIUS TUBERTUS. The Calendars of the Capitol record two Con∣suls after these; viz. Spur. Largius Flavus or Ru∣us,
and T. Herennius Aquilinus: and instead of Marcus, the Roman Calendars record T. Va∣lerius; Cassiodorus, P. Valerius. Plutarch agrees with Livy, and adds the Sirname of Tubertus to that of Posthumius, which Livy doth not men∣tion. These two Consuls got two great Victo∣ries over the Sabines, for which they obtain'd the Honour of publiek Triumph. A. M. 3550. R. 249. Publius Valerius, Pub∣licola, Titus Lucretius Plutarch records this Consulship as the fourth of Valerius, and Dionysius Halicarnasseus puts M. Horatius in the room of Iucretius. During this Consulship, Appius Clausus a Sabine, who was afterwards named Claudius, came to shelter himself at Rome, with those of his Party to the number of five thousand: He was received in the Senate, where he took a place as Senator, and the free∣dom of Citizens was bestowed upon the other Men that came along with him, with two A∣cres of Ground to each of them, upon the Banks of Anio. A. M. 3551. R. 250. MENENIUS AGRIP∣PA LANATUS, PUBLIUS POSTHUMIUS TUBERTUS. Valerius Publicola died in the beginning of the following Year, crowned with Glory and Blessings; the Roman Ladies mourned for him as they did for the death of Brutus. The Sabines made an Irruption in∣to the Roman Territories, Posthumius the Consul made head against them; but they forc'd him to retire to a disadvantageous place, where they besieg'd him; yet Agrippa's Colleague got him off, and vanquish'd the Sabines. The great Triumph was decreed to Agrippa, and the lesser called Ovatio to Posthamius. A. M. 3552. R. 251. VIRGINIUS OPI∣TER TRICOSTUS, SPUR. CASSIUS VI∣CELLINUS. These Consuls defeated the Arun∣tians, and cut off the Head of all their Ge∣nerals, after they had led them in Triumph. The Lands of the Aruntians were destributed to the People, to punish them for the plunder they had committed in the Roman Country. A. M. 3553. R. 252. POSTHUMIUS CA∣MINUS ARUNCUS, T. LAERTIUS. Cassio∣dorus reckons two Years less; but this supputa∣tion agrees with Eutropius. Upon the rumour that Manilius, Tarquiniu's Son-in-law, was mak∣ing a powerful League against the Romans to restore Tarquinius, the Senate re-united the au∣thority of the Consuls, in the person of one Magistrate whom they created, and called him Dictator. He had power of life and death over the Romans, and had four and twenty Li∣ctors walking before him. The first that was honour'd with this Office, was T. Largius. A. M. 3554. R. 253. SERVIUS SULPITI∣US, M. TULLUS or TULLIUS LONGUS. There was nothing considerable done this year, during which all things were quiet. A. M. 3555. R. 254. T. AEBUTIUS HEL∣LUA, C. or L. or P. VETURIUS GEMINUS. The Consuls besieged Fidenas, and proclaimed war against the Latins, who had sided with all the Enemies of Rome. A. M. 3556. R. 255. CLELIUS SICULUS, T. or LAERTIUS FLAVUS. The Latins ha∣ving made a Confederacy with the people cal∣led Volcae, the Romans made Aulus Posthumius Dictator, to resist them. The Armies did en∣counter near Lake Regillus, where there was a bloody and obstinate Fight, and it was reported that Castor and Pollux had fought for the Ro-mans under the shape of two young Horsemen, and that they had themselves brought to Rome the news of the Victory obtained by the Ro∣mans. The Senate ordered the honour of Tri∣umph to the Dictator. A. M. 3557. R. 256. AULUS SEMPRO∣NIUS ATTRATINUS, M. MINUTIUS AUGURINUS. They dedicated the Temple of Saturn, and instituted the Feasts called Sa∣turnalia for the 17th day of December. Tar∣quinius and Manilius engaged seventeen Com∣monalties of the Latins against Rome. A. M. 3558. R. 257. AULUS POSTHU∣MIUS ALBUS REGILLENSIS, T. VIRGI∣NIUS TRICOSTUS. A War was proclaimed against the Volcae. A. M. 3559. R. 258. APPIUS CLAUDI∣US SABICUS, M. or P. SERVILIUS PRIS∣NUS. This Year was very fortunate to the Commonwealth. The Latins, weakned by ma∣ny frequent losses, banished out of their Coun∣try Tarquinius Superbus, being then fourscore and ten years old, as being the author of their Mis∣fortunes. This unfortunate Prince retired to Cumae at the Court of Aristodemus, where he died few days after. All the Roman people were reduced to thirty one Tribes. The Sa∣bines renewed the War. The Senate created a Dictator to maintain it, viz. Aulus Posthumius. A Company of Merchants was settled at Rome, and the Temple of Mercurius their Patron was dedicated. The Honour of this Dedication was contested by the two Consuls, the Senate to bring them to an Agreement, appointed the People to decide their Quarrel, who be∣stowed that honour upon M. Lectorius a private ancient Centurion. A. M. 3560. R. 259. AUL. or C. VIRGINI∣US COELIMONTANUS, T. VETUSIUS or VETURIUS GEMINUS. The Sedition rais'd by the indebted persons was renew'd, and be∣came so strong, that a Dictator was created to quell it. Upon the rumor of this domestick disorder, the Sabini, the Aequi, and the Volcae confederated themselves, and took the Field; and as the Consuls would raise Forces to march against their Enemies, the People refus'd to list themselves, and retir'd in a body upon the
Mounts Esquilinus and Aventinus. The Soldiers likewise refus'd to take the Oath: Upon this the Senate was forc'd to create M. Valerius Dicta∣tor, Publicola his Brother, who pacified all things, being extreamly lov'd by the People and Souldiers; he rais'd ten compleat Legions, which was the greatest Army that ever Rome had on foot, and defeated the Volcae. A. M. 3561. R. 260. SPURIUS CASSIUS VICELLINUS, POSTHUMIUS CAMINUS ARUNCUS. The people in a mutiny against the Senate, went out of Rome, and incamped in a tumultuous manner upon the sacred Mountain, four Miles from Rome: Menenius Agrippa, a very eloquent man, went to the sa∣cred Mountain, where he represented to the people, that the whole Commonwealth was but one Body, whereof the Senate was the Head and the Stomach, which alone seem'd to swallow down all that the strength and the skill of the other parts could get, but that it was only in order to destribute the same to all the rest of the Body, to nourish and strengthen it; but if the Members should cease to afford the usual aliments, they would shortly be de∣prived themselves of strength, heat, and life it self. The People having hearkened to this just comparison, yielded to the proposals of agree∣ment that were made to him, whereof the chiefest was, that popular Magistrates should be created, who were called Tribunes of the Peo∣ple, and that they should be sacred and invio∣lable. They had power to oppose themselves to the deliberation of the Senate, and the orders of the Consuls. Nothing could be concluded without their consent, which they notified by putting a T below the order; and on the con∣trary, when they opposed themselves to it, they did write this word l'eto. Their power is more fully described under the word Tri∣bunus A. M. 3562. R. 261. T. GEGANIUS MA∣CERINUS, P. MINUCIUS AUGURINUS. Rome was afflicted with great Dearth, which grew still more raging by the injustice of Ari∣stodemus, Tyrant of Cumae, who seiz'd upon the Corn that the Roman Magistrates had bought in Sicily. A. M. 3563. R. 262. M. MINUTIUS AU∣GURINUS, AULUS SEMPRONIUS AT∣TRATINUS. The People grumbled at the unequal distribution of the Corn that was brought to Rome. C. Marsius surnamed Coriola∣nus from the taking of Corioli, endeavouring to suppress the murmuring and complaining of the people, was banished out of Rome. Coriola∣nus retired into the Country of the Volcae, and made war against his own Country, which he brought very near to its ruine. He would neither be perswaded by the Ambassadours that were sent to him, nor hearken to the ad∣vice of the Pontiffs; but only was prevailed with by the Prayers of Veturia his Mother, and Volumnia his Wife. Wherefore he brought the Volcae again into their Country; but a while after they put him to death, because he had betray'd them, in quitting their Conquests, and giving over the sacking of Rome. A. M. 3564. R. 263. SPUR. NAUTIUS RUTILIUS, SEXTUS FURIUS MEDUL∣LINUS. The Calendars of the Capitol reckon two Consuls before these, and mention Q. P. Sulpitius Camerinus, Spurius Largius or Laertius Fla∣vus: C. Julius Julus, and P. Pinarius Mamertinus, for the years of the World 3565 and 3566. A. M. 3567. R. 266. T. SICCINIUS ABI∣NUS, C. AQUILIUS TUSCUS. The first Consul made war against the Volcae, but got no great advantage over them, says Livy, tho' Di∣onysius Halicarnasseus affirms that he throughly de∣feated them; the Roman Cavalry having fought on foot at the head of the Infantry. Siccinius obtained the great Triumph, and Aquilius the Ovation for the advantages obtained over the Heruici. A. M. 3568. R. 267. SPURIUS CASSIUS VICELLINUS, PROCULUS VIRGINIUS TRICOSTUS. Cassius propos'd the Agrarion-Law, which was the cause of a World of Divi∣sions at Rome. This Law ordered that all the Lands gain'd from the Enemies, should be divided among the People; but it was reject∣ed. The Roman Civil Law mentions two Agra∣rian Laws, one made by Julius Caesar, the other by the Emperor Nerva; but they concern the limits of the Lands, and have no regard to the Divisions thereof. A. M. 3569. R. 268. SERGIUS CORNE∣LIUS MALLUGINENSIS or COSSUS, Q. FABIUS VIBULLANUS. The Quaestors Fa∣bius Caeso and Lucius Valerius sued Cassius, and im∣peach'd him for high Treason; which was pro∣ved against him, and he was thrown headlong from the Tarpeian Rock at the end of his Con∣sulship: Some were for punishing his Crime even in the persons of his Children, but they could not carry it; and this moderation passed afterwards for a Law at Rome, that the Crimes of the Fathers should not be punish'd in the persons of their Children, till the time of the Wars of Sylla and Marius. The Estate of Cassius was forfeited, and applied to the setting up a a Statue in the Temple of Ceres. A. M. 3570. R. 269. CAESO FABIUS, L. AEMILLIUS MAMERCUS. Cassiodorus de∣notes by a K. what Livy expresses by a C. Caeso. The Temple of Castor and Pollux was dedicated, which had been devoted after the Battle on the Lake of Regillus. Livy tells us, that some Au∣thors before his time, affirmed that this Battle was fought in the tenth Consulship, tho' he re∣lated it himself in the ninth.
A. M. 3571. R. 270. M. FABIUS VIBULLA∣NUS S. VALERIUS POTITUS VOLUTIUS. The Vestal Oppia was buried alive, being con∣victed of Incontinency. The War of the Vol∣cae, obliged the Consuls to raise Forces, but the Tribunes of the people opposed them: whereupon by an order of the Senate, the I∣vory chair of the Consuls were carried out of the Town, where they listed Souldiers, confiscating the Estates of the Citizens who refused to obey. The Tribunes alledged the Laws agreed upon on the Sacred Mountain, but it was to no purpose, for by the very same Laws their power had no further extent than the compass of the Walls of Rome, so that their Veto was of no effect. A. M. 3572. R. 271. Q. FABIUS VIBUL∣LANUS, C. JULIUS JULUS. The War a∣gainst the Volcae was carried on. The Veientes made incursions into the Campania of Rome. A. M. 3573 R. 272. K. FABIUS VIBUL∣LANUS, SPUR. FURIUS FUSCUS or FU∣SUS. This year Xerxes went into Greece, ac∣cording to what Dionysius Halicarnasseus relates, but Diorus Siculus reports, that it was under the Consulship of Spurius Cassius, and Proculus Virginius Tricostus, which was the 24th Consul∣ship; and according to his supputation the last year of the seventy third Olympiad. A. M. 3574. R. 273. M. FABIUS VIBUL∣LANUS, CNEUS MANLIUS CINCINNA∣TUS. The War of the Volcae, the Veientes, and the Aequi, became more dangerous by the conjunction of the Tuscans. The Consuls to op∣pose them joined both their Armies: they en∣gaged them, and got the victory, but with a considerable loss; wherefore the Consuls re∣fused the Triumph, that the Senate had or∣dered them, being too sensibly moved for the loss the Commonwealth had suffered, to be desirous of the glory of a Triumph. A. M. 3575. R. 274 K. FABIUS VIBUL∣LANUS, T. VIRGINIUS TRICOSTUS RU∣TILUS. This year the Fabian Family alone made War against the Veientes under the com∣mand of Caeso. A. M. 3576. R. 275. L. AEMILIUS MA∣MERCUS, C. or Q. SERVILIUS STRUCTUS AHALA. The Fabians continued the War a∣gainst the Veientes, while the Romans were en∣gaged with the Tuscans. A. M. 3577. R. 276. C. or M. HORATI∣US PULVILLUS, T. MENENIUS LANA∣TUS. The Veientes having drawn the Fabians into an Ambuscado, gave them such an overthrow, that of all that numerous Family only a child of fourteen years of age, Son to M. Fabius, remained alive. A. M. 3578. R. 277. AULUS VIRGINI∣US TRICOSTIUS, SPURIUS RUTILIUS SERVILLIUS STRUCTUS. The Veientes were driven out of the Janiculum, and by these means the people of Rome were eased of the want of Provisions, they had suffered by reason of their troublesome Neighbourhood. The Tribunes of the people renewed their instances to obtain the Agrarian Law. Menenius resisted them, but they impeached him of Misdemea∣nour in his Office, where upon he was fined twenty Crowns, but he was so sensibly con∣cerned at this affront put upon him, that he died a while after with grief. A. M. 3579. R. 278. L. or C. NAUTIUS RUTILIUS, P. VALERIUS PUBLICOLA. The Tribunes, encouraged by the misfortune of Menenius, attempted to impeach Servilius at the end of his Consulship, but he cleared himself of their accusation. A. M. 3580. R. 279. L. FURIUS ME∣DULLINUS, C. or A. MANLIUS VOLSO. The Veientes bought a Truce of forty years, and parted upon that account with a great deal of Gold and Corn. Manlius received the honor of the Ovation. An account of the people was taken, and Rome had a hundred and three thou∣sand heads of Families A. M. 3581. R. 280. L. AEMILIUS MA∣MERCUS, OPITER, VIRGINIUS, or VO∣PISCUS, or C. JULIUS JULUS. The Tri∣bunes renewed their accusations against the Pa∣tricians, and Genutius one of them impeached Manlius and Furius, and they had been con∣demned, had not the Senate ordered Genutius to be stabb'd in the night in his own house. The people highly resented this assas∣sination, and rose in an open sedition, and made Volero Tribune in the room of Genutius. A. M. 3582. R. 281. L. PINARIUS MA∣MERTINUS, P. FURIUS FUSUS, or ME∣DULLINUS. The new Tribune Volero endeavoured to procure a Law to be made, for the election of the Tribunes of the people by the votes of the Tribes, but the Senate opposed it, with one of the Tribunes, whom they had got on their side so that the Law did not pass. A. M. 3583. R. 282. APPIUS CLAUDIUS SABINUS, T. QUINTIUS CAPITOLINUS. The Tribune Victorius according to Livy, or Lectorius, according to Dionysius Halycarnasseus, accused Claudius as a most violent man against the Plebeians: and this accusation obliged the Senate to consent, that the election of the Tribunes should be made in the assembly of the people by Tribes; but Piso got three Tribunes to be added to the two former. A. M. 3584. R. 283. L. or T. VALERIUS POTITUS, T. AEMILIUS MAMERCUS. The Tribunes accused Appius Clauaius for despi∣sing the Roman people, and abetting the mur∣ther of the Tribun: Genutius. Claud. us appeared in the Assembly, where nothing was deter∣mined, and a while after he died of a sickness.
His Obsequies were performed in the usual manner, for persons of his rank; with a Fune∣ral Speech, in spight of the opposition of the Tribunes. A. M. 3585. R. 284. T. MINUTIUS PRIS∣CUS, AULUS VIRGINIUS COELIMON∣TANUS. The Sabini and the Volcae made an irruption into the Roman Territories, but were repulsed with loss. A. M. 3586. R. 285. T. or P. QUINTIUS CAPITOLINUS, Q. SERVILLUS PRISCUS. The Consuls chased the Sabini and the Volcae, and Quintius took Actium, the Senate came out to meet him, and ordered him the triumph. A. M. 3587. R. 286. T. AEMILIUS MA∣MERCUS, Q. FABIUS VIBULLANUS. The first obtained this Magistracy, being yet but four and twenty years of age, because of his rare merit. He gave to the people the Town of Actium with his Territory, and all his dependencies thereof. A. M. 3588. R. 287. Q. SERVILIUS PRIS∣CUS, SPUR. POSTHUMIUS ALBUS RE∣GILLENSIS. The Romans were in peace both in Country and in Town, because of an Epidemical Disease that raged amongst them. A. M. 3589. R. 288. Q. FABIUS VIBUL∣LANUS, T. QUINTIUS CAPITOLIN US. The City was purified, and the Citizens were numbred, who were found to be one hundred and twenty four thousand two hundred and fourteen heads of Families without the Or∣phans, and those that had no Children, who were not numbred. A. M. 3590. R. 289. AULUS POSTHU∣MIUS ALBUS, SPURIUS FURIUS ME∣DULLINUS FUSCUS. The people called Aequi fought Furius, routed his Army, wound∣ed him, and obliged him to retire upon a hill with the rest of his Army, where they besieg∣ed him. T. Quintius Capitolinus chosen Pro-consul, came to the assistance of the Consul, and brought him off, but there was a great slaughter on both sides. A. M. 3591. R. 290. L. AEBUTIUS HEL∣LUA, P. SERVILIUS PRISCUS. The plague raged at Rome, the two Consuls died thereof, with many other persons of note. A. M. 3592. R. 291, L. LUCRETIUS TRICIPITINUS, T. VETURIUS GEMINUS, or SPURIUS VETURIUS CRASSUS. The Tribune Tarentillus proposed the famous Law called by the name of the Author Tarentilla. This Law ordered the creation of five Magi∣strates, according to Livy, or ren according to Dionysius Hallicarnasseus, to moderate the au∣thority of the Consuls; but this Law was re∣jected, tho it was very acceptable to the peo∣ple. A. M. 3593. R. 292. P. or T. VOLUMNI∣US GALLUS SEXTUS, SERVIUS SUL∣PITIUS CAMERINUS AVENTINUS. Rome was frighted by several prodigies, a Cow spoke, it rained Flesh, which was seen du∣ring some days upon the ground without be∣ing corrupted. A. M. 3594. R. 293. APPIUS CLAUDI∣US SABINUS, L. VALERIUS PUBLICOLA. Four thousand five hundred slaves got into a Body, and took up Arms against the Romna people. The Consuls would raise Forces to oppose them, but the Tribunes kept the people from listing themselves, so that they were forced to have recourse to the Confederates. The Slaves chose for their General Appius Ar∣donius, a Sabine by Birth, and under his com∣mand, they seized upon the Capitol, which they stored with Arms and Provisions. Va∣lerius the Consul came thither to attack them, but was killed. The Senate sent in his room Lucius Quintius Cincinnatus, Father to Caeso, who disarmed the slaves, and made a cruel exam∣ple of them, by the horror of their punish∣ments. A. M. 3595. R. 294. C. FABIUS VIBUL∣LANUS, Q. L. CORNELIUS MALUGI∣NENSIS. They made an end of the tenth account of the people, which began the fore∣going year, and found a million three hun∣dred thirty two thousand four hundred and nineteen heads of Families. A. M. 3596. R. 295. L. MINUTIUS AU∣GURINUS, L. or C. NAUTIUS RUTILI∣US. The people called Aequi forced the Consul Minutius to quit the Field, and besieg∣ed him in his Camp. The Senate in this sad conjuncture, durst not call back the other Consul Nautius from the Frontiers of the Sa∣bines, wherefore they made Dictator L. Quin∣tius Cincimatus, whom they took from plough∣ing in a little Field, having lost the rest of his Estate by the injustice of the people. He chose for General of the Horse a brave man, oppressed like himself, called L. Tar∣quinius. These two illustrious poor men raised an Army in sixteen days, lead it against the Enemies, whom they defeated, and brought the vanquished under the Yoke; they triumphed, and deposed Minutius from his Consulship, and Q. Fabius, who had got so much glory during his former Consulship, was appointed in his place. A. M. 3597. R. 296. Q. or P. MINUTIUS AUGURINUS, M. or C. HORATIUS PUL∣VILLUS. Ten Tribunes of the people were created instead of five. Livy says, that this alteration was made two and thirty years after the creation of the first Tribunes; and Sa∣ballicus says six and thirty years. A. M. 3598. R. 297. L. or M. VALERIUS MAXIMUS, SPURIUS VIRGINIUS, COE∣LIMONTANUS.
A great dearth of Provi∣sions kept the Romans at rest. Dionysius Halicar∣nasseus mentions here a Sedition rais'd at Rome, occasioned by a violent Plebeian called Icellius, whom a Lictor had us'd too roughly. The Senate gave Mount Aventinus to any man that would build there, ('tis a Hill within the compass of Rome, containing about twelve Fur∣longs or fifteen hundred paces of Ground.) A. M. 3599. R. 298. T. ROMILIUS VA∣TICANUS, C. VETURIUS CICURINUS or CIMINUS. The Tribunes renewed the Law Tarentilla, but to no purpose. A. M. 3600. R. 299. SPURIUS TARPEI∣US CAPITOLINUS, AULUS ATERINUS FONTINALIS. Romilius who was Consul the foregoing year, was accused for having com∣manded to a dangerous post the Tribune Siccius, and was fined for the same. A Law was made, giving leave to every Magistrate to impeach the other Magistrates, who should be convicted of having done any thing, either against the Law or the Discipline. Three Deputies were sent into Greece, to fetch the Laws of Solon, and in∣struct themselves in the Customs of the Repub∣lick of Athens, and other most famous Com∣monwealths of Greece. These Deputies were Posthumius Albus, Aulus Manlius, P. or Servius Sul∣pitius. A. M. 3601. R. 300. P. CURIATIUS or HO∣RATIUS TERGEMINUS, SEXTUS QUIN∣TILIUS VARUS or QUINTIUS. The Plague and the Famine raged so much in the Town and in the Country, that the Consul Quintilius, three Tribunes, an Augure, and the Priest of Quirinus died of it. A. M. 3602. R. 301. L. or T. MENENIUS LANATUS, P. SEXTIUS CAPITOLINUS. The Deputies who were sent to Greece came back again and brought the Laws of Solon. A. M. 3603. R. 302. APPIUS CLAUDIUS CRASSINUS, T. GENUTIUS AUGURI∣NUS. Livy, Dionysius Halicarnasseus, Cassiodorus, and Sabellicus make no mention of these Con∣suls, they are only recorded in the Calendars of the Capitol. The People took a distaste of the Consulary Government; whereupon the Senate created ten Soveraign Magistrates called Decemviri to govern the Commonwealth, and to examine the Laws of Solon, which were cal∣led the Laws of the twelve Tables, because they were engraven upon twelve Tables of Brass. They were at first chosen out of the number of Patricians. Appius Claudius President of the Assembly, got himself to be one of the Decemviri. These new Magistrates exercised their Magistracy with all sorts of violence and ryranny, during three years together, says Cas∣siodorus, or during two years, according to Sa∣bellicus and Dionysius Halicarnasseus: Whereupon Valerlus and Horatius prevailed upon the People to agree, that first of all, the Decemviri should quit their Office, and the Ancient Consulary Government should be restor'd: which was perform'd, and the Mediators of the Peace, were made Consuls. A. M. 3606. R. 305. L. VALERIUS PO∣TITUS, M. HORATIUS BARBATUS. Ap∣pius and Oppius Decemviri killed themselves, to avoid the shame of their Condemnation; one for being the cause of the death of Virginia, and the other for having order'd a Veteran Sol∣dier to be whipt beyond all measure, and with∣out cause. The other Decemviri banish'd them∣selves. The Consul Horatius routed the Sabini. The Senate would deny him the honour of Triumph out of hatred, but the triumphed a∣gainst their will. A. M. 3607. R. 306. SP. or L. HERMINI∣US EXQUILINUS, T. VIRGINIUS COELI∣MONTANUS TRICOSTUS. There was no∣thing considerable done this year against the Enemies; only the Tribunes grew hot against the Patricians. A. M. 3608. R. 307. M. GEGANIUS MACERINUS, C. JULIUS JULUS. All things continued quiet within and without. A. M. 3609. R. 308. T. QUINTIUS CA∣PITOLINUS, AGRIPPA FURIUS FU∣SUS. The Volcae and the Aequi took opportuni∣ty from the civil Divisions of the Romans, to advance as far as the Esquilinian Gate, destroy∣ing all that they met in their way, but Consul Quintius drove them back to their own Frontiers. A. M. 3610. R. 309. M. GEGANIUS AUGU∣RINUS, P. CURIATIUS, or C. FURIUS FU∣SUS, or C. QUINTIUS, or CURTIUS PHILO. Canuleius Tribune, of the People propos'd, that it might be lawful for the Patricians to Marry into Plebeian Familes, and that the people might chuse the Consuls out of the body of the Senate and their own. The Senate was forc'd to pass this Law, but in ambiguous words; for it was order'd that Marriages should be free, and that the Plebeians should be admitted to the Military Tribunate, with the same Au∣thority as the Consuls had. Military Tribunes. With the Authority of Consuls. ANNO Mun 3611. R. 310. AULUS SEM∣PRONIUS ATTRATINUS, L. ATTILI∣US, T. CECILIUS. These three Tri∣bunes were Patricians, and kept their Office but three Months, because the Auspices at their Election were found defective, whereupon they made an Inter-rex to preside in the Assemblies, in which they created two Consuls for the re∣maining
part of the Year; viz. Papyrius Mugil∣lanensis, L. Sempronius Attratinus. A. M. 3612: R. 311. M. GEGANIUS MA∣CERINUS, T. QUINTIUS CAPITOLINUS. The first Censors were created this year, who were at first very little reputed, but afterwards became the first Magistrates of Rome. The Con∣sul Geganius assisted the Ardeates against the Volcae, whom he brought under their yoke, and Clavi∣lius General of the Volcae followed his triumphal Chariot. A. M. 3613. R. 312. M. FABIUS VIBUL∣LANUS, POSTHUMIUS OEBUTIUS HEL∣LUA CORNICEN. A Colony of Romans and Rutili was sent into Ardea, and the Lands that were conquer'd in the time of the Consulship of Quintius were restored to the Ardeates. A. M. 3614. R. 313. C. FURIUS PACIL∣LUS, L. PAPYRIUS CRASSUS. The Tri∣bune Petilius propos'd the Agrarian Law, but to no purpose. A. M. 3615. R. 314. PROCULUS GEGA∣NIUS MACERINUS, LUCIUS MENENI∣US LANATUS. Rome was afflicted with Fa∣mine, and a very dangerous Sedition was fo∣mented by Spurius Melius, an ambitious rich Man, who bribed the favour of the People, by di∣stributing Corn and Money amongst them. A. M. 3616. R. 315. TITUS QUINTIUS CAPITOLINUS, MENENIUS AGRIPPA LANATUS. The Famine grew more raging than the foregoing year, and gave an opportu∣nity to Melius to exercise his liberality, and ad∣vance his ambitious practices. Minutius Com∣missioner for the Provisions acquainted the Senate with it, who created L. Quintius Cincin∣natus Dictator: He called Melius to answer for the same, but being check'd by his Conscience, he fled away. Servilius pursued him, and kill'd him in the place of the Assembly. The Tri∣bunes exasperated so highly the people, under pretence of the death of Melius, that the Senate was forc'd to name Military Tribunes. MILITARY TRIBƲNES. A. M. 3617. R. 316. AEMILIUS MAMER∣CUS, TITUS QUINTIUS Son to CINCIN∣NATUS, L. JULIUS JULUS. The Town of Fidena rebelled, and delivered up-herself to the Volcae. The Senate sent some Deputies to Fidena, to know the reason of such a sudden alteration; but the Fidenates killed the Depu∣ties; whereupon Consuls were created. CONSƲLS. A. M. 3618. R. 317. M. GEGANIUS MA∣CERINUS, L. SERGIUS, who was afterwards called FIDENAS. The Consul Sergius won a Bat∣tle over the Fidenates, the Volcae and the Falisci on the Bank of the River Anio; but the Ro∣mans suffer'd so great a loss in this Engagement, that they created Aemilius Mamercus Dictator, who got the Victory over these three Nations, after Cossus a Military Tribune kill'd Volumnius King of the Volcae in single Combat. The Dictator triumph'd, and Cassus obtained the Ovation, or lesser Triumph, wherein he ap∣pear'd loaded with Spoils called Opima, the first that were seen in a Triumph since the time of Romulus. A. M. 3619. R. 318. M. PAPYRIUS or COR∣NELIUS MALUGINENSIS, L. PAPYRI∣US CRASSUS. The Plague raged at Rome, and the people was so frighted by several pro∣digies, that they did not enquire into the im∣peachment against Spurius Melius, nor the murther committed in his person by Servilius. A. M. 3620. R. 319. C. JULIUS JULUS, L. VIRGINIUS TRICOSTUS. The Plague was still violent, and gave an opportunity to the Fidenates and the Veientes to enter into the Roman Territories, and came as far as the Gate called Collina, but the Dictator Aulus Sirvilius Structus, or Priscus drove them away, and pur∣sued them to Fidena, which he besieged, and took it by force of Arms. A. M. 3621. R. 320. M. MANILIUS CA∣PITOLINUS, Q. SULPITIUS COSSUS, or CAIUS JULIUS JULUS, L. VIRGINIUS TRICOSTUS. The Vientes frighted by the taking of Fidena, sent Deputies to the twelve Commonalties of Tuscany, to make themselves sure of their assistance against the Romans, who chose Aemilius Mamercus Dictator for the second time. He ordered that the Censors should be but one year and a half in their Office; The Censors, out of a revenge for this Order, taxed Mamercus as soon as he had laid down the Office of Dictator, the people grumbled at it, and would not approve of what the Censors had done. TRIBƲNES. A. 3622. R. 321. M. FABIUS VIBUL∣LANUS, M POLLIUS, L. SERGIUS FIDENAS. The plague, and the fears of a Famine se∣cured the tranquility of the City. A. M. 3623. R. 322. L. PINARIUS MA∣MERCUS, L. FURIUS MEDULLINUS, SPUR. POSTHUMIUS ALBUS. The most considerable among the Plebeians perswaded the Tribunes to propose a Law, by which it should be forbidden to all men standing for offices to be dress'd in white Gowns. Cassiodo∣rus mentions nothing of what was transacted since the third Consulship of C. Julius and L.
Virginius, not so much as the name of any Magistrate till the following Consulship. CONSƲLS. A. M. 3624. R. 323. T. QUINTIUS POE∣NUS, CINCINNATUS, CNEUS JULIUS MENTO. The Volcae and the Veientes having joyned their Forces together, obliged the Romans to name for Dictator Posthumius Tubertus, who defeated the Enemies, took their Camp and spoils, which he carried in his triumph. The Consul Julius dedicated the Temple of Apollo. A. M. 3625. R. 324. L. PAPYRIUS CRAS∣SUS, L. JULIUS JULUS. The people called Aequi desired to enter into alliance with the Roman people, but they were denied. The Senate prevented the Tribunes of the peo∣ple in the design they had to demand the re∣lease of Fines, for they released them to get the affection of the people, without being asked for by the Tribunes. A. M. 3626. R. 325. L. SERGIUS FI∣DENAS, HOSTILIUS LUCRETIUS TRI∣CIPITINUS. There was nothing worth ob∣servation transacted this year. A. M. 3627. R. 326. AULUS SORNE∣LIUS COSSUS, T. QUINTINUS POENUS CINCINNATUS. An extream dry weather occasioned a sort of itch in Rome, of which few people were free, some new superstitions were taking ground among the people, but they were suppressed. A. M. 3628. R. 327. C. SERVILIUS HA∣LA STRUCTUS, L. PAPYRIUS MUGIL∣LANENSIS. The Senate sent some Heralds to Veii to ask of the Veientes satisfaction for the goods they had plundered in the Roman Territory; and upon their refusal, a War was proclaimed against them. MILITARY TRIBƲNES. A. M. 3629. R. 328. T. QUINTIUS POENUS CINCINNATUS, C. FURIUS, MARCUS POSTHUMUS, AULUS COR∣NELIUS COSSUS. The last of them staid in the City to manage the affairs, and his three colleagues went against the Veii, but they were vigorously repulsed. Upon this mis∣fortune Aemelius Mamercus was made Dictator, who went to rescue the Military Tribunes. The rumour of this success filled the Fidenates with hopes of recovering their liber∣ties, therefore they killed all the Romans in their Colony, and joyned themselves to the Veii. The Dictator fought them, routed, and pursued them so closely, that the Romans got promiscuously with them into Fidena; took it, and put the Inhabitants thereof to death. The Dictator made an end of this War in sixteen days. A. M. 3630. R. 329. AULUS SEMPRO∣NIUS ATTRATINUS, L. QUINTIUS CINCINNATUS, L. FURIUS MEDULLI∣NUS T. HORATIUS BARBUSUS. A Truce of twenty years was granted to the Veii. A. M. 3631. R. 330. C. CLAUDIUS CRASSUS, SPUR. NAUTIUS, SERGIUS, RUTILIUS FIDENAS, SERTUS JULIUS TULLUS or JULUS. There was magnifi∣cent games celebrated at Rome. CONSƲLS. A. M. 3632. R. 331. C. SEMPRONIUS ATTRATINUS, Q. FABIUS VIBULLA∣NUS. Sempronius was like to lose the Roman Army in the fight against the Volcae, had not the valour of Sextus Tarpeius a Brigadeer saved it, for having possessed himself of a rising ground, he gave opportunity to the Consul to get off with the Army. TRIBƲNES. A. M. 3633. R. 332. L. MANLIUS CA∣PITOLINUS, Q. ANTONIUS MEREN∣DA, L. PAPYRIUS MUGILLANENSIS. Hortensius Tribune of the people, charged Sempro∣nius with the ill success against the Volcae, but his colleague sopposed him. CONSƲLS. A. M. 3634. R. 333. Q. FABIUS VIBUI∣LANUS, T. QUINTIUS CAPITOLINUS. Fabius defeated the Aequi, and the Senate granted him the lesser triumph. The Tri∣bunes proposed to chuse Quaestors out of the commonalty of the people; but the Senate would not consent to it. The whole year was spent in insignificant contestations, so that the following year they made no Consuls, but only an Inter-rex, who was L. Papyrius Ma∣gillanus, who obtained from the people that Military Tribunes should be elected. MILITARY TRIBƲNES. A. M. 3636. R. 335. L. QUINTIUS CIN∣CINNATUS, SEXTUS FURIUS MEDUL∣LINUS, AULUS SEMPRONIUS ATTRA∣TINUS, M. MANLIUS. The Tribunes of the people renewed the Agrarian Law, but
Sempronius opposed it. The Vestal Posthumia was accused of incontinency, because she was too wanton and too nicely dress'd; but she cleared herself of that accusation. A. M. 3637. R. 336. AGRIPPA MENE∣NIUS LANATUS, P. LUCRETIUS TRI∣CIPITINUS, SPUR. NAUTIUS, C. SER∣VILIUS. The people was busied about sup∣pressing a conspiracy of many Slaves, who had resolved to set on fire several parts of the City, and then seize upon the Tarpeian Rock, while the Citizens should be busied about put∣ting out the fire. The two Slaves who had discovered the conspiracy were made free, and those who were found guilty were put to death by several torments. A. M. 3638. R. 337. L. SERGIUS FIDE∣NAS, M. PAPIRIUS MUGILLANENSIS, C. SERVILIUS PRISCUS. The Aequi shame∣fully defeated the Tribunes. The Senate made Q. Servilius Dictator, who marched pre∣sently against the enemies, and whilst they were proud of their Victory, he attack'd them so briskly, that after having routed them he took Lavicum, and afterwards enter'd triumph∣ing into Rome. A Colony of fifteen hundred Romans was sent to Lavicum. A. M. 3639. R. 338. AGRIPPA MENENI∣US LANATUS, L. SERVILIUS STRU∣CTUS, L. LUCRETIUS TRICIPITINUS, SPUR. VETURIUS COSSUS. Rome was ve∣ry quiet all this year. A. M. 3640. R. 339. AULUS SEMPRO∣NIUS ATTRATINUS, M. PAPYRIUS MUGILLANENSIS, SPUR. NAUTIUS RU∣TILIUS Q. FABIUS VIBULLANUS. The Tribunes renewed the Agrarian Law; but in or∣der to disappoint their design, the Senate found means to sow division among them. A. M. 3641. R. 340. C. or L. CORNELIUS COSSUS, P. VALERIUS POTITUS, Q. FA∣BIUS VIBULLANUS, M. POSTHUMIUS REGILLENSIS, QUINTIUS CINCINNA∣TUS. The people Aequi took the field, and seized upon the Town Vola, but a while after Posthumius took it again. The Tribunes pro∣pos'd to send a Colony to Vola to supply it with inhabitants, but Posthumius oppos'd it, with the whole Senate; and being retired into the Camp to avoid the fury of the people, he was ston'd to death by his own souldiers, who were angry, because he had sided with the Se∣nate in this affair. This disorder occasioned the creation of new Consuls. CONSƲLS. A. M. 3642. R. 341. AULUS CORNELIUS COSSUS, or P. POSTHUMIUS REGILLEN∣SIS, L. FURIUS MEDULLINUS. The en∣quiry after the accomplices of the murther committed on the person of Posthumius went on but slowly. The Tribunes complained of it, and the people grumbled thereat, but all was pacified. A. M. 3643. R. 342. Q. FABIUS AM∣BUSTUS, C. FURIUS PACILLUS. Livy doth not mention these two Consuls, but Cassi∣odorus speaks of them. A. M. 3644. R. 343. M. PAPYRIUS AT∣TRATINUS, or MUGILLANUS, C. NAU∣TIUS RUTILIUS. There was a very great want of Provisions, and a contagious Distem∣per in the City, that swept away a great ma∣ny people. A. M. 3645. R. 344. M. AEMILIUS MA∣MERCUS, C. VALERIUS. The Aequi plun∣dered the Country, and came to the very Gates of Rome. The Consul Valerius repulsed them, and got great spoils from them. The Ovation or lesser triumph was decreed for him. A. M. 3646. R. 345. C. or CN. CORNE∣LIUS COSSUS, L. FURIUS MEDULLI∣NUS. The Volsci besieged Carvertana. The Tribunes would not allow the people to take up arms, but upon condition that they would choose Military Tribunes instead of Consuls. The Senate consented to it, upon condition that none of the Tribunes then in Office should be elected. MILITARY TRIBƲNES. A. M. 3647. R. 346. C. JULIUS JULUS, C. or P. CORNELIUS COSSUS, C. SERVI∣LIUS AHALA. The Volsci and the Aequi took the Field with a dreadful Army, against the Romans, who immediately created P. Cor∣nelius Dictator, who defeated the Ene∣mies. A. M. 3648. R. 347. L. FURIUS MEDUL∣LINUS, C. VALERIUS POTITUS, CN. FABIUS VIBULLANUS, C. SERVILIUS AHALA. The Vosci took the Fort Verugo, the Tribunes armed tumultuosly, and routed all the Enemies they met in the Field, but were not able to re-take the Fort. A. M. 3649. R. 348. P. CORNELIUS COSSUS, CN. CORNELIUS, COSSUS, FABIUS AMBUSTUS, L. VALERIUS PO∣TITUS. Fabius besieged and took Auxur, now called Torracina. The Senate ordered, that for the time to come the Soldiers should re∣ceive their pay out of the publick Trea∣sury. A. M. 3650. R. 349. T. QUINTIUS CA∣PITOLINUS, AULUS MANLIUS, L. FU∣RIUS MEDULLINUS, C. JULIUS JULUS, M. AEMILIUS MAMERCUS. The War
was continued against the Volsci, but with lit∣tle success. Some Authors rank in this place the Consulships of Aulus Manlius Volso, and L. Furius Medullinus, but Livy mentions nothing of it. A. M. 3652. R. 351. C. VALERIUS PO∣TITUS, M. SERGIUS FIDENAS, P. COR∣NELIUS MAGULLINENSIS CN. COR∣NELIUS COSSUS, Q. FABIUS AMBU∣STUS, SPUR. NAUTIUS RUTILIUS. The Town of Artana belonging to the Vosci was taken, and razed down to the ground. A. M. 3653. R. 352. M. AEMILIUS MAMER∣CUS, L. VALERIUS POTITUS, APPIUS CLAUDIUS CRASSUS, M. QUINTIUS VARUS M. JULIUS JULUS, M. POSTHU∣MIUS, M. FURIUS CAMILLUS, M. POST∣HUMIUS ALBINUS. The Town of the Veii was besieged, and block'd up during the whole winter, a practise unusual a∣mong the Romans, who made War only in summer time. The Tribunes and the peo∣ple grumbled at this new practice; but Claudi∣us Crassus represented to them in a Speech, that Enemies were to be attacked at all times and seasons. A. M. 3654. R. 353. C. SERVILIUS A∣HALA, Q. SERVILIUS, L. VIRGINIUS, Q. SULPITITUS, AULUS MANLIUS, M. SERGIUS. The Volsci seized upon Anxur and fortified it. The Falisci and Fidenates at∣tacked the Romans who besieged Veii. The attack begun with Sergius's quarters, who suffered his Forces to perish, rather than to ask a relief of Virginius his colleague, with whom he was then at variance. This misun∣standing was prejudicial to the State, and thereupon the Senate ordered, that some other Tribunes should be created, tho it was then but the fifteenth day of July, whereas they used to proceed to their Election upon the thirteenth day of December. Servilius Ahala was named for the remainder of that year A. M. 3655. R. 354. L. VALERIUS PO∣TITUS, M. FURIUS CAMILLUS, M. AE∣MILIUS MAMERCUS, CN. CORNELIUS COSSUS, C. FABIUS AMBUSTUS, L. JULIUS JULUS. The Tribunes were victo∣rious every where, and Valerius retook Anxur. A. M. 3656. R. 355. P. LICINIUS CAL∣VUS, L. MANLIUS, P. TITINIUS, P. ME∣LIUS, L. FURIUS MEDULLINUS, L. PO∣PILIUS VOLSO. Licinius was the first Mi∣litary Tribune chosen out of the Body of the people. The Winter proved so very cold, and there fell such an abundance of Snow, that the same is recorded in the history of that time, as an extraordinary thing. A. M. 3657. R. 356. M. VETURIUS L. TITINUS, P. MENENIUS PACILLUS, CN. GENUTIUS, L. ATTILIUS. The Tribunes of the people watched their opportunity so well, that they got all the Military Tribunes chosen from among the Plebeians, except only Veturius. The plague raged both in Town and Country. They had recourse to the books of the Sibyls, and celebrated the first Lectis ter∣ by an order of the Duum viri. This Reli∣gious ceremony is explained under the word Lectisternium. A. M. 3658. R. 357. L. VALERIUS PO∣TITUS, M. VALERIUS MAXIMUS, M. FURIUS CAMILLUS. The interest of the Senate was so great, that all the Military Tri∣bunes were taken out of the Patrician Order. The Waters of the Albanian Lake grew so ex∣traordinary high, and there being no visible cause of it, its overflowing was taken for a prodigy: An Augur of Veii intimated to the Se∣nate, that there was no other way for the Ro∣mans to take Veii, but the making a passage for this Water; thereupon the Senate sent to con∣sult the Oracle of Delphi. A. M. 3659. R. 558. L. JULIUS JULUS, L. FURIUS MEDULLINUS L. SERGIUS FIDENAS, AULUS POSTHUMIUS RE∣GELLENSIS, P. CORNELIUS MALUGI∣NENSIS, A. MANLIUS. The Tarquin plundered the Campania of Rome. Posthumi and Julus routed them, and retook the spoils. The Volsci besieged Anxur, and the Aequi Lavic A. M. 3660. R. 559. P. LICINIUS CAL∣VUS, P. TITINIUS, P. MENENIUS, CN. GENUTIUS, L. ATTILIUS. Titinius and Genutius fell into an Ambuscado laid by the Falisci, and suffered a great loss by it. The Sol∣diers incamped before Veii, chose M. Furius Ca∣millus Dictator, and his election was approved of by the Senate. Camillus marched immedi∣ately to relieve Titinius, whom the Enemies kept besieged, and after he had defeated them, he returned to the Siege of Veii; and when he saw that the Town could hold no longer, he sent to the Senate to know what he should do with so rich a place, and the Senate order∣ed that it should be plundered, not only by the Soldiers, but also by all the Inhabitants of Rome that would go thither. Camillus made a triumphant Entry after the taking of Veii, and for the immortal memory of his atchieve∣ments, he marked out the Temple of Juno the Queen on mount Aventinus. This J was Patroness of the Veientes, and after the ta∣king of Veii, the Romans having entered into her Temple, and asked the Goddess if she was willing to go to Rome, her Statue made a sign that she was consenting to it. Camillus dedi∣cated also the Temple of mother Matuta, whom Plutarch calls Lucothoea. A. M. 3661. R. 360. P. CORNELIUS COSSUS, P. CORNELIUS SCIPIO, M. VALERIUS MAXIMUS, C. FABIUS AM∣BUSTUS,
L. FURIUS MEDULLINUS Q. SERVILIUS. The popular Tribune Siccinius represented to the people that Rome was scitua∣ted in a barren and unwholsom territory, that the Country of the Veii was fruitful and plea∣sant, the air wholesom, and a convenient dwelling place for every thing, and advised them to go and settle themselves there; some other Tribunes proposed that the Roman people should divide themselves in two parts, that one part of them should remain at Rome, and the other should go to inhabit Veii, but Camil∣lus opposed both proposals as dishonourable to that City. A. M. 3662. R. 361. M. FURIUS CA∣MILLUS, M. FURIUS MEDULLINUS, C. AEMILIUS, L. VALERIUS PUBLICOLA. SP. POSTHUMIUS, P. CORNELIUS. Camillus went to plunder the Fields of the Falisci, and got a great booty in their Camp, which he refused to deliver to the Soldiers: This unusual practice they bore with, out of the great respect they had for him; but they abhorred his severe virtue, tho they admired it, says Livy. Camillus afterwards besieged Fa∣leria, and during this siege, a School-master, who had under his care the Children of the most considerable Families of the Inhabitants, brought all these innocent creatures to the Camp of the Romans. Camillus, struck with horror at this base perfidiousness, clapt the Ma∣ster in Irons, and sent him back again, the children whipping him along the way. This act of generosity mov'd so sensibly the Inhabi∣tants of Faleria, that they surrendered them∣selves to the Romans, and willingly submitted to so generous Enemies. The Senate sent a Golden Cup to the Temple of Delphi, to return thanks to Apollo for the good advice he had given him, to make a free passage for the wa∣ters of the Albanian Lake. This Present, with the Ambassador who carried it, was taken by the Pyrates of Lipari; but Timasitus their comman∣der, being informed that the Ambassador was a Roman, he let him go free with the Presents that were conscrated to Apollo. CONSƲLS. A. M. 3663. R. 362. L. LUCRETIUS FLAVUS, SERVIUS SULPITITUS CA∣MERINUS. The Tribunes of the people renewed the proposal made two years before of inhabiting Veii, but the Senate opposed it, and distributed the lands of the Veientes to the people. A. M. 3664. R. 363. L. VALERIUS POTITUS, M. MANLIUS, afterwards called CAPITOLINUS. A great Drought occasion∣ed a contagious distemper in Rome, of which a great many people died. MILITARY TRIBƲNES. A. M. 3665. R. 364. L. LUCRETIUS, SERVIUS SULPITIUS, M. AEMILIUS, L. FURIUS MEDULLINUS, AGRIPPA, FU∣RIUS C. AEMILIUS. M. Seditius a Plebeian, head a voice, (which he thought to come from Heaven) that gave warning to the Ro∣mans of the coming of the Gauls into Italy. The Senate neglected this advice, as a Dream; but the event justified that it was not a meer fancy, for the Gauls entered Italy and besieg∣ed Rome. A. M. 3666. R. 365. The three Sons of FABIUS AMBUSTUS, P. SULPITIUS LONGUS, Q. SERVILIUS, P. SERVI∣LIUS, MALUGINENSIS. The Tribunes went out to meet the Gauls, but they were vanquished; for out of too much con∣fidence in their valour, they passed the River Allin, and incamped at the Bank of it. There was a great slaughter, and those who escaped caused such a consternation in Rome, that all the inha∣bitants left the City, except some Officers and Soldiers, who got into the Capitol, and some Senators, whose great age had rendered them unfit for fighting, but whose great courage did not permit them to run away. These con∣tinued in their Houses, and dressed themselves in their Robes of State. The Gauls furiously pursued the Romans, and came to Rome the same day that the Battle was fought, says Livy, or three days after, according to Plutarch. They found the Town open and without Inhabitants: they got into it, set it on fire in several places, and killed those venerable old men, whom they had took at first for the Domestick Gods of the Romans. They besieged the Capitol, and as they were scaling the Wall in the night, the Geese that were fed in the Temple of Jano, made so great a noise, that M. Manlius being awakned by it, ran to the Rampart and repul∣sed the Gauls. The besieged being in want of every thing, were forced to capitulate, upon condition of paying to the Gauls a thousand pound weight of Gold, or two thousand according to Pliny; and whilst they were weighing the Gold in execution of the Treaty, Camillus (who tho absent had been named Di∣ctator) arrived and charged the besiegers, of whom they killed a great number. The Gauls being retired, the Tribunes proposed again to go to inhabit Veii, and leave the smoaking ru∣ins of Rome, but Camillus prevented it, restored the service of the Gods, and marked out a Temple in honour of that voice that they had despised, when it gave warning of the coming of the Gauls, and instituted sacrifices to it, under the name of the God Locutius. Pliny
affirms, that a while before the taking of Rome, they had numbred one hundred fifty two thousand five hundred and fourscore heads of Families. A. M. 3667. R. 366. AULUS VALERIUS PULLICOLA, L. VIRGINIUS, P. CORNE∣LIUS, AULUS MANLIUS, L. AEMILIUS, L. POSTHUMIUS. The Romans remembring that the eighteenth day of July, says Livy, or the fifteenth according to Sabellicus, they had been defeated at Cremera, where all the Fabians were kill'd; and that upon the same day, they were routed on the banks of the Allia by the Gauls, they did mark out that day in their Fasts or Calendar for a fatal and unlucky day, and forbad by a solemnal decree to undertake any thing for the future, upon that day. Camillus was made Dictator he reduced the Volsoi to the Romans obedience, after they had maintain∣ed their Liberty for seventy Years, says Eutro∣pius. He marched afterwards against the Aequi, whom he overcame, as he did also the Tuscans: His Triumph lasted three days together, for having subdued these three Nations, and: out of the Spoils that he had got, he repaid the Ro∣man Ladies the price of the Jewels they had be∣stowed to enrich the Offering, that the Roman People had made to Apollo. A. M. 3688. R. 367. T. Q. CINCINNA∣TUS, Q. SERVILIUS FIDENAS, C. JULI∣US JULUS, L. AQUILIUS CORVUS, L. LUCRETIUS TRICIPITINUS. The Fields of the Aequi, were plunder'd, and the Romans took from the Tusoans Cortuosa and Contenebra. A. M. 3669. R. 368. L. PAPYRIUS, CN. SERGIUS, L. AEMILIUS, L. LICINIUS, M. MENENIUS, L. VALERIUS PUBLICOLA, C. CORNELIUS. The Tribes called Pometina, Sabina, Stellatina, Arninsis were added to the former, and so made in all thirty five. A. M. 3670. R. 369. M. FURIUS CAMIL∣LUS, SEXTUS GORN. MALUGINENSIS, L. SERGIUS FIDENAS, L. QUINTIUS CINCINNATUS, L. HORATIUS PULVIL∣LUS, T. VALERIUS. Camillus and Valerius march'd against the Antiates, whom they de∣feated, and took Satricum. A. M. 3671. R. 370. AULUS MANLIUS, P. CORNELIUS, T. and L. QUINTIUS CA∣PITOLINUS, L. PAPYRIUS CURSOR, C. SERGIUS. M. Manlius attempted to make him∣self Sovereign of Rome, and in order to it, spread abroad several reports against the Senate, who thereupon made Aulus Cornelius Cossus Dicta∣tor, who oppos'd Manlius, and summon'd him to appear before the People, and discover the place where the Senate had hid the Gold, which he accused them to keep for themselves. Manlius shifted off this Question with ambigu∣ous Answers, which discovered his Calumny; wherefore the Dictator caus'd him to be arrest∣ed; but the people grumbling at it, and threatning the City with a Sedition, the Dicta∣tor thought fit to release Manlius. A. M. 3672. R. 371. SERGIUS CORNE∣LIUS MALUGINENSIS, P. VALERIUS POTITUS, L. POSTHUMIUS, M. FURIUS CAMILLUS, SERVIUS SULPITIUS, T. QUINTIUS CINCINNATUS, C. PAPYRI∣US CRASSUS. M. Manlius renewed his In∣treagues; and the Senate having won to their Interest the Tribunes of the People, Manlius was summon'd again; he appeared, and was convicted of aspiring to a tyrannical Govern∣ment, and condemned to be thrown headlong from that same Rock that he had defended a∣gainst the Gauls in the Siege of the Capitol; his House was razed, and they forbid his Family, to take for the future the fore-name of Ma. The Plague and the Famine did a world of da∣mage both in the City and the Country. A. M. 3673. R. 372. L. VALERIUS, AU∣LUS MANLIUS, L. LUCRETIUS, L. AEMI∣LIUS, M. TREBONIUS, SERVIUS SUL∣PITIUS. Colonies were sent this year to P∣ptine and Nepete. A. M. 3674. R. 373. SPUR, and L. PAPY∣RIUS, SERVIUS CORNELIUS MALUGI∣NENSIS, Q. SERVILIUS, C. SULPITIUS, L. AEMILIUS. Rome was a little mortified for the loss of Satricum, which was taken by storm by the Volsci, and all the Romans of that Colony were put to the Sword. A. M. 3675. R. 374. M. FURIUS CAMIL∣LUS, AULUS and L. POSTHUMII REGIL∣LENSES, L. FURIUS, L. LUCRETIUS, M. FABIUS AMBUSTUS. Camillus with Furi his Colleague made war against the Volsci, de∣feated them, and took their Camp by storm, and because he found some Tusculans among the Prisoners, this was a sufficient reason for proclaiming war against them; but the Tusculans opened their Gates, without offering to make any defence; thereupon Camillus grant∣ed them the freedom of Citizens of Rome. A. M. 3676. R. 375. LUCIUS and P. VA∣LERIJ, C. SERGIUS, LICINIUS MANCI∣NUS, L. PAPYRIUS, SERGIUS CORNE∣LIUS MALUGINENSIS. The Tribunes of the people rais'd a Sedition, and demanded the releafe of Usuries; but the Senate denying their request, they stopt the raising of Forces to oppose the Inhabitants of Praeneste, who made Incursions to the very Gate Collina. Quintias Cincinnatus was thereupon created Dictator, and march'd against the Enemy, who made a stand on the banks of the River Allia; but he van∣quish'd them, and took in twenty days nine of their Towns, and Praeneste their capital City was surrender'd by Capitulation. A. M. 3677. R. 376. C MANLIUS, P. MANLIUS, L. JULIUS PATRICIUS, C.
SEXTILLIUS, M. ALBINUS, L. ANTIS∣TIUS. The Volsci got this year some advan∣tage over the Tribunes. A. M. 3678. R. 377. SP. FURIUS, Q. SERVILIUS, LICINIUS MANCINUS, M. HORATIUS, P. CLAELIUS, L. GEGANIUS. The Tribunes of the people propos'd that all persons in debt should be relieved, and the Se∣nate consented that no man should be put in prison for debt, so long as the war against the Volsci should last. A Tax was laid upon the People, for the lining with Stonè the Ramparts of Rome. A. M. 3679. R. 378. L. AEMILIUS, B. VA∣LERIUS, C. VETURIUS, SERVIUS SUL∣PITIUS, L. and C. QUINTIJ CINCINNA∣TI. The Tribunes of the people made several Demands to the Senate; 1. That the Interest that had been paid by the Creditors, might be deducted from the Principal, and that the re∣maining part should be paid off at several times in three years. 2. That no Roman Citizen should be allowed to possess above five hundred Acres of Ground. 3. That one of the Consuls for the future should be a Plebeian. The Se∣nate oppos'd these Laws, and the Tribunes on their side would not consent to the creation of the Magistrates Curules; so that Rome was five years without Magistrates of the first Order. A. M. 3685. R. 384. L. FURIUS, AULUS MANLIUS, SERVIUS SULPITIUS, L. CORNELIUS, AULUS and CAIUS VALE∣RIJ. The two last raised the siege of Tusculum, which was besieg'd by the Vilitrians. A. M. 3686. R. 385. Q. SERVILIUS, C. VETURIUS, A. and M. CORNELIJ, Q. QUINTIUS, M. FABIUS. The Tribunes propos'd to create ten Magistrates to take care of the affairs of Religion, and the Books of the Sibylt, and that five of them should be taken out among the Patricians, and the other five among the Plebeians. This Magistracy was never be∣fore this time exercised, but by two men cal∣led Duum-viri, both Patricians. A. M. 3687. R. 386. T. QUINTIUS, SER∣VIUS CORNELIUS, SERVIUS SULPITI∣US, SP. SERVILIUS, L. PAPYRIUS, L. VE∣TURIUS. M. Furius Camillus was chosen Dicta∣tor for the fourth time, and to bring the peo∣ple to reasonable terms, abdicated his Office, which the Senate conferr'd upon P. Manlius, who to give some satisfaction to the People, consented to the creation of the Decem-viri or ten Men, appointed to manage the affairs of Religion. A. M. 3688. R. 387. AULUS and MAR∣CUS CORNELIJ, M. GEGANIUS, P. MAN∣LIUS, L. VETURIUS, P. VALERIUS. The Gauls came again into Italy, and M. Furus Ca∣millus was chosen again Dictator to oppose them. Livy says that the Gauls were beaten near the Lake Albanus; but Polybius, a Greek born, from whom Livy has taken many things, affirms that the Gauls were not beaten, but came and plundered the Country as far as Albanus, and retired with a great Booty. The Senate consented to the creation of a Consul out of the body of the people, and the people agreed that a Praetor, and two Aediles Curules should be chosen out of the body of the Patricians or the Nobles. CONSƲLS. A. M. 3689. R. 389. AEMILIUS MAMER∣CUS, L. SEXTIUS. A. M. 3690. R. 388. L. GENUTIUS A∣VENTINUS, Q. SERVILIUS AHALA. The Plague swept away a great many People in Rome, and amongst them M. Furius Camillus. A. M. 3691. R. 390. T. or C. SULPITIUS PETICUS, C. LICINIUS STOLO CALVUS. The Plague continued in Rome, but to stop it they solemniz'd the Lectisternium, and voted and celebrated for the first time the Senick Games, which were very inconsiderable at first, for they were neither compos'd in measur'd Verses, nor attended with any other Musick but only some Flutes. The Tyber overflowed its Banks, and the whole Country about it was laid under Water. A. M. 3692. R. 391. L. GENUTIUS, L. AEMILIUS MAMERCUS. Rome was still af∣flicted with Pestilence, and the Romans were forc'd to have recourse to the Ceremony of driving the Nail; which was only practised at first, to mark out the number of years, according to the ancient Law; Let the greatest Praetor drive the Nail the third day of September; since that time, this political ceremony was turn'd into superstition, and they perswaded the common people, that it had the virtue of turning away any publick Plagues. This Nail was of Brass, and they drove it into the back wall of the Temple of Minerva in the Capitol, at the right hand of the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, and upon this ceremony L. Manlius Imperiosus was made Dictator. A. M. 3693. R. 392. Q. SERVILIUS HA∣LA, L. GENUCIUS. A great Abyss open'd of it self, in the place where the Assemblies met, they endeavoured all they could to fill it up, but to no purpose; they had recourse to the South-sayers, who answer'd, that this Abyss should never be closed up, but by throwing into it that in which the Romans excell'd. Q. Curtius a young Roman Knight presented himself to the Senate, which was in a great perplexity about this Answer, who acquainted him, that the Gods asked for nothing else, but a Roman to remové that prodigy, upon which he freely
offer'd to lay down his Life to fill up that Pit; and then compleatly Arming himself, riding on Horseback, threw himself into the Gulph, in the presence of all the People, who imme∣diately flung Flowers and Offerings into it, and a while after this Hole shut up of it self, and that place was since called Lacus Curtianus, for an everlasting Monument of Curtius's bravery. A. M. 3694. R. 393. C. or C. SULPITIUS PETICUS, C. LICINIUS CALVUS STO∣LO. The Gauls made a third irruption into Italy; and upon the first advice of this Inva∣sion, they made Titus Quintius Poenus Dictator. He with all the Roman Forces incamped upon the Banks of the Anio, in the sight of the Gauls, the River being betwixt them both: Then a Gaul of a prodigious stature came up to chal∣lenge the Roman Forces to a single Combat; T. Manlius got leave of the Dictator to fight this Enemy, and succeeded so well, that he kill'd him at one blow. The Gaul fell down dead upon the ground, and Manlius kept for himself nothing of his Spoils, but a rich Collar for a Token of his Victory; from whence af∣terwards he took the Sirname of Torquatus, which afterwards distinguish'd his posterity from the other Manlii. A. M. 3695. R. 394. C. PETILIUS LIBO BALBUS, M. FABIUS AMBUSTUS. The Tiburtini were at war with Fabius, and called the Gauls to their assistance, who were then in Campania. The Armies engag'd near the Gate Collina, and the Fight was lasting and bloody; but at last the Romans got the Victory. Q. Ser∣vilius Hala was made Dictator. A. M. 3696. R. 395. M. POPILIUS LAE∣NAS, C. MANLIUS IMPERIOSUS. The Inhabitants of the City of Tyber, now Tivoli, sca∣led Rome in a very dark night: This unexpect∣ed alarm put the Town into a great Confusi∣on; but the Romans at last repuls'd their Ene∣mies with loss. A. M. 3697. R. 296. C. FABIUS AM∣BUSTUS, C. PLAUTIUS PROCULUS. War was proclaimed against the Tarquini∣ans, who had plundered the Roman Territo∣ries; Fabius was beaten, and a great slaughter was made of the Romans, besides seven hun∣dred Prisoners, who were all put to death after the Fight was over: The Gauls coming again, and incamped at Pedum near Rome, C. Sulpitius was made Dictator, and got a victory over them. A. M. 3698. R. 397. C. MARTIUS RU∣TILIUS, CN. MANLIUS IMPERIOSUS. The Tribunes got a Law to be made to re∣duce the use of money to one per Cent. Li∣cinius Stolo the Author of the Law, whereby it was forbidden to possess more than five hundred Acres of ground, was himself con∣victed of possessing a thousand Acres, and thereupon fined. A. M. 3699. R. 398. M. FABIUS AMBUSTUS, M. POPILIUS LAENAS. Popilius plundered the Fields about the City of Tyber, now Tivoli, after he had forced the Inhabitants to retire within their Walls. Fabius offered Battle to the Falisci, but they mistrusting their Forces, made use of a stratagem. Their Priests pla∣ced themselves at the head of their Batalions, dressed in their priestly habits, their heads surrounded with Serpents, and holding up lighted Torches in their hands. This spe∣ctacle at first stopt the Romans, out of respect to Religion, but that scruple being vanished, they fell upon them, and overthrew the Ene∣mies and all their Bugbears. The Tuscans afterwards joyning themselves to the Falisa, C. Martius Rutilius was created Dictator, the first of the Plebeians that enjoyed that Digni∣ty, he made C. Plautius a Plebeian, General of the Horse, at which the Senate grumbled ve∣ry much. The Dictator got an entire victory over the Enemies, and took eight thousand Prisoners. The Senate would have denied him the honour of Triumph, but he triumph∣ed notwithstanding, and the people never be∣fore expressed so much joy. The Senate made all their endeavours to get two Consuls chosen out of their Body, but the Tribunes gave no∣tice of their design to the people; who could not come to any resolution for a long time; so that the Commonwealth was governed by by eight Inter-reges. A. M. 3700. R. 399. C. SULPITIUS PETICUS, M. or L. VALERIUS PUBLI∣COLA. All was quiet within and without the City, till the latter end of the year, when the Patricians used their interests for getting the Consulship for those that were of the body, in which they succeeded. A. M. 3701. R. 400. M. FABIUS AM∣BUSTUS, T. QUINTIUS or M. PO∣PILIUS. Fabius defeated the Tiburtini, took Salucium, and forced them to lay down their Arms. The Tarquins were also routed, and their Prisoners killed by way of retaliation. The triumph was allowed to Fabius without any opposition. A league was solemny made with the Samnites. A. M. 3702. R. 401. C. SULPITIUS PETICUS, M. VALERIUS PUBLICOLA. (Sabillicus mentions C. Martius Rutilius in∣stead of Sulpitius.) The Tuscans, Ceratani, and the Volsci, raised a great many Forces, where∣upon the Senate created T. Manlius Torquatus Dictator, who proclaimed War against the Ceretani, because they had joyned with the Tuscans to plunder the Roman Fields. The Ce∣retani frighted thereat, sent an Embassy to Rome to excuse themselves, and they were pardoned upon consideration that their Town had been a place of Refuge for sacred things,
when Rome was burnt by the Gauls. The Towers and Ramparts of Rome were repaired, and the Temple of Apollo was dedicated. A great Rebellion broke out at the latter end of the year, because the Patricians would keep the Consulship among themselves, but they were brought again to the Law of Licinius, and a Plebeian was made Consul. A. M. 3703. R. 402. L. VALERIUS PUBLICOLA, a Patrician, C. MARTIUS RUTILIUS, a Plebeian. Five Commissioners were established for the regulation of Usuries, who were called Mensarii. C. Julius was e∣lected Dictator. A. M. 3704. R. 403. C. SULPITIUS PE∣TICUS, T. QUINTIUS POENUS CINCIN∣NATUS. The Senate created M. Fabius Am∣bustus Dictator, without any pretence whatso∣ever; but notwithstanding the opposition of the Senate and the Dictator, the Licinian Law was put into Execution, and a Consul was chosen out of the Body of the people. A. M. 3705. R. 404. L. CORNELIUS SCIPIO a Patrician, M. POPILIUS LOENAS, a Plebeian. Scipio falling sick, Popilius marched with the Army against the Gauls, whom he put at first in disorder, and then attacked them in their Camp, where he forced them with an invincible courage. L. Furius Camil∣lus was named Dictator. A. M. 3706. R. 405. L. FURIUS CA∣MILLUS, APPIUS CLAUDIUS CRASSUS. The Gauls came again this year, and incamped near Albano with a formidable power. The Romans raised an Army of forty two thousand Foot, and three thousand Horse. This Ar∣my incamped near the Gauls, and one of them challenging the Romans to a single Combat, M. Valerius a young Tribune, commanding a thousand men, offered himself to fight him. 'Tis related, that during the fight a Raven came to the help of Valerius, and pearched upon his Head-piece, flying at the face of the Gaul, and pecking him, insomuch that Valerius killed his adversary. This false story probably is ground∣ed upon the custom of the antient Romans, who crested their Head-pieces with figures of Animals, thinking thereby to render them∣selves more terrible to their Enemies, and no doubt but Valerius had the figure of a Raven upon his Head-piece, and they have repre∣sented this Figure alive and moving, only to represent the agility of Val rius in this fight. How∣ever it was, Valerius got the sirname of Corvi∣nus, which remained to all his posterity. The Senate went on with their Intreagues to elude the Licinian Law, and made F. Manlius Torquatus Dictator, but the people carried it for Lae∣nas. A. M. 3707. R. 406. M. VALERIUS COR∣VINUS, M. POPILIUS LOENAS. Valerius was then but three and twenty years of age, yet his want of the age was dispensed with∣in consideration of the victory he had obtain∣ed over the Gaul, whom he had killed the last year. The Plague was very troublesom to the Romans. The Carthaginians made a league with the Roman people. A. M. 3708. R. 407. T. MANLIUS TOR∣QUATUS, C. PLAUTIUS VENOX. The use of Money was reduced again to half per Cent. A. M. 3709. R. 408. M. VALERIUS COR∣VINUS, C. PETILIUS LIBO. Valerius pur∣sued the Volsci as far as Satricum, where he forced them, burnt the Town, and demolish∣ed its Fortifications. He obtained the Ho∣nour of Triumph, wherein he appeared attend∣ed by four thousand Prisoners. A. M. 3710. R. 409. M. FABIUS DOR∣SO, SERVIUS SULPITIUS CAMERINUS. The Aruncians renewed the War, plundering the Country about Rome, whereupon L. Furi∣us Camillus was made Dictator, who engaged and overcame the Aruncians, having first devo∣ted a Temple to Juno Moneta, which was built in the place, where the House of Manlius Ca∣pitolinus formerly stood. A. M. 3711. R. 410. C. MARTIUS RU∣TILIUS, T. MANLIUS TORQUATUS Livy relates a great many prodigies that hap∣pened this year; for it rained Stones, and the Sun was eclipsed at noon. P. Valerius Publicola was chosen Dictator. A. M. 3712. R. 411. M. VALERIUS COR∣VINUS, AULUS or C. CORNELIUS COS∣SUS. Valerius got a great Victory over the Samnites: he took one hundred and seventy Colours, and forty thousand Shields. The Carthaginians hearing of it, sent to congratu∣late the Roman people, and offered a Crown of Gold of five and twenty pounds weight to Jupiter Capitolinus. A. M. 3713. R. 412. C. MARTIUS RU∣TILIUS, Q. SERVILIUS AHALA. The Legions that were in Winter quarters at Ca∣pua, considering how pleasant and fruitful that Country was, resolved to make themselves masters of that rich Town, killing all the In∣habitants thereof; but Martius prevented that cruel and treacherous design, removing the se∣veral authors of that enterprize by diverse Com∣missions. M. Valerius Corvinus was made Dicta∣tor. A. M. 3714. R. 413. C. PLAUTIUS, L. AEMILIUS MAMERCUS. The Camp and the Country of the Volsci were plunder'd. Ae∣milius put all the Samnites Country to the Fire and Sword, and forc'd them to sue for Peace, which was granted them. A. M. 3715. R. 414. T. MANLIUS TOR∣QUATUS, P. DECIUS MUS. War being
proclaim'd against the Latins, the two Consuls raised their Forces, and marched toward the Enemies, who expected them near Capua. Both the Consuls separately saw a Ghost, who told them with a distinct voice, that one of the two Armies should perish, and the Commander of the other should be kill'd. The Entrails of Victims foretold the same; so that both the Consuls agreed among themselves, that the first of them that should find his Forces in a waver∣ing condition, should devote himself to the In∣fernal Gods to have the Roman Army. The Son of Maulius the Consul, who was order'd to march with a body of Horse to observe the Enemy, was challeng'd by the Commander of an advanced Post: This young man, ambitious of Glory, not thinking of the Prohibition the Generals had made, accepted of the Challenge, kill'd his Enemy, and brought the Spoils to his Fathers feet, who barbarously put him to death, and sacrific'd his own Son to the severity of military. Discipline; from whence came this Proverb Manliana imperia, to express an extream severity in point of observation of Orders. They engaged the Enemy, the Fight was very bloody, and the event uncertain for a long time; but Decius seeing that his Forces grew weak, and that their courage failed 'em, sent for M. Valerius the Pontiff, and being dress'd in his Gown of State, cover'd his Head, and put both his Feet upon a Dart; then lifting up his right hand to the height of his Chin, he devoted himself to the Infernal Gods, pronouncing aloud these words, which the Pontiff dictated him word by word, Janus, Jupiter, and you Fathers, Mars, Quiri∣nus, Bellona, Lares, Domestick Gods, Gods Novencilles, Gods Indigites, Gods who have power over us and our Enemies; and you Infernal Gods, I do invoke you, I adore you, and beg your pardon, vouchsafe to bless the endeavours of the Roman People, and grant them the Victory, and afflict with fear and death their Enemies. And so I devote my self to the Infernal Gods, and to the Earth, the Iegions of the Enemies, and their helpers, with my self. Thus hav∣ing spoken, he sent word to Manlius that he had devoted himself, then spurring on his Horse into the midst of the Enemies, he revi∣ved the Souldiers courage, and got the victory by his death. Manlius pursued the Enemies, possessed himself of their Camp, plunder'd the rich Fields of Capua, and made his Triumphal entry into Rome. A. M. 3716. R. 415. L. AEMILIUS MA∣MERCUS, QUINTUS PUBLIUS PHILO. The Consuls always had the best of their Ene∣mies. Q. Publius Philo one of the Consuls was named Dictator. He signaliz'd himself in his Office by several publick Orders, to the great mortification of the Patricians, for he caus'd a Law to be enacted, by which the Senate was to en∣cute the Orders of the people, and that the People should first declare their opinion con∣cerning the Laws that should be proposed. He got also enacted that one of the Censors should be taken out of the body of the People. A. M. 3717. R. 416. L. FURIUS CAMIL∣LUS, C. MENENIUS NEPOS. The Two Consuls took the Town of Pedum, which Ae∣milius had only invested. Afterwards they marched through all the Country of the Latin, and seized upon a great many of their Town, whereupon a Statue on Horseback was erected to each of them in the Market place at Rome, which never had been yet done for any person. By the Advice of Camillus the freedom of Citizens was granted to several of the Latins, yet with this limitation, that they should have no vote in the Assemblies. Camillus took Antium, from the Volsci, and brought to Rome all the stems of their Gallies, and set them upon places designed for Orations, called Ro∣stra or pro Rostris. A. M. 3718. R. 417. C. CALPURNIUS or SULPITIUS LONGUS, L. AELIUS PETI∣CUS. The Senate forced the Consuls to name a Dictator to go to the relief of the Ar∣cians, because they had been remiss therein, they named C. Claudius Regillensis. Minutia was convicted of having transgressed the Vessal's rules in point of Chastity. Q. Publius Philo was the first Plebeian that was raised to the Dignity of Praetor. A. M. 3719. R. 418. L. PAPYRIUS CRAS∣SUS, CAESO DUELLIUS. The Tuscans now called Calvi in Terra Laboris, joyned the Sedi∣tiams to make War against Rome, but they were easily defeated at the first encounter. A. M. 3720. R. 419. M. VALERIUS CORVINUS, M. ATTILIUS REGULUS. Valerius besieged Calles, and took it by storm. L. Aemilius Mamercus was made Dictator to pre∣side in the Assemblies. A. M. 3721. R. 420. T. VETURIUS, SPU∣RIUS or P. POSTHUMIUS ALBUS. A Colony was sent to Calles. P. Cornelius Rufur was created Dictator. The Plague raged in the City A. M. 3722. R. 421. L. or AULUS COR∣NELIUS, CN. DOMITIUS CALVUS. A Report was spread abroad, that the Gauls were about making an irruption into Italy, where∣upon the Romans made M. Papyrius Crassus Dicta∣tor. Alexander King of Epirus, made a Con∣federacy with the people of Rome. Two Tribes were added to the former, viz. the Me∣tianna and Scaptianna. A. M. 3723. R. 422. M. CLAUDIUS MAR∣CELLUS, T. or C. VALERIUS POTITUS PLACCUS. There was a great Mortality in Rome, and it was observed that it carried away
none but men. The cause of this particularity was for a long time unknown, till a Slave de∣clared to the Senate, that most part of the Roman women had plotted to destroy all the men, and for that purpose made use of a poy∣soned drink. Twenty of these women were seized, who bring asked about the quality of the drink that was found by them: they an∣swer'd impudently, that it was good; they were commanded to try it themselves, and as soon as they had drank it, some indubitable marks of poison appeared, and soon after they died. One hundred and seventy others were apprehended, and publickly put to death. A Dictator was created to drive in the nail, to ap∣pease the Gods by this Ceremony. Two Con∣suls were poysoned by their Wives, of which they died. This is the first instance of pub∣lick Poysoning. Cn. Quintius was chosen Dictator. A. M. 3724. R. 423. P. PAPYRIUS CRAS∣SUS, L. PLAUTIUS VENNO. Peace was granted to the Samnites, the Volsci, and the lit∣tle Commonwealth of Fundi. A. M. 3725. R. 424. L. AEMILIUS MA∣MERCUS, CN. PLAUTIUS. The Consul besieged the Town of Priverna, and took it. He ordered the Governours Head to be cut off, and interceded for the rest of the people: by his means the Inhabitants of Priverna obtained a Peace, and the freedom of Roman Citizens. A. M. 3726. R. 425. C. or P. PLAUTIUS PROCULUS, P. CORNELIUS SCAPULA. A Colony was sent to Fregellae. A. M. 3727. R. 426. CORNELIUS LEN∣TULUS, Q. PUBL. PHILO. Claudius Marcellus, was chosen Dictator to op∣pose the Samnites Naulans. The Senate dispu∣ted his Election, but the people maintained it. A. M. 3728. R. 427. C. PETILIUS, L. PA∣PYRIUS MALUGINENSIS, or CURSOR. Alexander King of Epirus was killed in Lucania, now called Basilicates. The fifth Lectisternium or Banquet was celebrated, because of the great affairs the Romans had upon their hands. A. M. 3729. R. 428. L. FURIUS CAMIL∣LUS, DECIUS JUNIUS BRUTUS SCAEVA. A War was proclaimed against the Marsi, and Camillus marched against the Samnites; but he fell sick, and named L. Papyrius Cursor Dicta∣tor, who being obliged to go to Rome, to of∣fer there some sacrifices, left the command of the Army to Favius, expressly forbidding him to attack the Enemy, let the opportunity be e∣ver so fair. Fabius seeing that the absence of the Dictator made the Samnites grow careless, chose rather to hazard his life, than neglect so fair an opportunity of defeating the ene∣mies. He attacked them in their Camp, ob∣tained a great victory, and got a rich booty. The Dictator being return'd to the Camp, design'd to put Fabius to death, but the whole Ar∣my and the Senate itself used all their interest to get his pardon, but the Dictator remained inflexible; yet was at last prevailed upon by the prayers of the whole people, to whom he granted Fabius his life; saying unto him, Live thou, Fabius, more glorious for this universal love of the people, than for the Victory thou hast got over the enemy, and may the Gods grant that thy bad example do not prove prejudicial to the State. A. M. 3730. R. 429. C. SULPITIUS LON∣GUS, Q. AEMILIUS or AURELIUS CERE∣TANUS. The Samnites broke the Truce, which was made for a year. The Tribunes of the people accus'd the Tusculans of being con∣cern'd in the Rebellion of the inhabitants of Priverna: but they came to Rome with their wives and children, and cleared themselves. A. M. 3731. R. 430. Q. FABIUS, L. FUL∣VIUS. They created Aulus Cornelius Arvina Dictator, who pursued the Samnites, and made so great a slaughter of them, that they begged for Peace, offering to surrender up all that they had taken during the War. A. M. 3732. R. 431. T. VETURIUS CAL∣VINUS, SP. POSTHUMIUS ALBINUS. The Samnites were sent back again, and Peace was denied unto them. Pontius their General raised all the force he could, and incamp'd on the top of Furcae Caudinae, called now Stretto d'Arpeia, or Jugo di Santa Maria, or Vallo di Guardano. Pontius ordered ten, the most reso∣lute of his Souldiers, to disguise themselves like Shepherds, and gave them some Cattel to drive: these new Shepherds were taken by the Roman Forragers, who brought them before the Consuls. They were severally examined, and all affirmed that the Samnites were busied at the siege of Luceria. The Consuls de∣ceived by this false report, went down thro the narrow passage of the Valley; but as soon as they were got into it, the Samnites ap∣peared upon the tops of the Mountains. They endeavoured all they could to pass the Defilé, but the passage was stopt with strong barricadoes of Trees hewn down. Then they attempted to go back again, but they found their retreat obstructed; so that they were taken like Wild Boars in Nets. The Samnites brought them all under shameful subjection. M. Fabius Ambustus was elected Dictator. A. M. 3733. R. 432. QUINTUS PUBLIUS PHILO, L. PAPYRIUS CURSOR. The Consuls of the foregoing year delivered them∣selves up willingly to the Samnites, with the other Commanders who had signed the Treaty of the Furcae Caudinae, to wash away the shame the Roman people had been reproached with
concerning it. The War was renewed against the Samnes, and Papyrus besieged Luceria, and took it, and conquer'd Pontius, and seven thousand of his men, and set six hundred Ho∣stages at liberty, that were kept Prisoner there. A. M. 3734. R. 433. LUCIUS PAPYRIUS CURSOR, or MALUGINENSIS, Q. AEMI∣LIUS CERETANUS. They named M. Ae∣milevs Papus Dictator. Papyrius put the Garrison of the Samnites to the Sword, which had been driven from Satricum. A. M. 3735 R. 434. M. FOLLIUS FELCI∣NA, L. PLAUTIUS VENNO. A Truce for two years only was granted to the Samnites, instead of the Peace they sued for. A Roman Governour was sent to Capua for the first time. A. M. 3736. R. 435. C. JUNIUS BUBUL∣CUS, Q. AEMILIUS BARBULA. The Ro∣man Law began to be received in all Italy. A. M. 3737. R. 436. AULUS SPURIUS or SEMPRONIUS NAUTIUS RUTILIUS, M. POPILIUS LAENAS. They made L. Ae∣milius Dictator, who engaged twice the Sam∣nites; in the first engagement the advantage was equal on both sides: but in the second fight the Samnites were defeated. Q. Fabius was elected Dictator to succeed him. A. M. 3739. R. 438. M. PETILIUS LI∣BO, C. SULPITIUS LONGUS. Cassiodorus mentions two other Consuls before these, viz. L. Papyrius Junior, Q. Publicius, or Publius Chilo. The Consuls took the Town of Sora by trea∣chrey, and all the Inhabitants were put to the Sword, except only two hundred and twenty five of the chief Authors of the rebellion, who were sent to Rome, where they were publickly whipt, and then beheaded. The Senate crea∣ted Q. Menenius Dictator. A. M. 3740. R. 439. L. PAPYRIUS CUR∣SOR, Q. JUNIUS BRUTUS BUBULCUS. Junius took Nola and the Fort of Fregellae. C. Petillius was made Dictator to drive the Nail, to stop the Plague. A. M. 3741. R. 440. M. VALERIUS, P. DECIUS. Valerius made an end of the War with the Samnites. Appius Claudius came out of his Censorship, during which the way called after his name via Appia was paved by his care. He made also the Canal of Rome called Appian, which brought the Anio into Rome, and was called Aqua Claudia: it carried the waters to the very top of Mount Aventini. All the Potitie died this year, though they were thirty young men of that name in twelve Families. A. M. 3742. R. 441. C. JUNIUS BRU∣TUS BUBULCUS, Q. AEMILIUS BARBU∣LA. The Players upon Flutes and other musical Instruments quitted Rome and retired to Tivoli, because they were forbidden to drink in Temples. The Senate desired them to come again, but they refused; whereupon they sent some of their acquaintance to them, who made them so very drunk, that they, brought them in Waggons to Rome. After the fumes of the Wine were over, they were amazed to find themselves in it, and would go back again, but they were forbid upon pain of death to go out of the Town, and were allowed to mask themselves during three days every year. Junius re-took Luceria, and killed 20000 Sammtes upon the spot. A. M. 3743. R. 442. Q. FABIUS MAXI∣MUS, Q. MARTIUS RUTILIUS. Fabius fought the Tuscans and got the victory over them, but the Samnites got the day against the other Consul. L. Papyrius Cursor was then cre∣ated Dictator, who triumphed over the Sam∣nites, and their stately Shields were laid by his orders in the place of the Assemblies; and this Ornament was so taking, that they adorn'd in the like manner the Streets of Rome, where the Statues of the Gods were to pass. A. M. 3744. R. 443, Q. FABIUS MAXI∣MUS, P. DECIUS MUS. Sabellicus menti∣ons neither of them. The Consuls got several advantages, one over the Samnites, and the o∣ther over the Umbrians, who were quite routed. A. M. 3745. R. 444. Q. APPIUS CLAU∣DIUS CAECUS, L. VOLUMNIUS FLAM∣MA. The Proconsul Q. Fabius defeated the Samnites near Alif, and streightned them so much in their Camp, that they could not get out of it, but upon condition of subjecting themselves, and that their Confederates to the number of seven thousand men, should be publickly exposed to Sale. A. M. 3746. R. 445. L. CORNELIUS ARVINA, Q. MARTIUS TREMULUS. Cor∣nelius was much straitned in his Camp by the Samnites and want of Provisions. Martius his colleague hearing of the condition he was in, came to his relief; the Samnites marched out to meet him, and fought him, but they were quite routed, and lost thirty thousand men. Upon the absence of the Consuls, Cornelius Sci∣pio was created Dictator. The Temple of Salus, devoted by Junius Bubulus during the War with the Samnites, was Built. A. M. 3747. R. 446. L. POSTHUMIUS, T. MINUTIUS AUGURINUS. The Con∣suls besieged Boviana, and took it. The Coloss of Hercules was found among the Spoils, and was dedicated in the Capitol, having been first carried in the Consuls Triumph. A. M. 3748. R. 447. L. SULPITIUS A∣GERIO, or SAVERIO, P. SEMPRONIUS SOPHUS. The Peace was concluded with the Samnites. The Aequi made some motions, but at last they disbanded their Armies so soon
as they heard that the Consuls were marching against them. C. Flavius, Son to Cneus Flavius a freed man, was raised to the dignity of Aedi∣lis Curulis, notwithstanding the oppositions of the Patricians. Flavius to be revenged of them, published the Civil Law, which the Se∣nate and the Patricians had always kept very secret among themselves. He did also put out the Fasti and Calendars, that every one might know the Feriae, or Holidays, and dedicated the Temple of Concord. This encreased the mortification of the Patricians, who had then nothing left secret. Q. Fabius Censor, endea∣vouring to hinder the Mob from having any share in the elections of Magistrates, divided the common people in four Tribes, which he called the Tribes of the Town. The Senate was so pleased with it, that they granted Fabius the sirname of Maximus, which he had not been able to obtain by a great many victories he had got over the Samnites, Tuscans and Umbians. A. M. 3749. R. 448. L. GENUTIUS A∣VENTINUS, SERVIUS CORNELIUS LEN∣TULUS. A Colony of four thousand men was sent to Sora, and another of six thousand to Albana. The freedom of the City was granted to the Arpinates. They sent a small body of Forces into Umbria to repress certain Forragers, who retired into a deep Den that had two ways to get in, the Roman Forces filled up both ways with wood, and then set it on Fire, and smothered two thousand of these Forragers in the Den. A. M. 3750. R. 449. M. LIVIUS DEU∣TER, C. AEMILIUS. The Aequi not being able to suffer the yoke of the Romans, attack∣ed the Colony of Albana, whereupon C. Junius Bubulcus was created Dictator to punish them, and in eight days time he suppressed them. He came back to Rome, where he dedicated the Temple of Salus, which he had vowed du∣ring his Consulship. The Marsi rebelled, and M. Valerius Maximus was made Dictator, who defeated them, and reduced them to the Ro∣man subjection. Some record in this place M. VALERIUS CORVINUS MAXIMUS, and P. SEMPRO∣NIUS SOPHUS; but Livy doth not mention 'em. A. M. 3752. R. 451. M. VALERIUS COR∣VINUS MAXIMUS, Q. APULLIUS PAN∣SA. They created four Pontiffs, and five Au∣gurs out of the body of the People: So that the people shared all dignities of the Common-wealth with the Patricians, having besides the Populary Tribunes over and above their share. Valerius propos'd the Law of appealing to the People from the Sentences of the Senate, when a Citizen was condemned to be whipt or dye. A. M. 3753. R. 452. M. IULVIUS OE∣TUS, T. MANLIUS TORQUATUS. The Consul Manlius fell off his Horse, and broke his Neck, and M. Valerius Maximus succeeded him. Rome was much pressed with famine, but was relieved by the care of Fabius Maximus then Commissioner for the Provisions. Two Tribes were added to the former, viz. the Anniana and Tarentina. A. M. 3754. R. 453. L. CORNELIUS SCIPIO, FULVIUS CENTUMALUS. The Romans sent some Forces to the assistance of the Lucani against the Samnites, whom they de∣feated near Boviana. A. M. 3755. R. 454. Q. FABIUS MAXI∣MUS, P. DECIUS MUS. The Samnites lost a Battle, in which three thousand two hun∣dred of them were taken Prisoners, and four thousand four hundred kill'd. A. M. 3756. R. 455. L. VOLUMNIUS FLAMMA, APPIUS CLAUDIUS. The Consuls got a great victory over the Samnites. They killed seven thousand of the Enemies, and took two thousand Prisoners. A Colony was sent to Minturna, that lies at the mouth of the River called then Liris, or Clanius, and now Garillan. A. M. 3757. R. 456. Q. FABIUS MAXI∣MUS, P. DECIUS MUS. The Tuscans, the Samnites, and the Umbrians leagued together, and made War against the Roman people. The 2 Armies being in view of one another, a Wolf that pursued a Hind, passed in the sight of both Armies; the Souldiers gave a great shout, and frighted those creatures so much, that the Wolf retired on the Romans side, and the Hind on the side of the Samnites, who kil∣led her. The Generals of the Roman Army improved this accident as a good omen, and encouraged their Souldiers thereby. They told them that the Wolf was an Animal consecrated to Mars, whom they adored as one of their first Gods. Then they recollected the Fable of the Wolf of Romulus: the Hind, said they, is consecrated to Diana, and the Samnites have doubtless provoked that God∣dess, by killing a creature that is under her protection. The Armies engaged with an extream fury, the Wing commanded by De∣cius, not being able to resist the strength of the Enemies yielded every where; when Decius devoted himself to the Infernal Gods, as his Father had done before, and flung himself into the thickest Batallions of the Enemies; and yet Fabius had much ado to get the best of the day. There was at Rome a quarrel be∣twixt Women, which was like to bring on a great disorder. Virginia Aulus, Virginius his Daughter, and Volumnius his Wife, being a∣bout to perform her devotion in the Chap∣pel of the Patrician Chastity, which stood in the Oxe Market, near the Temple of Hercu∣les; the Patrician Ladies would not admit her,
tho she was of a Patrician Family, because they said she had degenerated in marrying a Ple∣beian. Virginia would not submit this con∣test to the decision of the people; but she built a Chappel in the long Street, which she devoted to the Plebeian Chastity. A. M. 3758. R. 457. LUCIUS POST∣HUMIUS, ATTILIUS REGULUS. Posthu∣mius fell sick, the Samnites attacked the Camp of the Consul Attilius, and being favoured by a thick fog, made a great slaughter of his men. Posthumius having recovered his health, went into Tuscany, and there routed the Tuscans in two several encounters, took many Towns, and then made a triumphal Entry. A. M. 3759. R. 458. L. PAPYRIUS CUR∣SOR, SPURIUS CARVILIUS. The Sam∣nites raised an Army more numerous and pow∣erful than before. They assembled all their Forces together near Aquilonia, and made a retrenchment in the midst of their Camp with boards and hurdles of rods wall'd together, cover'd with linnen cloaths, and armed them with rich and fine arms. Papyrius engag'd them, and killed three and thirty thousand three hun∣dred of them upon the spot, and made three thousand eight hundred prisoners. The Con∣suls triumphed. The nineteenth Lustram was solemnized, and the account of the Citizens being taken, amounted to two hundred sixty two thousand three hundred and twenty two heads of Families. The Romans being afflict∣ed with the Plague, sent an Embassy to Epi∣daurus with rich presents for Aesculapius, in or∣der, if possible, to bring him to Rome. A. M. 3760. R. 459. Q. FABIUS GUR∣GES, DECIUS JUNIUS BRUTUS SCEVA. Fabius fought the Samnites so imprudently, that it was almost agreed upon to recall him; but Fabius Maximus, his Father, to prevent that dis∣grace, offered himself to serve as his Sons Lieutenant. The Senate accepted of it with joy. And this great man having restor'd the former posture of affairs, obtain'd for his Son the honour of Triumph. A. M. 3761. R. 460. L POSTHUMIUS, C. JUNIUS BRUTUS BUBULCUS. The Roman Ambassadors got leave of the Inhabi∣tants of Epidaurus to bring along with them the God Aesculapius under the shape of a great Ser∣pent, who presented himself to them in his Temple, and followed them to Rome. He landed at an Island in the Tyber, and the Ro∣mans built there a Temple to his honour. A. M. 3762. R. 461. P. CORNELIUS RU∣FINUS, M. or ANNIUS CURIUS DENTA∣TUS. Curius triumphed twice, viz. over the Samnites and Sabini. The first made an attempt upon the fidelity of Curius, and offered him a rich present of Plate, instead of earthen Dishes they saw him making use of: but this great man told them, 'twas more glorious to com∣mand rich men, than to be rich himself. A. M. 3763. R. 462. M. VALERIUS, Q. CAEDITIUS NOCTUA Colonies were sent to Cestrae and Adria. A. M. 3764. R. 463. Q. MARTIUS TRE∣MULUS, P. CORNELIUS ARVINA. They celebrated the Celsus and Lustram, and took an account of the Citizens of Rome, who were then encreased to the number of two hundred seventy thousand heads of Families. A. M. 3665. R. 464. M. CLAUDIUS MAR∣CELLUS, C. NAUTIUS RUTILIUS. The people not being able to pay their Creditors, rebelled, and retired to Janiculum. The Dicta∣tor Q. Horatius pacified the sedition. A. M. 3766. R. 465. M. VALERIUS PO∣TITUS MAXIMUS, C. AELIUS POETUS. The Gauls besieged Aretium in Tuscany. The Consul Aelius attempting to relieve the Town, lost his Army and life there. A. M. 3767. R. 466. C. CLAUDIUS, M. AEMILIUS LEPIDUS. The Gauls, contrary to the Laws of Nations, murthered the Roman Ambassadors, who were sent to them to de∣mand the prisoners took before Aritium. This was the occasion of a bloody War, but the Romans got the best on't. A. M. 3768. R. 467. C. SERVILIUS TUC∣CA. L. CAELIUS or CAECILIUS METEL∣LUS. The Tarentini took some Roman Galleys, and killed the Commander thereof. A. M. 3769. R. 468. Q. CORNELIUS DO∣LABELLA, CN. DOMITIUS CALVUS. Do∣labella defeated the Gauls, who came to besiege Rome, which obliged them to make peace with the Romans, which continued for forty years together. A. M. 3770. R. 469. C. FABRICIUS LUS∣CUS, Q. AEMILIUS PAPPUS. The Bruti∣ans and Lucanians besieged Tauranum in Cala∣bria. Fabricius marched against them, and rai∣sed the Siege. A. M. 3771. R. 470. L. AEMILIUS BARBU∣LA, Q. MARTIUS PHILIPPUS. The Ta∣rentini finding themselves hard pressed by the Romans, implored the assistance of Pyrrhus King of Epirus, who was very glad of that opportu∣nity. A. M. 3772. R. 471. P. VALERIUS LEVI∣NUS, T. CORUNCANUS NEPOS. Pyrrhus came into Italy; fought the Roman Army, and defeated it by means of his Elephants, the Ro∣mans having never seen any before. Eutropius says that Pyrrhus advanced as far as Praeneste, and that in his march he increased his forces and party. A. M. 3773 R. 472. C. FABRICIUS LUS∣CUS, Q. AEMILIUS PAPPUS. One of Pyr∣chus's Physicians came to Fabricius, and offered to poyson the King; but the Consul was struck
with horror at his base treachery, and sent him back to his Master, with a full account of his ill design. Pyrrhus was so pleased with the generosity of the Cousul, that he sent him all the Prisoners he had taken at the defeat of Le∣vinus. However, these mutual kindnesses did not make an end of the War; for they fought, and Pyrrhus again obtained the Victory. A. M. 3774. R. 473. P. SULPITIUS SA∣VERIO, P. DECIUS MUS. This second misfortune did not cast down the courage of the Consuls, they order'd their Souldiers to at∣tack the Elephants only, which they perform∣ed with such success, that those creatures feel∣ing themselves wounded, ran away, put their own Souldiers in disorder, and gave the Ro∣mans an opportunity to get an entire Victory. Pyrrhus lost twenty thousand men, and was wounded in the fight. A. M. 3775. R. 474. P. CORNELIUS RU∣FUS, C. JUNIUS BRUTUS. Pyrrhus his con∣federates were punished. A. M. 3776. R. 475. Q. FABIUS GURGES, C. GENUTIUS. Several Prodigies terrified the Roman people, and particularly a Thunder-bolt, which struck off the head of the Statue of Jupiter Capitolinus. A. M. 3777. R. 476. MANIUS, or M. CU∣RIUS DENTATUS C. CORNELIUS DENTATUS. Curius engaged Pyrrhus, defeated him, and killed three and twenty thousand of his Soldiers. The honour of tri∣umph was permitted him, and four Elephants were shown the first time at Rome. After this overthrow Pyrrhus returned into Greece, and came no more into Italy. A. M. 3778. R. 477. SERVIUS CORNE∣LIUS, M. CURIUS DENTATUS. C. Fabri∣tius Censor, expelled P. Cornelius Rufinus a Con∣sulary man out of the Senate, because he found fifteen marks of silver utensils in his house. A. M. 3779. R. 478. C. FABRICIUS LI∣CINIUS or LUSCUS, C. CLAUDIUS CIN∣NA. They numbred the people, and found two hundred seventy one thousand two hun∣dred twenty four heads of Families. Ptolome∣us Philadelphus sent an Embassy to Rome, to make a league with the Romans. Eutropius reckons this year to be the four hundred and sixty first after the foundation of Rome, and Cornelius Nepos the four hundred and seventieth. A. M. 3780. R. 479. L. PAPYRIUS CUR∣SOR, C. SERVILIUS. The Vestal Seutilia was convicted of lewdness, contrary to the constitu∣tion of her order, and was put to death accord∣ing to the laws. A. M. 3781. R. 480. C. QUINTIUS GU∣LOX, L. GENUTIUS. Eutropius mentions M. Falius Pictor in the room of Genutius, omit∣ting the following Consuls. A. M. 3782. R. 481. C. GENUTIUS, CN. CORNELIUS BLASIO. The Mamertini, whom the Carthaginians had called to their assistance, besieged them in their own Cittadel. These Mamertini were Souldiers of Campania, who after having served under Agathocles, as Sabal∣licus reports, or under Hiero, according to Po∣lybius, were put in Garrison in Messina. They were so taken with the situation and conveni∣ency of the place, that they resolved to settle there, and for that purpose killed all the male Inhabitants whom they came to relieve, and having seized upon all their effects, and their Wives, they began a new settlement. They were called Mamertini, that is, the Children of Mars. A. M. 3783. R. 482. Q. FABIUS PICTOR, Q. OGULIUS GALLUS. There is nothing more recorded of these Consuls, but their names. A. M. 3784. R. 483. SEMPRONIUS SO∣PHUS, APPIUS CLAUDIUS CRASSUS. The Legion who had seized upon Rhegium during the Consulship of L. Aemilius, was now besieged and forced to surrender at discretion. All the Soldiers were beheaded. Polybius tells us, that this Legion consisted of Romans, but Florus says it was made up of the Inhabitants of Campania, and the Town of Capua. A. M. 3785. R. 484. M. ATTILIUS RE∣GULUS, L. JUNIUS LIBO. They begun to use Money at Rome, says Eutropius, and the number of Quaestors was encreased. A. M. 3786. R. 485. DECIUS JUNIUS MUS, CN. FABIUS PICTOR. Volsinia, one of the chiefest Communities in Tuscany, was oppressed by the Slaves, whom they had made free. Decius subdued that Rabble, and punished them. A. M. 3787. R. 486. Q. FABIUS MAXI∣MUS GURGES, L. MANLIUS. A. M. 3788. R. 487. APPIUS CLAUDIUS, Q. FULVIUS FLACCUS. Aurelius Victor names Appius Cl. Caudex, and says, that he was Brother to Appius Claudius Caecus: but he could be but either his Son or his Nephew. The Ma∣mertini, the greatest villains in the world, begged the assistance of Romans, who assisted them rather out of policy and self interest, than affection or justice. This year the barbarous show of the Gladiators began first; M. and Decius Brutus invented it, to grace the Funeral pomp of their Fathers. Florus mentions it not till three years after. A. M. 3789. R. 488. M. VALERIUS MAXI∣MUS, M. OTTACILIUS. The Conquest of Sicily was attempted, and four compleat legions were sent on that expedition. Valerius brought from the City of Catanea in Sicily the first Dial that ever was seen at Rome. It was set up upon a Pillar over against the Rostra.
Claudius went over into Sicily with a fine Ar∣my, and this was the first time that the Roman Horse passed over the Sea. He gave Battle to the Carthaginians, and vanquished them, and by this enterprize had the honour to be the first of all the Romans that got a victory out of Italy. A. M. 3790. R. 489. L. POSTHUMIUS, Q. MANLIUS. The Consuls took the Town of Agragas, tho it was relieved by Hanno Gene∣ral of the Carthaginians, with whom the Ro∣mans had a very bloody Battle. A. M. 3791. R. 490. L. VALERIUS FLAC∣CUS, T. OTTACILIUS CRASSUS. The Romans fitted out a Fleet, and put sixscore Galleys to Sea. This was the first Navy the Romans ever had. The Inhabitants were num∣bred, and amounted to three hundred seventy two thousand two hundred and fourscore heads of Families, according to Florus, but Eutropius's account amounts only to two hundred and ninety two thousand three hundred thirty four. A. M. 3792. R. 491. CN. CORNELIUS A∣SINA, C. DUELLIUS NEPOS. Cornelius was treacherously besieged by Annibal, Duellius his colleague revenged the Treachery; for he sunk many of the Carthaginian Galleys, took fifty of them, and chased the Admiral, with all the remaining Ships. After this great vi∣ctory, Duellius returned to Rome, where he had the first Naval Triumph. He was also allow∣ed to have a Torch carried before him in the night, and players upon the Flute to attend him. A. M. 3793. R. 492. L. AQUILIUS FLO∣RUS, L. CORNELIUS SCIPIO. Cornelius defeated the Carthaginians in the Isle of Corsica, where Hanno their General was killed, fighting for the defence of the Town of Olbia. The Consul buried him very honourably. A. M. 3794. R. 493 AULUS ATTILIUS COLLATINUS, Q. or C. SULPITIUS PA∣TERCULUS. The two Consuls offered the Car∣thaginians Battle before Palermo, but they refused it. The Consul Attilius, out of rashness, attempting to engage the Carthaginian Fleet, had a severe rebuke, but his Lieutenant by his prudence at∣toned for it. The Islands of Sardinia and Cor∣sica surrendred themselves to the Romans after the taking of Caralla. A. M. 3795. R. 494. C. CORNELIUS, C. ATTILIUS according to Cassiodorus, or M. ATTILIUS REGULUS and L. MAN∣LIUS according to Polybius, Eutrolius and Florus. The Consuls put out to Sea with three hundred and fifty Sail, and a hundred and forty thousand men. The Carthaginians came up to meet them with an equal force, but the success was not alike, for thirty two of the Enemies Galleys were sunk, sixty four taken, and the rest chas'd as far as the coasts of Africa. Atiilius destroyed a dreadful Serpent, sixscore foot long whose Scales were so hard, that they were forc'd to make use of a Balista to kill him. He sent the skin thereof to Rome. A. M. 3796. R. 495. Q. CAEDITIUS, L. MANLIUS or M. ATTILIUS REGULUS. Neither Polybius, Eutropius, or Florus mention these Consuls. The Carthaginians having lost three Generals, and above eighteen thousand men kill'd in several Fights, besides five thou∣sand Prisoners, sent to Sparta to get a General. The Spartans sent them Xantippus, a prudent man and a great Captain, who beat the Romans in a fight, where they lost thirty thousand men, besides fifteen thousand that were taken Prisoners, with the Consul Regulus. A. M. 3797. R. 496. M. AEMILIUS PAU∣LUS, SERVIUS FULVIUS NOBILIOR. The Carthaginians, proud of this Victory, put again to Sea, and engag'd the Consuls near Ca∣marina. The Fight was long and obstinate, but the Romans got the victory, and took a hun∣dred and fourteen Ships of the Enemies. At their return home, they met with such tem∣pestuous weather, that they could save but fourscore of their Ships. A. M. 3798. R. 497. AULUS ATTILI∣US, or according to Polybius, L. AQUILIUS, C. CORNELIUS ASINA. The Consuls be∣sieged Palerma, the chiefest City of the Cartha∣ginians in Sicily, and took it before it could be relieved. The Senate to repair the loss of the former year, put two hundred and forty Ships to Sea, which they sent to bring all that could be recovered of the first Fleet. A. M. 3799. R. 498. C. SERVILIUS, C. SEMPRONIUS. Eutropius and Sabellicus call the first by the Sirname of Caepio, and the se∣cond by that of Blaesus. The Romans lost two hundred and fifty Ships by stress of weather, upon which they laid up the remainder of their Fleet, except threescore Gallies, which they kept to guard the Coasts of Italy. A. M. 3800. R. 499. C. AURELIUS COTTA, P. SERVILIUS GEMINUS. The Consuls went over into Sicily, but there was nothing remarkable done on neither side. A. M. 3801. R. 500. L. CAECILIUS, L. FURIUS or C. CURIUS, says Sabellicus. Eu∣tropius gives the first the sirname of Metellus, and the second that of Pacillus. The Carthaginians sustain'd several Losses both by Sea and Land, and thereupon they sent Ambassadors to Rome, and the Consul Attilius Regulus, who was their Prisoner with them to treat for peace; but the Consul disswaded the Romans from it, and from exchanging the Prisoners, wherefore they sent back the Ambassadors: Regulus return'd with them according to his Parole. The Car∣thaginians
being exasperated with this denial, shew'd their resentment to Regulus, and in∣vented punishment for him both new and cruel: they put him in a Vessel stuck full with points of Nails, and roll'd it about till the ge∣nerous Roman expired. A. M. 3802. R. 501. C. ATTILIUS RE∣GULUS, L. MANLIUS VOLSO. The Con∣suls went over into Sicily, and besieged Lilibae∣um both by Sea and Land. Annibal got into the place with ten thousand men, and made a vigorous Sally, having burnt the Romans En∣gines. A. M. 3803. R. 502. P. CLAUDIUS PUL∣CHER, L. JUNIUS. Claudius seeing that the siege of Lilibaeum took up a great deal of time, formed a design upon Drepanum a Sea-Town: but Asdrubal who commanded in the place, having notice of it, drew his Forces in a line of Battle at the mouth of the Harbour: Clau∣dius was amaz'd to see his Enemy in this po∣sture; yet thought fit for the honour of the Romans to attack him, but Asdrubal sunk many of his Ships, and took ninety three. The su∣perstitious people imputed this loss to the slight Claudius had made of the Augur of the sacred Birds: for the Cage being brought be∣fore him that he might take himself the Augur, and seeing that the Birds did not stir towards the Corn that was laid there for them, he threw the Cage and the Birds into the Sea, saying, Let them drink, since they won't eat. The people was number'd, and there was found two hundred-fifty one thousand two hundred twenty two heads of Families. Junius sailed for Sicily with sixty Ships, thinking to rein∣force his Fleet with the like number of Gal∣leys; but Cartala Admiral of the Carthaginians, being inform'd of the course he was steering, stood off to Sea, and kept his Fleet under sail, to prevent the joining of the two Fleets; but foreseeing a great storm approaching, he re∣tired under shelter. The Romans who had but little experience in Sea affairs, seeing them∣selves at liberty, attempted to join their Gal∣leys; but they were on a sudden overtaken by so tempestuous weather, that they lost most part of their Ships. A. M. 3804. R. 503. P. SERVILIUS GE∣MINUS, C. AURELIUS COTTA. The siege of Lilibaeum was continued without any considerable success. A. M. 3805. R. 504. L. CAECILIUS ME∣TELLUS, CN. FABIUS BUTEO. There was a sight upon Mount Eryx, which Jurius had formerly taken. Sabellieus says that Junius seiz'd upon Erice, but in all probability he mistakes the Mountain for the City. A. M. 3806. R. 505. M. FABIUS BU∣TEO, M. OTTACILIUS CRASSUS. The Fleet of the Consuls was scatter'd by a storm, and render'd unfit for any Enterprize. A. M. 3807. R. 506. M. FABIUS, C. ATTI∣LIUS. Florus thinks that the Praetors were first created this year; but this sort of Magistracy was in use in Rome the year before the Con∣sulship of L. Aemilius and L. Sextius. One of them administred Justice to the Citizens of the Commonwealth, the other to the Foreign∣ers that came to Rome. They were allowed to use Ivory Chairs, and were clothed like the Consuls, attended by six Lictors, and rode upon a white Horse. A. M. 3808. R. 507. A. MANLIUS TORQUATUS, C. SEMPRONIUS. The War continued in Sicily. A. M. 3809. R. 508. C. FUNDANIUS, C. SULPITIUS GALLUS. Nothing remark∣able happen'd this Year. A. M. 3810. R. 509. C. LUTTATIUS, A. POSTHUMIUS. Luttatius got together two hundred Galleys, with five Banks of Oars each (Quinqueremes) to drive away Amilcar Ad∣miral of the Carthaginians, who had infested the Coasts of Italy for five years together. The Carthaginians had notice of these Sea preparati∣ons, and fitted out a like number of Ships. The two Fleets engaged, and the Romans had the advantage. Eutropius says, that thirteen thousand of the Enemies were kill'd, and two and thirty thousand made Prisoners. This loss obliged them to sue for peace, which was grant∣ed, upon condition that they should quit Sici∣ly, and pay two thousand Talents ready Money for the charges of the War, and two hundred every year during the space of twenty years. And thus ended the first Punick or Carthaginian War, which had continued four and twenty years, according to Polibius, and two and twenty, ac∣cording to Eutropius. The Temple of Janus was shut up. A. M. 3811. R. 510. Q. LUTTATIUS CATULUS, AULUS MANLIUS TOR∣QUATUS, The Consuls triumph'd over the Falisci, whom they defeated in six days, hav∣ving kill'd fifteen thousand of their men, and conquer'd half of their Country. A. M. 3812. R. 511. C. CLAUDIUS CEN∣TO, M. SEMPRONIUS TRUDITANUS. King Hiero came to Rome to see the publick Shews, and made a present to the Roman peo∣ple, of two hundred thousand Bushels of Corn. A. M. 3813. R. 512. C. MANLIUS, Q. or P. VALERIUS FLACCUS. The Romans sent to Prolomeus King of Aegypt, to offer him a succour of Forces, against King Antiochus; but he return'd them thanks, and would not accept of it. One Licinus, says Eutropius, about this time introduc'd Comedy and Tragedy upon the Roman Stage. A. M. 3814. R. 513. T. SEMPRONIUS GRACCHUS, L. CORNELIUS or L, VA∣LERIUS
FLACCUS. The Romans accepted of Sardinia; which offered to surrender to them. The Carthaginians were very much displeased at it. A. M. 3815. R. 514. L. CORNELIUS, Q. FULVIUS. Eutropius says, that the first of these Consuls was sirnamed Lentulus, and the second Flaccus. Fulvius made war in Liguria: burnt down the Forests, in which the Enemy used to retire. A. M. 3816. R. 515. C. LICINIUS VAR∣RUS, P. CONELIUS LENTULUS. The Consuls routed the Ligurians, who were so bold to attack the Romans on the plain. A. M. 3817. R. 516. T. MANLIUS TOR∣QUATUS, C. ATTILIUS BALBUS. The Consuls chastiz'd the Sardinians, and Triumph∣ed for the same. The Temple of Janus was shut up. A. M. 3818. R. 517. L. POSTHUMIUS ALBINUS, SPURIUS CARVILIUS MAXI∣MUS, or according to Eutropius, CN. FUL∣VIUS CENTUNCULUS. War was pro∣claim'd against the Illyrians, and the Consuls disarmed the Ligurians. A. M. 3819. R. 518. Q. FABIUS MAXI∣MUS, M. POMPONIUS MATHO. Tullia a vestal Virgin was convicted of Unchastity, and punish'd with death. A. M. 3820. R. 519. M. AEMILIUS LE∣PIDUS, M. PUBLICIUS MALLEO. Au∣thors relate nothing of what was transacted during this Consulship. A. M. 3821. R. 520. C. PAPYRIUS MAS∣SO, M. POMPONIUS MATHO. A. M. 3822. R. 521. M. AEMILIUS BAR∣BULA, M. JUNIUS PERA. Demetrius King of Pharos hearing of the preparations the Romans made against Queen Teuca, Widow to Agron King of Illyria, revolted from her, and joined with another party. A. M. 3823. R. 522. L. or ANNAEUS POSTHUMIUS ALBINUS, CN. FULVIUS CENTUMALUS. Posthumius went into Illy∣rium, where having joined his Forces with those of Demetrius, he took the Towns of Apol∣lonia and Corcyra, and many other places: Whereupon Queen Teuca was forc'd to sue for peace, which was granted to her, upon condi∣tion that she should pay a yearly Tribute, and that the Towns then taken should remain to the Conqueror. A. M. 3824. R. 523. Q. FABIUS SPURI∣US CARVILIUS. The number of Praetors was incresed to four. A. M. 3825. R. 524. P. VALERIUS, M. ATTILIUS REGULUS. The Country taken from the Gauls was given to the Soldiers; and that imboldened them to take up Arms against the Romans, and Demetrius, whom they had made King of Pharos joined his Forces with theirs. A. M. 3826. R. 525. L. APUSTEIUS, M. VALERIUS MESSALA. The Gauls entred into Italy with seventy thousand men, and the Romans opposed them with an Army of eight hundred forty eight thousand foot, and fifty thousand eight hundred Horse. A. M. 3827. R. 526. C. ATTILIUS, MA∣MILIUS LEPIDUS or PAPPUS. The Gauls engag'd the Romans, and quite routed them, but as they were returning home, they fell between the Army of the Consul Attilius, and the remainder of the Forces of Aemilius that were behind them, so that they were beaten, and lost forty thousand men in this engage∣ment, with Corgolitanus their King; on the Roman side Attilius was kill'd. A. M. 3828. R. 527. T. MANLIUS TOR∣QUATUS, Q. FULVIUS FLACCUS. They carried on the War in Liguria and Lombardia; but the Plague and the continued Rains oblig'd the Consuls to retire, without having done any considerable thing. A. M. 3829. R. 528. T. MANLIUS TOR∣QUATUS, Q. FURIUS PHILO or C. FLA∣MINIUS NEPOS. This last Consul enter'd into the Milanese, fought the Enemies with success, and made his triumphal entry, not∣withstanding the opposition of the Senate. Flaminius is not reckon'd among the Consuls, neither in the Fasti, nor by Cassiodorus, because the Senate design'dto depose him, for some defect of Formalities in his Election, and for that reason it may be, that his name was not set down in the Calendars. A. M. 3831. R. 529. M. CLAUDIUS MARCELLUS, CN. CORNELIUS SCIPIO. They made war against the Milanejes and Lom∣bards. Marcellus took Milan, and returned to Rome with great booty, having kill'd Veridoma∣rus King of the Gauls. A. M. 3831. R. 530. P. CORNELIUS ASINA, M. MINUTIUS RUFUS. Seve∣ral Merchants made a complaint to the Senate, that the Adriatick Sea was become dangerous, because of the Piracies of the Italians. Rome took hold on this pretence to proclaim war against them. A. M. 3832. R. 531. L. VETURIUS PHI∣LO, C. LUTTATIUS CATULUS. Han∣nibal laid siege to Saguntum. The Saguntines sent for succour to Rome. The Romans sent Deputies to Carthage to complain of it; but the Carthaginians, against Hanna's opinion, ac∣cepted of the war, that the Deputies declared against them. The Inhabitants of Sanguntum being reduced to the last extremity, chose ra∣ther to set their Town on fire, and burn all their Goods and themselves withal, than sur∣render to the Enemy. The  and the Haminian way were finish'd.
A. M. 3833. R. 532. M. LIVIUS SALI∣NATOR, L. AEMILIUS PAULUS. This year two hundred and seventy thousand heads of Families were number'd in Rome. The enfranchis'd Slaves, who had been hitherto di∣stributed amongst Tribes, were divided into four, which were called Aesquilina, Palatina, Suburrana, and Collina. A. M. 3834. R. 533. P. CORNELIUS SCIPIO, T. SEMPRONIUS LONGUS. The War being proclaimed against the Carthagini∣ans, the Romans made publick processions to obtain the favour of the Gods. The Roman Army was four and twenty thousand Foot, and eighteen hundred Horse strong, all Ro∣mans born, besides four and forty thousand Foot, and four thousand Horse of Confede∣rate Troops; and the Carthaginians were four∣score thousand Foot, and ten thousand Horse. Hannibal entered Italy with this Army, and came to the foot of the Alps about the fifteenth of October, and in nine days he got up to the top of them, in spight of the High-landers and the Snow, cutting and splitting the Rocks that were in his way with Fire and Vinegar. Cor∣nelius advanc'd against him, and met him up∣on the banks of the Tessena, where they enga∣ged, and Hannibal was victorious. Sempronius came to relieve his Colleague, but he had no better success. A. M. 3835. R. 534. CN. SERVILIUS GEMINUS, C. QUINTIUS FLAMINIUS. The Consul Flaminius was sent against Hannibal, but he had fifteen thousand men kill'd in the Fight, and eight thousand made Prisoners. Q. Fabius Maximus was made Dictator; his wise and prudent conduct was suspected by the Ro∣mans, who order'd by a Plebiscitum, that the General of the Horse should bear an equal power with the Dictator. A. M. 3836. R. 535. C. TERENTIUS VARRO, L. AEMILIUS PAULUS. The two Consuls offer'd battle to Hannibal, who willingly accepted it. The Fight began with an incredible eagerness, and was so bloody, that forty thousand Romans, with the Consul Aemilius himself, were kill'd on the spot. Han∣nibal sent to Rome three bushels of those Rings, the Roman Knights were for a badge of their Quality. This overthrow has render'd the Village of Cannae famous to posterity. M. Ju∣nius was created Dictator; They raised new Forces, and armed eight thousand Slaves, that were bought for that purpose. To compleat all their misfortunes, the Romans received ad∣vice of the loss of the Army that Posthumius the Praetor commanded in Gaul, which was crushed to death, and buried under the Trees of the Forest Litana. The Gauls had half saw'd those Trees, but kept them standing by means of Ropes and other things, and let them fall on the Romans, when they saw their whole Army in the Forest. A. M. 3837. R. 536. T. SEMPRONIUS GRACCHUS, MARCUS CLAUDIUS MAR∣CELLUS. The noise of Thunder being heard during the creation of the Consuls, the Senate perswaded the People that this bad Omen was occasioned, because the two Consuls were Ple∣beians. To avoid all disputes about it, Marcel∣lus of his own accord laid down his Consul∣ship, and deliver'd up his place to Q. Fabius Maximus, who restored the affairs of the Ro∣mans by dilatory methods. —Cunctando restituit rem. Enn. A. M. 3838. R. 537. FABIUS MAXIMUS, M. CLAUDIUS MARCELLUS. Marcellus met Hannibal near Nola, and engaged him, but he got no great advantage over him. The two Scipio's did wonders in Spain. Cneus Scipio forc'd the Camp of Asdrubal, and put a supply into Illiturgis, which the Carthaginians had be∣sieged. A. M. 3839. R. 538. Q. FABIUS MAXI∣MUS, T. SEMPRONIUS GRACCHUS. Rome was set on fire and the Incendiaries could not be discovered. Sifax King of Numidia made a League with the Romans. Massinissa the Son of Gala, a young Prince, seventeen years of age, defeated Sifax and killed thirty thousand of his men. Fabius followed Hannibal every where, and encamped so advantageously, that he could not be forced to fight. A. M. 3840. R. 539. Q. FULVIUS FLAC∣CUS, APPIUS CLAUDIUS PULCHER. Hannibal took Tarentum by the treachery of Philomenes and Nico, two young Gentlemen of that place. Marcellus took Syracusa by storm, having layn before it for three years together, during which time Archimedes alone, made more resistance against him with his Engines, than all the Arms of the Carthaginians. P. Sci∣pio was delivered up to the Enemies by the Geltiberians, or the people of Arragon, and put to death by the Carthaginians. Cneus his Brother was a short time after overpower'd by three Armies of the Carthaginians. A. M. 3841. R. 540. CN. FLAVIUS CEN∣TUMALUS, P. SULPITIUS GALBA. Ful∣vius besieged Capua, which surrender'd to him after a siege of two years. He put to death fifty six Senators, which were found alive, the others being dead during the siege, and the rest of the Inhabitants were publickly ex∣pos'd to sale. A. M. 3842. R. 541. M. CLAUDIUS MARCELLUS, M. VALERIUS LEVINUS. This last Consul made an end of the Sicilian war, by the taking of Agrigentum, which was the last place belonging to the Carthaginians.
P. Cornelius Scipio came into Spain as Proconsul, tho he was but four and twenty years of age. He took Nova Carthago by storm, and got a very rich booty both of Ammunition and Provisions, besides many Hostages, that the Spaniards had delivered to the Carthaginians, and among them a very beautiful young La∣dy. Scipio enquired about her Country and Family, and being told that she was betroth∣ed to a young Celtiborian Prince named Alluci∣us, he sent immediately for her Parents and her Bridegroom, to whom he delivered up his Spouse, and sent them back again. Vale∣rius Maximus relating this passage, calls the Bridegroom Indibilis, instead of Allucius, but Polybius, who lived in the time of that Illustri∣ous Roman, nor Livy do not confound him with Iudibilis, whom they call King of the Illergetes. A. M. 3843. R. 542. Q. FABIUS MAXI∣MUS CUNCTATOR, Q. FULVIUS FLAC∣CUS. Twelve Roman Colonies refused their usual Supplies of Men and Money; where∣upon the Senate was obliged to have recourse to the Treasure called Aerarium vicessimarum, which never was made use of but in very urging necessities. They took out of it four thousand pound weight of Gold, which were applied to the most pressing exigencies. Scipio went on with the Conquests in Spain. He made a Confederacy with Iudibilis, and Man∣donius, the two greatest Princes of Spain, whose friendship he had gained by setting at liberty their Wives and Children, whom he had taken in Nova Carthago. He defeated As∣drubal, and possess'd himself of his Camp, where he got a great booty. A. M. 3844. R. 543. M. CLAUDIUS MAR∣CELLUS, TITUS QUINTIUS CRISPI∣NUS. Both Cousuls fell into an Ambuscado of the enemy, where Marvellus was killed, and Crispinus so wounded, that he died in few days after of his wounds, having named Dictator T. Manlius Torquatus. A. M. 3845. R. 544. C. CLAUDIUS NE∣RO, MARCUS LIVIUS, whom Cassiodorus calls SALINATOR. Asdrubal Barcha came into Italy, to the relief of Hannibal his bro∣ther, and besieged Placentia, but hearing that the Consul Livius was drawing near him, he raised the Siege, and encamped upon the banks of Metaurus in Umbria. Nero joined his Colleague with such of the Troops as were able to march, with the utmost diligence; and before the Carthaginians had notice of it, the Consuls offered Battel to Asdrubal, who accepted of it, and was killed in this fight, with five and fifty thousand of his men, and five thousand made prisoners. Nero being re∣turned to his Camp, ordered the head or As∣drubal (the only booty he had brought with him) to be thrown among the Carthaginians; and at the sight of this sad spectacle Hannibal uttered these words, Now I deubt no more of the misfortune of Carthage. Both Consuls tri∣umphed: Livius on a Triumphal Chariot, and Nero only on Horseback, because he had fought in the Army of his Colleague. Nero named Dictator his Colleague Livius, to pre∣side in the Assemblies. A. M. 3846. R. 545. L. VETURIUS PHI∣LO, Q. CAECILIUS METELLUS. Scipio went over into Africa, having made a league with Sifax King of part of Numidia, and up∣on his return from that journey fell so dan∣gerously ill, that they gave him over for dead. This false report being spread in Spain, Iudibilis rebelled, and the Roman Army itself mutinied, and requested to return into Italy; but the recovery of Scipio calmed their minds. The Carthaginians perverted Sifax from the Confederacy made with Scipio, and gave him to wife Sophonisba, Asdrubal Gisco's daughter, who was promised a long time before to Prince Massanissa. A. M. 3847. R. 546. P. CORNELIUS SCIPIO AFRICANUS, P. LICINIUS CRAS∣SUS. Mago came into Italy to the relief of Hannibal. C. Octavius, Praetor of Sicily, cros∣sing the Sea, took eight Ships laden with Corn design'd for Hannibal's Army. The Praetor of Spain routed the Spaniards, and Indibilis their Commander was kill'd in the fight, wherein he behaved himself with a great deal of cou∣rage. A. M. 3848. R. 547. M. CORNELIUS, whom Cassiodorus calls CETHEGUS, P. SEM∣PRONIUS TUDITANUS. Scipio besieged Utica; Sifax and Asdrubal came to relieve it with four and fifty thousand foot, and thir∣teen thousand horse. Scipio raised the Siege, and marched against them. A general re∣view was made of all the Roman people, and the number of them amounted to two hun∣dred and fiftteen thousand heads of Families. A. M. 3849. R. 548. CN. SERVILIUS CAE∣PIO, CN. SERVILIUS GEMINUS. Scipio being reinforced with the Numidian horse that Massanissa had brought along with him, beat the Carthaginians from several Posts. Massanissa took Sifax Prisoner, and pursued his routed Army as far as Cirtha, the chief City of the dominions of that unfortunate Prince, which was delivered up to him, with all the Towns of Numidia, upon advice that their King was taken Prisoner. Scipio took Utica, which put the Carthaginians into such a consternation, that they sued for Peace. Q. Caecilius Metellus was elected Dictator. A. M. 3850. R. 549. M. SERVILIUS GER∣MINUS, T. CLAUDIUS NERO. Hannibal returned to Carthage, and was made comman∣der
of a very considerable Army, to oppose Scipio: The Armies engaged, but the Cartha∣ginians were beaten, and lost twenty thousand men, and as many Prisoners. This loss obliged the Carthaginians to sue again for Peace, which they obtained on the following conditions, that they should pay a yearly Tribute to the Romans, that they should keep but four Galleys in their Harbour, and that they should reim∣burse in ready Money, the charges of the War. Scipio came back again to Rome, where he made his Triumphal Entry. A. M. 3851. R. 550. CN. CORNELI∣US LENTULUS, P. AELIUS PAETUS. A Confederacy was concluded with the Rho∣dians and King Attalus. A. M. 3852. R. 551. P. SULPITIUS GALBA, L. AURELIUS COTTA. The War was proclaimed against Philip King of Macedon, because he had attacked Illyrium du∣ring the Carthaginian War. L. Furius Praetor of the Gauls defeated Amilcar, and killed thirty thousand Gauls, both Insubres and Caeromani, and took two thousand Prisoners. A. M. 3853. R. 552. L. LENTULUS, P. VELEIUS TAPPULUS. L. Bebius Praetor of the Gauls was beaten by the Gauls called Insubres, and lost six thousand men. A. M. 3854. R. 553. SEXTUS AELIUS PAETUS, T. QUINTIUS FLAMINIUS. Quintius had a Parley with Phllip King of Ma∣cedon, but that interview had no effect; for at last they came to an engagement, wherein the Romans got a Booty, tho the slaughter was not very great on either side, for King Phi∣lip lost but two thousand men. After this victory Quintius besieged Corinth, but without any success. A. M. 3855. R. 554. CN. CORNELIUS CETHEGUS, Q. MINUTIUS RUFUS. Cassiodorus doth not mention these two Consuls in his Chronology. The two Consuls made War, one in Luguria, and the other in the Country of the Boii. Cornelius engaged the Ligurians and Milaneses, broke them, and killed fifteen thousand of them, and took seven thousand Prisoners and among them Amilcar, their Commander, the last of the Carthaginian Generals that re∣mained in Italy. A battle was fought be∣tween King Philip, and the Consul Quintius, in a place called Cynocephalum in Thessalia, where the Romans were victorious. The Con∣sul Cornelius triumphed over the Milaneses, and Minutius obtained but the small. Triumph or Ovation on Mount Albanus. A. M. 3856. R. 555. L. FURIUS PUR∣PUREO, M CLAUDIUS MARCELLUS, Son to Marcellus the Great. Flaminius con∣cluded the Peace with King Philip, and there∣by restored the liberty to Greece, causing the same to be proclaimed at the Olympick Games. A great many Slaves of the Romans got into a Body and rebelled, and had cou∣rage enough to make a stand against a Legion designed to reduce them to their duty; they were all disarmed and very severely punish∣ed. A. M. 3857. R. 556. L. VALERIUS FLACCUS, M. PORTIUS CATO. Valerius fought against the Boii, and killed eight thousand of them. Cato being arrived in Spain, which Province was fallen to his share, routed forty thousand Spaniards, and brought the whole Country under the Roman subjection. T. Quintius made War against Tyrannus Nabis, besieged him in Sparta, and forced him to accept of a disadvantageous Peace. A. M. 3858. R. 557. P. CORNELIUS SCIPIO AFRICANUS, T. SEMPRONIUS LONGUS. Flaminius withdrew the Garri∣sons of the Towns of Acrocorinthus, Demetria∣des and Calcidona, and so restored an entire li∣betty to Greece, and the Greeks delivered up to him all the Roman Slaves. A. M. 3859. R. 558. L. CORNELIUS MERULA, Q. MINUTIUS THERMUS. Merula brought up the Legions against the Boii, and beat them near Modena. There was a powerful League made against Rome by Antiochus in Asia, the Aetolians in Greece, and Hannibal in Africa, but so many Confederate Enemies, served only to add a greater lustre in the Roman Glory. A. M. 3860. R. 559. L. QUINTIUS FLAMINIUS, CN. DOMITIUS AENEO∣BARDUS. The League above-mentioned began to discover its self in Greece. Antiochus joyned the Aetolians, and took Calcidona. A. M. 3861. R. 560. L. CORNELIUS SCIPIO NASICA, M. ACILIUS GLA∣BRIO. Acilius went over into Greece with ten thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse. Antiochus expected him at the narrow passage of Tempe, where the Consul made a great slaughter of the Asiaticks, then besieged Hera∣clea, where the Aetolians after the defeat of Tempe, were retired. He reduced the place, and forced the Enemies to beg Peace. A. M. 3862. R. 561. L. CORNELIUS SCIPIO ASIATICUS, C. LAELIUS NE∣POS, whom Cassiodorus call Africanus, to inti∣mate that he is the same who was Scipio's Lieutenant in Africa. Antiochus made War a∣gainst Eumenes King of Armenia, and besieged Pergamus, the chiefest Town of that Prince's Dominions: but when he heard that the Consul was marching against him, he raised the Siege, and waited for him upon the Banks of the Phaenician River, where he lost four and fifty thousand men. Peace was granted to King Antiochus, upon condition that he
should not extend his Conquests on this side of Mount Taurus. Acilius Glabrio caused a Statue on Horseback to be made, and set it up in the Temple of Piety, and consecrated the same to the memory of his Father, whom the Statue represented. This was the first Statue made of that precious Metal at Rome. A. M. 3863. R. 562. M. FULVIUS NO∣BILIOR, C MANLIUS VOLSO. Scipio came back to Rome, and was the first man that triumphed over the Asiaticks. A. M. 3864. R. 563. C. VALERIUS MESSALA, C. LIVIUS SALINATOR. The Senate sent ten Deputies into Asia, to settle the Affairs of Proconsul Manlius Volso. A. M. 3865. R. 564. M. AEMILIUS LE∣PIDUS L. FLAMINIUS CRASSIPES, or C. FLAVIUS NEPOS. The Scipio's were both accused by the Tribunes of the people of em∣bezzling the publick Money Scipio Africanus ap∣peared before the Assembly in white cloath, and having made the Eulogy of his great At∣chievements, without excusing himself of the crime laid upon him, he ended his Speech with these words. Upon this day of the year I destroyed Carthage, Rome's Emula∣tor, let us go and give thanks to the Gods for the same. Having thus spoken, he went up to the Captitol, and there he performed his sacrifice. A. M. 3866. R. 565. SPURIUS POST∣HUMIUS ALBINUS, Q. MARTIUS PHI∣LIPPUS. The Consuls made an exact in∣quiry into the new superstition of the Baccha∣nalia that were celebrated in the night time with horrid lasciviousness. Seven thousand persons were found guilty of this shameful superstition. The Athletes, the delight of the Greeks, were introduced into Rome. A. M. 3867. R. 566. APPIUS CLAU∣DIUS PULCHER, M. SEMPRONIUS TU∣DITANUS. The two Praetors of Spain were routed near Toledo; but a while after they had their revenge on the banks of the River Tagus, insomuch that out of five and thirty thousand Spaniards, four thousand only es∣caped, all the rest being either killed or ta∣ken Prisoners. A. M. 3868. R. 567. P. CLAUDIUS PULCHER, L. PORCIUS LICINIUS. Cas∣siodorus relates some other Consuls instead of these. A. M. 3869. R. 568. M. CLAUDIUS MARCELLUS, Q. FABIUS LABEO. There was nothing more remarkable this year than an exact enquiry after the Bacchanalia, and poisonings. Scipio Africanus, Hannibal and Philopaemn died this year, tho Eutropius tells us that Hannibal died two years before. A. M. 3870. R. 569. CN. BEBIUS PAM∣PHILUS, L. AEMILIUS PAULUS. The dissolute life of the Priests of Isis, called Galli, occasioned an order from the Senate, import∣ing that the Temples of that Goddess, and Serapis should be razed to the ground, but no man durst execute this Sentence of the Senate, out of a scruple of Religion: Therefore Paulus Aemilius took himself an Ax, and began to de∣molish that Nest of lewd people, and incou∣raged the workmen by his Example. A. M. 3871. R. 570. M. BEBIUS PAM∣PHILUS, P. CORNELIUS LENTULUS or CETHEGUS. There was found in Numa's Grave three Volumes concerning Religion, Petilius the Praetor got them burnt without scruple; whereupon he was impeached of Impiety and Sacrilege; yet he was found not guilty, because he took an Oath, that these Books tended to the subversion of the Religi∣on then established. A. M. 3872. R. 571. AULUS POSTHU∣MIUS ALBINUS LUSCUS, C. CALPUR∣NIUS PISO. This Consul died a little while after his Election, not without suspicion of having been poison'd by Quarta Hostilia his Wife, to get the Consulship for her Son, who she had by a first Husband, called Q. Fulvius Flaccus, who was chosen in the room of his Father-in-law. A. M. 3873. R. 572. Q. FULVIUS FLAC∣CUS, L. MANLIUS ACCIDINUS or LUS∣CUS. The Ligurii Appuani were transported to Samnium, for it was thought impossible to keep these fierce people in peace, so long as they could shelter themselves amongst their Mountains. A. M. 3874. R. 573. M. JUNIUS BRU∣TUS, A. MANLIUS VOLSO. Epulo King of the Istrians took the Field, and by favour of very thick foggy weather drew near the Camp of the Romans, and at the first onset for∣ced the same; but while he and his Army were feasting in the Romans Camp, Consul Manlius fell upon them and defeated them. A. M. 3875. R. 574. C. CLAUDIUS PUL∣CHER, T. SEMPRONIUS GRACCHUS. There was a Serpent seen at Rome with four feet, which was taken for a prodigy. Claudius routed the Istrians, and besieged them in Mesa∣tia the chief Town of their Country, whither they were retired. A. M. 3876. R. 575. CN. CORNELIUS SCIPIO HISPALUS, Q. PETILIUS SPU∣RINUS. Cornelius died in his Consulship, and C. Valerius Levinus was chosen in his room. Consul Levinus forced the Ligurians to retire un∣to their two Mountains, called Laetum and Ba∣lista, and there besieged them, but was killed at the beginning of the Fight. This misfor∣tune rather encourag'd than disheartned the
Romans, who at last beat the Enemy from those holds. A. M. 3877. R. 576. M. AEMILIUS LE∣PIDUS, P. MUCIUS SCAEVOLA. Cassiodo∣rus mentions these two Consuls, tho' there is nothing recorded during their Consulship. A. M. 3878. R. 577 SPURIUS POST∣HUMIUS, Q. MUCIUS SCAEVOLA. Poly∣bius doth not mention these two Consuls, and yet Cassiodorus affirms that he has taken his Chro∣nology out of the Calendars or Fasti of the Capitol, where they are recorded. A. M. 3879. R. 578. L. POSTHUMIUS ALBINUS, M. POPILIUS LAENAS. Peace was granted to the People of Corsica, upon condition that they should pay every year two hundred thousand pounds weight of Wax. A. M. 3880. R. 579. C. POPILIUS LAE∣NAS, P. AELIUS LIGUR. A stormy wind drove away so great a quantity of Locusts in∣to Apulia, that the Land was all over covered with them. The Roman people solemnly re∣nounced the friendship of Perseus King of Ma∣cedonia, hearing that he was forming a party in Asia against them. A. M. 3881. R. 580. P. LICINIUS CRAS∣SUS, C. CASSIUS LONGUS. Perscus defeat∣ed the Roman Army commanded by the Con∣sul Licinius, says Eutropius. This Battle was fought on the Banks of the River Penes. The Praetor Lucretius laid the siege before Coronea, and took it by storm with the Town of Thebes. A. M. 3882. R. 581. C. ATTILIUS SE∣RANUS, C. HOSTILIUS MANCINUS. The Alabandii out of a base and ridiculous flattery rank'd Rome in the number of their Gods, built her a Temple, and instituted an∣nual Games to the honour of their new created Goddess. Mancinus got some advantage over Perseus. A. M. 3883. R. 582. Q. MARTIUS PHI∣LIPPUS, Q. SERVILIUS CAEPIO. Perseus desired peace, but it was denied him. The Censors forbad the Farmers of the publick Revenues to renew their Lease. A. M. 3883. R. 583. L. AEMILIUS PAU∣LUS, C. LICINIUS CRASSUS. Paulus Aemilius was chosen to have the conduct of the Macedo∣nian war, tho' he was then sixty years old. He found Perseus incamp'd, and well fortified upon Mount Olympus, and forc'd him to re∣move from thence, and afterwards engag'd him. The Macedonians, after a long and vigorous resistance, were at last overcome, and Perseus surrender'd himself to Paulus Aemilius, who led him in triumph with his three Children; that unfortunate Prince died in Irons, and two of his Children before him. Theyoungest called Alexander, was very skilful in Joyners work, and Turning, and writ so good a hand, that the Register of the Commonwealth took him for his Clerk: A sad fate of the last Successor of Alexander the Great. Macedonia was then re∣duced to a Province, having been govern'd by thirty Kings, during nine hundred and twen∣ty three years, but had no great name in the world, according to Justin, till one hundred and eighty two years before the defeat of Per∣sius. Paulus Aemilius, as an exemplary punish∣ment of the Illyrians, quarter'd his Army in threescore of their chiefest Towns, and at an appointed day gave them up to be plunder'd by his Soldiers, who sold one hundred and fifty thousand Inhabitants for Slaves. A. M. 3885. R. 584. Q. AELIUS POE∣TUS, M. JUNIUS POENUS. Memmius Prae∣tor of Spain reduc'd some Spaniards that were in Rebellion. A. M. 3886. R. 585. M. MARCELLUS, C. SULPITIUS GALBA. Marcellus made war with good success. A. M. 3887. R. 586. CN. OCTAVIUS NEPOS, T. MANLIUS TORQUATUS. A. M. 3888. R. 587. AULUS MANLIUS TORQUATUS, Q. CASSIUS LONGUS. The war was carried on in Spain with differ∣ing success. A. M. 3889. R. 588. T. SEMPRONIUS GRACCHUS, M. JUVENTIUS. Sempronius reduced Thracia, and the Country along the River Danube into a Province, and brought them under the subjection of the Roman Em∣pire. A. M. 3890. R. 589. P. SCIPIO NASI∣CA, L. MARTIUS FIGULINUS. A. M. 3891. R. 590. M. VALERIUS MESSALA, C. FANNIUS STRABO. A. M. 3892. R. 591. L. ANNICIUS GAL∣LUS, CORNELIUS CETHEGUS. A. M. 3893. R. 592. CN. CORNELIUS DOLABELLA, M. FULVIUS NOBILIOR. A. M. 3894. R. 593. M. AEMILIUS LEPI∣DUS, C. POPILIUS LAENAS. The Romans sent people to work in the Mines, that were discovered in Macedonia. A. M. 3895. R. 594. SEXTUS JULIUS CAESAR, L. AURELIUS ORESTES. A. M. 3896. R. 595. L. CORNELIUS LENTULUS, C. MARTIUS FIGULINUS. A. M. 3897. R. 596. P. CORNELIUS SCIPIO NASICA, M. GLAUDIUS MAR∣CELLUS. A. M. 3898. R. 597. L. POSTHUMIUS ALBINUS, Q. OPIMIUS NEPOS. A. M. 3899. R. 598. Q. PULVIUS NO∣BILIOR, T. ANNIUS LUSCUS. A. M. 3900. R. 599. M. CLAUDIUS MARCELLUS, L. VALERIUS FLACCUS. A. M. 3901. R. 600. L. LICINIUS LU∣CULLUS, AULUS POSTHUMIUS ALBI∣NUS. Lucullus made war against the Celtibe∣rians,
and sent Scipio over into Africa, to desire some Elephants of Massmissa. A. M. 3902. R. 601. L. QUINTIUS FLAA∣MINIUS, M. ACILIUS BALBUS. A. M. 3903. R. 602. L. MARTIUS, M. MANLIUS NEPOS. The reduction of Utica gave sufficient occasion to the Romans for proclaiming war against the Carthaginians. They sent over the two Consuls into Africa with one hundred and fifty Galleys, with five Oars in a seat, (Quiqueremes) one hundred with six Oars (Sextiremes) and fourscore thousand Foot, all Romans born, and four thousand of their best Horse. The Carthaginians, surpriz'd at these preparations of war, sent Deputies to complain to the Senate of this infraction of a peace so sólemnly sworn, and so religiously kept on their side. The Romans demanded three hundred Hostages, and that they should bring up all their Arms to the Consuls. The Carthaginians obey'd exactly, they deliver'd up their Hostages and their Arms; consisting of Arms for two hundred thousand men, such as were used in that time, and two thousand Engines of war. When they were thus dis∣arm'd, Marsius told them, that he had orders to destroy their Town, but that he would give them leave to rebuild another Carthage on the firm Land, fourscore Furlongs at least off from the Sea. The Carthaginians were thun∣der-struck at this cruel Declaration; and tho' they were without Forces and Arms they shut up their Gates, and provided themselves with Arms as well as they could, making use (in that necessity) of their Wives hair, instead of strings for their Bows. Asdrubal took the Field with twenty thou∣sand men, and from time to time supply'd the Town with Provisions. Manlius attempting to rid himself of this troublesome Enemy, fell inconsiderately into a defilé, where he had certainly perish'd, had not the Tribune Scipio brought him off. A. M. 3904. R. 603. SP. POSTHUMIUS ALBINUS, L. CALPURNIUS PISO. The Carthaginians sent Ambassadours every where for relief; and made such progress therein, that the Romans were amazed at it. A. M. 3905. R. 604. P. CORNELIUS SCIPIO AFRICANUS, C. LIVIUS DRU∣SUS. Scipio went over into Africa at the de∣sire of the people, tho it was the Province of his Colleague, and had under his command fourscore thousand Foot, and four thousand Horse, with leave to raise such number of the Confederates as he should think fit. Scipio with these Forces by night attack'd a quarter of Carthage, called Megara, on the land's side, took it by storm, and there he lodg'd himself, and so kept the besieged from receiving Pro∣visions. At the beginning of the winter, ha∣ving left some Troops to block up the place, he marched with the remaining Forces against Asdrubal, who was very troublesome to him: Asdrubal not being able to withstand him, got into Nephera, where Scipio besieged him, and took the place, wherein seventy thousand men were kill'd. Scipio return'd in the begin∣ning of the Spring, to carry on the siege of Carthage, and stormed another quarter of the Town, called Cotton, wherein there was a great slaughter for six days and six nights to∣gether. The strongest hold of Carthage, call'd Byrsa, was not yet taken, and there, those that could escape out of Megara and Cotton, had made their retreat; but wanting both Provi∣sions and Ammunition, they surrendered to Scipio as well as Asdrubal, who was retired in the Temple of Aesculapius. Five thousand persons of both Sexes went out of Carthage, which were the deplorable remains of that stately City, the Rival of Rome, which flourish∣ed for six hundred and sixty seven years, or seven hundred, according to some Authors. A. M. 3906. R. 605. CN. CORNELIUS CENTUMALUS, L. MEMMIUS. The A∣chaians opposed Memmius with a good Army, but were overcome. The Consul pursued the Victory, laid siege to Corinth, and took it; he razed its walls, and carried all its fine Orna∣ments also to Rome. This year Scipio laid Car∣thage even with the ground. Corinth flourish∣ed for nine hundred and fifty years. A. M. 3907. R. 606. Q. FABIUS MAXI∣MUS, L. HOSTILIUS MANCINUS. Fa∣bius routed Viriatus in Spain. A. M. 3908. R. 607. SERGIUS SULPI∣TIUS GALBA, L. AURELIUS COTTA. One Andriscus, who called himself the Son of Philip the fifth King of Macedonia, because he was like him both in shape and countenance, made some noise in Macedonia. The Romans at first despised him, but after he had defeated the Praetor Juvetius, they were afraid of him, says Florus. A. M. 3909. R. 608. APPIUS CLAU∣DIUS PULCHER, Q. CAECILIUS ME∣TELLUS. A. M. 3910. R. 609. Q. CAECILIUS ME∣TELLUS, Q. FABIUS MAXIMUS. Macedo∣nia fell to Metellus, who vanquished Andriscus. whom a King of Thracia delivered into his hands. This pretended King followed the triumphal Chariot of the Consul, and after∣wards the Senate ordered he should be put to death, and gave the name of Macedonicus to the Consul who had overcome him. A. M. 3911. R. 610. CN. SERVILIUS CAEPIO, Q. POMPEIUS or POMPILIUS RUFUS. Florusil. 2. c. 17. says that this last Consul had dishonoured the Roman name in Spain, having caused Veriatus to be murther'd
by one of his Servants, whom he corrupted for that purpose. Paterculus tells us that this Pompey was the first of his name that was rai∣sed to the Consulship, and charges the Consul Caepio-with the murther of Viriatus. Eutropius affirms that the murtherers committed the fact of their own accord, and demand∣ed a reward from the Consuls for the same, who generously answer'd that they had no reward for crimes. A Macedonian perswaded seventeen thousand Slaves, that he was son to King Perseus; but the Praetor Tre∣melius defeated him, before he had encreased his faction. A. M. 3912. R. 611. Q. CAEPIO, C. LAELI∣US. This last Consul undertook to get the Agrarian Law enacted; but when he under∣stood that it could not be done without rai∣sing a great confusion in the Commonwealth, he gave it over: whereupon he got the sirname of Sapiens. A. M. 3913. R. 612. CN. CALPURNIUS PISO, M. POPILIUS LAENAS, whom Flo∣rus and Eutropius call Q. POMPFIUS LAE∣NAS. This last Consul was beaten in Spain by the Numantini, who might have quite rout∣ed him; but had rather make Peace with him, than provoke the Romans. A. M. 3914. R. 613. P. CORNELIUS CAE∣PIO or SCIPIO NASICA, D. JUNIUS BRU∣TUS. This Consul beat the Celtae, the Lusita∣nians and the Galicians at Sea; and was there∣upon sirnamed Brutus Galacius. A. M. 3915. R. 614. M. AEMILIUS LEPI∣DUS, C. HOSTILIUS MANCINUS, who carried on the siege of Numantia. Being gone out of his Camp against the Augur of the Au∣spices, the Numantini attacked the same, seized upon it, and having followed the Consul, o∣vertook him in a narrow passage, where they might have easily routed him, had he not con∣cluded a Peace with them: The Senate re∣fused to ratifie that Peace, being disadvanta∣geous and shameful to the Roman people, but sent Mancinus with his hands bound to Numan∣tia, with the bundle of Rods, the badge of his dignity. A. M. 3916. R. 615. P. FURIUS PHILO, SEXTUS ATTILIUS SERANUS. Numantia was besieged again. A. M. 3917. R. 616. SERGIUS FULVIUS FLACCUS, Q. CALPURNIUS PISO. The siege of Numantia was carried on, but very slowly. A. M. 3918. R. 617. P. CORNELIUS SCI∣PIO AFRICANUS, C. FULVIUS FLAC∣CUS. Scipio starved the Numantini, and tho they made several vigorous sallies, reduced them to such exrremities, that they burnt their Wives, Children, and all that they had most dear and precious to them, even their Arms, and then rnn naked against the Arms of the Romans, leaving to Scipio no other orna∣ment of his triumph, but the bare name of Numantinus. Pliny says that the booty of this rich Town was but seven thousand, pound weight of Silver, and therefore Florus accounts it for nothing. A. M. 3919. R. 618 C. MUTIUS SCAE∣VOLA, L. CALPURNIUS PISO. The Consul Murtus, who was a learned Lawyer, perswaded Tiberius Gracchus to get the Agrarian Law to be received; he brought it about, af∣ter a great resistance from the Senate, who na∣med Commissioners to share the Lands; but allowed but nine obeli a day to each of them to bear their charges. Attalus King of Pergamus gave by his last Will his Kingdom and all his goods to the Roman people. Tiberius Gracchus made use of this opportunity to flatter the people, and demanded that the Money of At∣talus might be destributed among them. The Senate opposed his demand; but Gracchus went up the Capitol, and a great number of people after him. Then Scipio Nasica, Jupiter's High Priest cried out, Let those that are for the good and conservation of the Commonwealth follow me: and having put his Gown over his head. ascended the Capitol, followed by the Sena∣tors and the most rich among the Plebeians. The people made room for him out of re∣spect to his Priesthood: but he and his fol∣lowers making use of the Seats of the Tem∣ple, instead of Arms, knock'd down Gracchus with three hundred more of his party. Ari∣stonicus, who call'd himself the Son of Atta∣lus, occasion'd a second War in Asia. A. M. 3920. R. 619. P. POPILIUS LAE∣NAS, P. RUPILIUS. Spain having been ab∣solutely subdued by the taking of Numantia, it was reduc'd into a Province. Florus l. 2. c. 20. says that this year King Attalus died, and gave his dominions to the Roman people. Judas Machahaeus made a league with the Ro∣man people: as we read in the book of the Machabees. A. M. 3921. R. 620. P. LICINIUS CRAS∣SUS, L. VALERIUS FLACCUS. Crassus went into Asia, to make war against Aristoni∣cus, Attalus's pretended Son, who had seized upon the Kingdom of Pergamus. The Consul took greater care to lay hold upon the Trea∣sures of Attalus, than to pursue Aristonicus, who haivng rallied his Troops, fell upon the Romans and entirely defeated them. Eutrepius l. 4. and Justinus l. 36. say, that the Consul was killed upon the spot: but Valerius Maxi∣mus relates his death otherwise, and says, that after his overthrow he was taken by some Thracian Soldiers between Smirna and Elaea, and as they were bringing him to Ari∣stonicus, he designing to be killed, put a Sol∣diers
eye out with a Switch he had in his hand, whereupon the Soldier killed him; so died Crassus, the only Roman Consul who was ever taken alive in War. A. M. 3922. R. 621. APPIUS or C. CLAUDIUS PULCHER, M. PERPENNA. This last Consul had order to revenge the affront that Aristonicus had put on the Roman people. He besieged him in Stratonica, and took him Prisoner, having forced him to sur∣render for want of Provisions. The Consul preserved his life, that he might adorn his Triumph, but he was strangled in prison by order of the Senate. A. M. 3923. R. 622. C. SEMPRONI∣US TUDITANUS, M. AQUILIUS NE∣PUS. Aquilius made an end of the War in Asia, by poisoning the Waters. Scipio Nasica Aemilianus was found dead in his Bed, and by marks that appeared upon his Body, it was plain that he had been strangled; his own Wife, and Cornelia, the Gracchi's Mother, were suspected of having committed that crime. A. M. 3924. R. 623. CN. OCTAVIUS NEPOS, T. ANNIUS LUSCUS. A. M. 3925. R. 624. L. CASSIUS LON∣GUS, L. CORNELIUS CINNA. Jonathas, Brother to Judas Machabaeus, renewed the league with the Romans. A. M. 3926. R. 625. L. AEMILIUS LEPI∣DUS, L. AURELIUS ORESTES. One of the slaves that manured the ground in Sicily, named Eunus, a Syrian born, not being able to bear the misfortune of his condition, played at first the Enthusiast, as being inspired by the Goddess of Syria: and said that he was sent from the Gods, to free the Slaves; and to get credit among the people, he had in his mouth a Nut full of Brimstone, and setting it dexterously on fire, he blew out Flames to the great amazement of the vulgar. Two thousand Slaves and others oppressed with misery, joyned him, and with their help he broke open the Prisons, and unfettered the Slaves, crying out every where Liberty. By these means he was in few days at the head of threescore thousand men, and got ground on the Romans. Perpenna being sent against them, took them by Famine, and all the Prisoners were nailed to the cross. A. M. 3927. R. 626. M. PLAUTIUS HIPSAEUS, M. FULVIUS FLACCUS. A Slave called Athenoin, a Sicilian born, and a Shepherd, killed his Master, and got out of Prison as many Slaves as he could, and put himself at the head of them, taking upon him the quality of King and Liberator of the Slaves. Aquilius was ordered to punish him, and made use of the same means, that had so well succeeded with Perpenna, he had the like good success, except only that Athene∣on was not taken alive, because the Soldiers being too eager to seize him, tore him in pieces. Fulvius perswaded the Italians to beg the Freedom of Roman Citizens, but the Senate prevented it. A. M. 3928. R. 627. C. CASSIUS LON∣GINUS, C. SEXTIUS CALVINUS. The Allo∣broges, Haedui and Averni made war against the Marsitians, ancient Confederates of the Romans. Sextius who was sent to assist them, destroyed the Allobroges and their Allies, after a war of three years standing. Eutropius reckons this year to be the 627 ab urbe condita. A. M. 3929. R. 628. Q. CAECILIUS ME∣TELLUS, Q. QUINTIUS FLAMINIUS. Carthage was rebuilt two and twenty years af∣ter its ruine. Metellus laid siege before Canto∣bricum in Spain, and as he was ready to storm it, the besieged laid the Children of Rethogenes a Spanish Prince, who was on the Romans side, on the breach. Metellus moved to compassion by the prayers of Rethogenes, rais'd the siege and retired. A. M. 3930. R. 629. CN. DOMITIUS, C. FANNIUS STRABO. Gracchu, Tribune of the people, got Commission for rebuilding Carthage; and cast a line about it in seventy days, and called her Junonia. Sextius built a Town in Gallia Narbonensis, near a spring of mineral waters, which was called Aqua Sextiae. A. M. 3931. R. 630. L. OPIMIUS, Q. FABIUS MAXIMUS. Opimius revoked all Orders decreed by Gracchus, and particularly the re-peopling of Carthage, giving out, that it was not the will of the Gods, who had de∣clared their mind about the same by a Prodi∣gy, for a Wolf had pluckt out the stakes that were driven into the ground to draw the line about it; Gracchus maintained that that pro∣digy was false and forged; and while they were arguing upon that point, a Lictor spoke so insolently, that he was kill'd by Gracchus's Faction. The Consul and the Senate made a great noise for the death of this wretched man, thinking thereby to raise the people, but on the contrary they expressed their indignation, that the Senate should make such a disturbance for the death of an insolent Lictor, who had made no scruple to knock down Tiberius Grac∣chus Tribune of the people, an inviolable Ma∣gistrate, even in the Temple of Jupiter. Af∣terwards a sedition broke out in Rome, raised by the faction of Gracchus and that of the Se∣nate. Opimius promis'd to give for the Head of Gracchus its weight in Gold, and the same was brought to him, and was found seventeen pounds eight ounces weight. Then Opimius built a Temple to the Goddess Concerrd.
A. M. 3932. R. 631. P. MANLIUS NE∣POS, C. PAPYRIUS CARBO. A. M. 3933. R. 632. L. CAECILIUS METELLUS CALVUS, L. AURELIUS COTTA. A. M. 3934. R. 633. M. PORTIUS CA∣TO, Q. MARTIUS REX. C. Cato, Grand∣son to Cato the Great, was fined for having converted several things in Macedonia to his own use, which belonged to the Republick. A Colony was sent to Narbona. A. M. 3935. R. 634. P. CAECILIUS ME∣TELLUS, Q. MUCIUS'SCAEVOLA. This last Consul triumphed over Dalmatia. A. M. 3936. R. 635. C. LICINIUS GE∣TA, Q. FABIUS MAXIMUS EBURNUS. A. M. 3937. R. 636. M. CAECILIUS METELLUS, M. AEMILIUS SCAURUS. All Arts serving only for diversion were ba∣nished Rome, except playing upon the Roman Flutes, Singers and Dice players. A. M. 3938. R. 637. M. ACILLIUS BAL∣BUS, C. PORTIUS CATO. A. M. 3939. R. 638. C. CAECILIUS ME∣TELLUS, CN. PAPIRIUS CARBO. Massi∣nissa King of Numidia being dead, his Son Micipsa succeeded him alone, after the death of his Brothers Mastanabal and Gulossa. Micipsa had two Sons Adherbal and Hiempsal; and his Bro∣ther Mastanabal had left a Son called Jugurtha, by a Concubine, whom the esteem and love that the Numidians had for him, rendered sus∣picious to Micipsa; but to get himself sure of him, he adopted him, and made him an equal sharer with his own Children. A while after this Adoption Micipsa died, and left his Kingdom to his two Sons, and to Jugurtha, who was so cruel as to cause Hiempsal to be murthered in the Town of Thirmida. Adher∣bal took up Arms to revenge his Brothers death, but was beaten; he had recourse to the Romans, but Jugartha sent them Ambassa∣dours loaded with Gold and Silver, and thereby won them over to his interest. A. M. 3940. R. 639. C. LIVIUS DRUSUS, L. or C. CALPURNIUS PISO. L. Opimius was sent to divide the Kingdom of Numidia: The lowest Numidia, which is bounded by the Sea, fell to Adherbal; but so soon as Opimius had left Africa, Jugurtha invaded his Brother's Territories, where he destroyed all, and be∣sieged him in Cirtha, the capital City of his Kingdom, and so streighten'd him, that he was forc'd to surrender. Jugurtha put him to death with all his faithful Servants. A. M. 3941. R. 640. P. CORNELIUS SCIPIO NASICA, L. CALPURNIUS BE∣STIA. The News of what Jugurtha had done in Africa being brought to Rome, a War was proclaim'd against him, and the Consul Cal∣purnius was sent into Africa. This cruel Prince sent an Embassy to Rome, to bribe the Sena∣tors and people with rich Presents: But his Ambassadors were order'd to depart Italy in ten days, and Jugurtha was summon'd to ap∣pear at Rome in person to justifie himself. He came thither upon the parole of Cassius the Proeror, who had been sent to notifie unto him the orders of the Senate. Memmius Tribune of the people accused him of having put to death the two Sons of Massinissa his Father and Benefactor; but he got off of this impeach∣ment with Money. But upon advice that Massiva Son of Gulossa had been murther'd by his orders, he was shamefully banish'd out of Rome; and at his going out of the Town he spoke these words, O infamous Town, thou art to be sold, if thou couldst find a buyer. Scipio pull'd down a very fine Theater, that Lucius Cassius had began, lest the Romans courage should be soften'd and effeminated by the Luxury and Pleasures of the Greeks. A. M. 3942. R. 641. SPURIUS POST∣HUMIUS ALBINUS, M. MINUTIUS RU∣FUS. Albinus was sent against Jugurtha, but he came back to Rome, because the meeting of their Assemblies or Commitia required his presence, and left his Brother Aulus to com∣mand in Africa: Aulus out of a desire of gain∣ing Glory, laid siege to Stul, a Town impreg∣nable by its scituation; but Jugurtha attack'd his Camp in the night, and made a great slaughter of his men. Aulus retired upon a Hill with the scatter'd Remnants of his Army, but Jugurtha besieged him the next day, and forc'd him to surrender, upon condition that he should pass under the yoke himself, and all the rest of his Soldiers, and that he should quit Africa. A. M. 3943. R. 642. Q. CAECILIUS ME∣TELLUS NUMIDICUS, M. SYLLANUS. Metellus went into Africa, which put Jugurtha under a consternation. Metellus seiz'd upon Vacca a large Town, where he kept his Maga∣zines, and then besieged Zama the chief Town of Numidia; but being perpetually harassed by Jugurtha he rais'd the Siege. A. M. 3944. R. 643. SERGIUS SULPI∣TIUS GALBA, M. AEMILIUS SCAURUS. Jugurtha made great preparations of war, and attempted to corrupt the Roman Garrisons. The Inhabitants of Vacta, irritated by the Co∣vetousness of the Romans, returned to the sub∣jection of their ancient Master; but Metellus retook that place, destroyed the Inhabitants thereof, and permitted his Soldiers to plun∣der it. Then he marched against Jugurtha, whom he defeated, and forced him to re∣tire to Bocus his Son-in-law, King of Mau∣ritania. A M. 3945. R. 644. L. CASSIUS LON∣GINUS, C. MARIUS. This last Consul,
had the management of the Affairs of Africa. He formed a design upon Capsa, one of the most powerful Towns of Africa, took it with∣out resistance, and gave it up to his Soldiers to be pillaged. Afterwards he engaged Bocus and Jugurtha near Cirtha, and got a compleat victory over them. Bocus delivered up his Father-in-law to Marius, pursuant to a secret Treaty between them. Hircanus King and Soveraign Pontiff of the Jews, renewed the confederacy with the Ro∣man people. A. M. 3946. R. 645. Q. SERVILIUS SE∣PIO, C. ATTILIUS SERRANUS. The Cimbri and Teutoni began to fright Italy. Some think these Nations to be the Scythae, others would have them to be the Germans of the North: They were three hundred thousand fighting men, besides a great number of Wo∣men and Slaves. A. M. 3947. R. 646. Q. RUTILIUS RU∣FUS, C. MANLIUS. The Cimbri and Teuto∣ni defeated the two Consuls on the Banks of the River Rhone. This loss brought so great a fear upon Rome, that 'tis parallell'd by Hi∣storians, with the fright that seiz'd the Ro∣mans, after they were routed at Cannae by Hannibal; they were afraid the Gauls would come again to besiege the Capitol. Rutilius instituted Fencing Masters, to teach young Soldiers how to handle their Weapons. A. M. 3948. R. 647. C. MARIUS, C. FLAVIUS FIMBRIA. The people was in great terror, and thought that no other man but Marius was able to defend them against the fury of the Cimbri, wherefore he was na∣med Consul in his absence, contrary to the laws. Marius came again to Rome, he triumph∣ed over Jugurtha, and brought into the Ex∣chequer three thousand and seven pounds weight of Gold, and five thousand seven hun∣dred and seventy five pounds of Silver in the Mass, besides a great quantity of Gold and Silver Coin. He bestowed all the time of his Consulship, in making preparations for this great and important Expedition against the Cimbri. A. M. 3949. R. 648. C. MARIUS, L. AURELIUS ORESTES. The Cimbri turn'd their arms against Spain, and so gave an op∣portunity to Marius to reinforce his Army, and bring it under a good Discipline. Ore∣stes died in his Magistracy. A. M. 3950. R. 649. C. MARIUS, L. LUCTATIUS CATULUS. Marius being inform'd that the Cimbri were marching to∣wards Italy, went over the Mountains, and incamped on the banks of the River Rodanus, now the Rhone: he engag'd them in Provence, and gave such an overthrow, that they lost one hundred thousand men, either kill'd or taken Prisoners. The Inhabitants of Marseilles for a long time inclosed their Vineyards with the bones of the Cimbri and Toutoni, who were kill'd in this bloody Fight. Florus says, that Teutobocus their King was made prisoner and led in triumph to Rome. A. M. 3951. R. 650. C. MARIUS, MANI∣US AQUILIUS. Marius preferr'd the safety of Rome before the triumph that was ordain'd him; and the glory of a second Victory, to the glory of a victorious entry into Rome, he pursued the Cimbri, whom he engaged and routed in the plain of Versellae, killing sixscore thousand of them on the spot, and taking sixty thousand Prisoners. Marius in conside∣ration of this great Victory, was called the third founder of Rome. A. M. 3952. R. 651. C. MARIUS, L. VA∣LERIUS FLACCUS. This sixth year of Marius's Consulship was spent in Actions un∣worthy of him; for he seconded all the sedi∣tious proposals of Saturninus a Tribune of the People, and oblig'd the Senators to take an Oath, that they should follow the Laws made by the people; which they did with this limi∣tation, Si Leges sunt: There was none but Metellus that refus'd to take the Oath. Pater∣culus and Valerius Maximus both justifie Marius about the death of the Tribune Saturninus, and the Praetor Glaucia. 'Tis true that he shut up these two seditious men in the Court of Ho∣stilia; but he did so, to secure them from the fury of the people, and save them under that pretence; but the Senate having discovered his design, sent some of his faction, who got upon the tops of the Neighbouring houses, and kill'd them with their Darts. A. M. 3953. R. 652. M. ANTONIUS, AULUS, POSTHUMIUS ALBINUS. The Thracians rebell'd, and committed horrid cru∣elties on the Romans. A. M. 3954. R. 653. Q. CAECILIUS ME∣TELLUS PIUS, T. DIDIUS. This last Consul was sent to punish the Thracians, and Metellus in several engagements defeated two Brothers, called the Herculians, Authors of the Rebellion in Spain. A. M. 3955. R. 654. CN. CORNELIUS LENTULUS, P. or C. LICINIUS CRAS∣SUS. Cn. Carbo went over into Gaul to observe the conduct of Crassus, because he had banish∣ed his Father. A while after, finding no fault therewith, he returned into Rome, and reported that his Father could not be guilt∣less, seeing he had been condemn'd by so just and moderate a man as Crassus. A. M. 3956. R. 655. CN. DOMITIUS AENEOBARBUS, C. CASSIUS LONGI∣NUS. Ptolomeus King of Aegypt made the Ro∣man people his Heir by his Will.
A. M. 3957. R. 656. P. LICINIUS CRAS∣SUS, Q. MUTIUS SCAEVOLA or SCAE∣VULA. They made a Law which was cal∣led after their Names Licinia and Mucia, about the regulation of the Citizens. A M. 3958. R. 657. CAIUS COELIUS CALDUS, L. DOMITIUS AENEOBAR∣BUS. A. M. 3959. R. 658. C. VALERIUS FLACCUS, M. HERENNIUS. All was quiet in the Roman Empire under these Con∣suls. A. M. 3960. R. 659. C. CLAUDIUS PULCHER, M. PERPENNA. A. M. 3961. R. 660. P. or L. MARTIUS PHILIPPUS, SEXTUS JULIUS CAESAR. M. Livius Drusus Tribune of the people, at∣tempted to restore to the Senate the right of judging in certain Causes, which Gracchus had got from them, and given to the Knights. He endeavour'd also to obtain the freedom of Roman Citizens for all the Inhabitants of Italy; but he was vigorously oppos'd: whereupon the Inhabitants of Italy rais'd one hundred thousand men, to obtain it by the force of their Army. A. M. 3962. R. 661. C. JULIUS CAESAR, C. RUTILIUS LUPUS. The Consuls rais'd one hundred thousand men, whom they di∣vided into several Bodies, that they might re∣sist the several Nations of Italy leagued toge∣ther; yet they were worsted every where, and the Consul Rutilius was kill'd in an En∣gagement. At the latter end of the year, Julius Caesar made a Law, granting the freedom of Rome to the Latins and the Confederates, as Tully says, in his Oration for Balbus. A. M. 3963. R. 662. CN. POMPEIUS STRABO, L. PORCIUS CATO. The war against the Inhabitants of Italy was car∣ried on; There Cato was kill'd, and several Bodies of the Army defeated. The Italians seeing the good success of their Affairs, erected a Commonwealth of their own, which they called the Italian Republick; and the capital City of this new State was Cornifi∣cium; But Pompeius destroy'd their infant Re∣publick, and routed their chief Forces. The Senate granted the freedom of their City to the Latins that were not of the League, but they were not incorporated into the thirty five Tribes, nor had the priviledge of voting in the Assemblies. A. M. 3964. R. 663. L. CORNELIUS SYLLA or SULLA, Q. POMPEIUS RU∣FUS. Several prodigies threatned the Roman State with some fatal revolution. A woman was brought to bed of a Serpent, and great foundings of Trumpets were seen in the air: These prodigies were the forerunners of the troubles, which were occasioned by the Civil Wars between Marius and Sylla, which had their rise from what follows. Marius stood for the command of the Army against Mithri∣dates King of Pontus, and Sylla pretended the same, for being Consul, that Command be∣longed to him; yet Marius made so good an interest for himself, that he carried it, being seconded by the Tribune Sulpitius. The Con∣suls being offended at this proceeding, stopt all Employments and acts of Justice: But Sulpitius grew so insolently bold, that he at∣tacked the Consuls in the Rostra, and kill'd and overthrew all that would oppose his fury. Sylla could find no shelter, but in the House of Marius, from whence he was not permit∣ted to go out, till he had passed his word to repeal what he had ordered. Marius sent one of his Lieutenants to Nola, to oblige the Ar∣my to swear fidelity to him, but Sylla prevent∣ed it, and came to the Army before Marius's Lieutenant, whom he caus'd to be put to death, as soon as he came into the Camp; and having caus'd the Army to take an Oath to him, he march'd directly towards Rome, and possessed himself of the Gate Collina, and some other posts. The Inhabitants made at first some resistance from the tops of their Houses, but Sylla threatned them to set the whole Town on fire, if they offer'd to oppose him. Marius made a vigorous resistance in the sacred street, but not being able to withstand any longer, he quitted the Town and went over into Africa. All things being then at Sylla's command, he call'd the Senate, and caus'd Marius and Sulpitius with their followers to be proscrib'd, and declared Enemies of the Roman People. A. M. 3965. R. 664. L. CORNELIUS CINNA, CN. OCTAVIUS FLACCUS. After the Consul's election, Sylla set out for Rome to make war against Mithridates, and be∣gan this Expedition with the defect of Arche∣laus one of his Generals. Octavius expelled Cinna out of Rome, and substituted in his room Cornelius Merula, the great Priest of Jupiter. After this affront Cinna retired into Italy, and perswaded the Italians to rebel, inticing them with the promises of the freedom of Citizens, and of being incorporated into the thirty five Tribes, that they might be partakers of all the priviledges of the Roman people: By this means Cinna raised a considerable Army, and Marius joined himself to him. They took the Town of Ostia by treachery, and destroyed all the Inhabitants thereof. Afterwards Ma∣rius went over the River Tyber, leaving Cinna on the other side, and seized the Janiculum, whereupon the Romans sent him Ambassadours to desire him to come again to Rome; and to that purpose the act of his banishment was repealed. Marius and Cinna entred again into
Rome, and there made a very great slaughter. A. M. 3966. R. 665. L. CORNELIUS CINNA, C. MARIUS. Marius died the 17th day of his seventh Consulship, and Cinna got Valerius Flaccus elected in his room, who was ordered to go and make war against Mithri∣dates: they made Fimbria, with the quality of Praetor, his Lieutenant General, that he might have a greater Authority. He fell out with Placcus, who shamefully deposed him; but this great Man was revenged of the Consul, and got him murthered in a Well, where he had hid himself. After his death, Fimbria ha∣ving the sole command of the Army, pursued Mithridates, and forced him to retire by sea to Mitilene. A. M. 3967. R. 666. L. CORNELIUS CINNA, CN. PAPYRIUS CARBO. Cinna went on with his Murthers and Proscriptions. P. Lenas Tribune of the people, caused his Colleague Sextus Lucilius, to be thrown head-long from the Tarpeian Rock. A. M. 3968. R. 667. CORNELIUS CIN∣NA, CN. PAPYRIUS CARBO. Sylla divi∣ded Asia in forty four Provinces, and then re∣turned into Italy: Cinna marched against him, but his own Soldiers mutinied, and killed him in his Camp. Carbo would have no Col∣league. A. M. 3969. R. 668. L. SCIPIO ASIA∣TICUS, C. NORBANUS FLACCUS. The two Consuls with the young Marius, opposed Sylla with two powerful Armies; but he de∣feated them, and pursued Norbanus so closely, that he besieged him in Capua. A. M. 3970. R. 669. CN. PAPYRIUS CARBO, C. MARIUS. Sylla engaged Marius near Signium, and got a full victory, having killed twenty thousand of his men, and taken eight thousand Prisoners. Offella one of Sylla's Generals besieged Marius in Praeneste, where he retired after his defeat, and kept him so close that he could not get off; where∣upon he murthered himself. Then Praeneste was delivered up to Sylla, who got all the In∣habitants together in the place of Arms, and had them murthered by his Soldiers. Pliny affirms that Sylla found in Praeneste three thousand pounds weight of Gold, and seven thousand pounds of Silver. Sylla came again to Rome, where he took the Name of Faustus: He caused himself to be created perpetual Dictator, and obliged the Senate to approve by a decree, all that he had done, and all that he should do afterwards. He changed many ancient Laws, and made new ones, and cre∣ated three hundred Senators, whom he chose himself out of the Equestrian Order; besides he freed ten thousand Slaves, to whom he gave the freedom of Citizens, and called them by his name Cornelians. When he walk'd in the City, he was attended with four and twenty Lictors, and a great Guard. At last he quitted the Dictatorship, being guilty of many Murthers, Assassinations, Prescriptions and Banishments. A. M. 3972. R. 671. M. TULLIUS SIL∣LIUS, CN. ORTILLIUS DOLABELLA. These two Consuls are recorded in this order in the Chronologies; but 'tis very likely that they were both Consuls, during the Year of Sylla's Dictatorship; for we find that there were Consuls during the perpetual Dictator∣ship of Caesar, and the Soveraign Authority of the Emperours. A. M. 3973. R. 672. L. CORNELIUS SYLLA FAUSTUS, Q. CAECILIUS ME∣TELLUS PIUS. This year all things were very calm. A. M. 3974. R. 673. P. SERVILIUS ISAURICUS, APPIUS CLAUDIUS PUL∣CHER. Sylla refus'd the Consulship and re∣tired into the Country, where he liv'd the rest of his days in quiet. The Consul Clau∣dius went into Macedonia, where he died of a fit of Sickness. His Colleague passed over Mount Taurus, where the Romans never had been before. He brought Cecilia and Licia un∣der the Roman subjection; and having in three years time performed the Expedition, return∣ed to Rome, where he receiv'd the honours of Triumph, with the Name of Isaurieus. A. M. 3975. R. 674. M. AEMILIUS LE∣PIDUS, Q. CATULUS LUCTATIUS, Sylla died: Lepidus would not permit the Magnificent Funeral designed for him, be∣cause of the Murthers he had committed; yet Catulus was allowed to pay to the body of his Friend all the testimonies of his acknow∣ledgment. Pompeius growing in credit, sided with the Nobility, and marched at the head of an Army, that Catulus trusted him with against Brutus, and besieged him in Modena. Pompeius got the Government of Spain, with the Character of Pro-consul. A. M. 3976. R. 675. M. AEMILIUS LE∣PIDUS SCAURUS, DECIUS JUNIUS BRUTUS. Scaurus made Laws to regulate the Expences of private men. Pompey and Metellus had several Engagements in Spain with Sertorius, but Pompey was always beaten, and Metellus always victorious; whereupon Sertorius passed a biting Jest upon Pompey, as Eutropius and Plutarch relate, If that old woman, said he, rallying the Physiognomy of Metellus, was not here, I would send this Boy to School, meaning Pompey, who was then but a Youth. A. M. 3977. R. 676. CN. OCTAVIUS COSCONIUS, CN. SCRIBONIUS CURIO. This last Consul succeeded Claudius in the Go∣vernment of Macedonia. He carried on his Conquests as far as the River Danube. He
spent, three years in these wars, and after∣wards came to Rome to make his triumphas entry. Octavius routed the Dalmatians, took Salonica, and triumphed likewise over that Nation. A. M. 3978. R. 677. L. OCTAVIUS, C. AURELIUS COTTA. There was no∣thing remarkable transacted during their Con∣sulate. A. M. 3979. R. 678. L. LICINIUS LU∣CULLUS, M. AURELIUS COTTA. Lu∣cullus got a Commission to march against Mi∣thridates, who had increased his Forces during the civil wars of Marius and Sylla; yet he de∣feated him in several Battels. A. M. 3980. R. 679. M. LICINIUS LU∣CULLUS, C. CASSIUS. Spartacus a famous Gladiator got out of the Prisons of Capua, with seventy of his Companions; and being at the head of sixty thousand men, who join∣ed themselves to him, undertook to make war against the Roman people. He routed all the forces that oppos'd him; and beat Cassius the Praetor, who would dispute with him the pas∣sage of the River Po, with ten thousand men. A. M. 3981. R. 680. L. GELLIUS, COR∣NELIUS LENTULUS. The Senate com∣mitted the care of the war against Spartacus to Crassus, who was followed by the most part of the Nobility. This General order'd a Trench to be made of fifteen Leagues long, from one Sea to the other, to inclose Spartacus, and prevent his escape; but he overcame this obstacle, by filling up the Trench in a certain place with Fascines, in a very dark and cold night. A. M. 3982. R. 681. CN. AUFIDIUS ORESTES, P. CORNELIUS LENTULUS SURA. Crassus pursued Spartacus, who re∣tired towards the Alps, after having lost twelve thousand men, that Crassus had cut off in several skirmishes. But two of Crassus's Generals pursuing him with too much preci∣pitation were beaten, and the Army they commanded cut in pieces. This Victory was the cause of his ruin, for his Soldiers grow∣ing proud of these advantages, forced Crassus to an Engagement, and were quite routed, and Spartacus himself lost his life. Lucius was victorious in the famous Battle of Cizicenna against Mithridates; his Lieutenant General beat the Fleet of the King, and Lucullus ha∣ving subdued Paphlagonia, Bithinia; Pontus, and taken Synopae its capital City, he again defeat∣ed Mithridates near Cabyra, and took away from him the lower Armenia. This unfortu∣nate Prince fled to Tigrannes King of the upper Armenia, who stil'd himself King of Kings. Lucuilus followed Mithridates into Armenia; besieged and took Tigranocerta the chiefest City of the Kingdom, which Tigrannes had built. Tigrannes, who had besieged Ptolomais, hearing of the great progress of the Romans, rais'd the siege and march'd against Lucullus; but he was overcome, and Lucullus took the Town of Nisiba, where Tigrannes was taken prisoner. A. M. 3983. R. 682. M. LICINIUS CRASSUS, CN. POMPEIUS. Pompey taking notice that Crassus's opinion prevail'd in the Senate, made it his business to gain the Love of the People, wherefore he restored the Tri∣bunes the authority that Sylla had taken away from them; and referred the trial of civil and criminal Causes to the Equestrian Order. A. M. 3984. R. 683. Q. CAECILIUS ME∣TELLUS CRETICUS, Q. HORTENSIUS. The Isle of Candia revolted, and gave a fair op∣portunity to Metellus to signalize himself. He subdued the whole Island in the space of three years, and afterwards obtain'd the triumph and the sirname of Creticus. Appion King of Cyrene and Lybia died, and by his Will bequeathed his Territories to the Roman people, with the Towns of Ptolomais, Cyrene and Bernice, says Eu∣tropius. The Capitol was intirely rebuilt, and dedicated by Quintus Catulus, according to Cas∣siedorus. The disturbances between Hircanus and Aristobulus began this year, and were carried on so far, that they occasion'd the destruction of Jerusalem, and the servitude of the Jews, as Josephus their Historian relates. A. M. 3985. R. 684. L. CAECILIUS METELLUS, Q. MARTIUS VATIA REX. This year was imploy'd in ordering and set∣tling the Provinces, that Appion had lest by his Will to the Roman people. A. M. 3986. R. 685. M. CALPURNIUS PISO, M. ACILIUS GLABRIO. The Pi∣rates grew formidable upon the Miditerranean Sea. Pompey was ordered to clear the Sea of them; whereupon he fitted out five hundred men of war, and raised sixscore thousand Foot, and five thousand Horse; with these Forces he cleared the Sea in forty days, and by this quick Expedition he got so far into the esteem of the people, that they gave him Commission to march against Mithridates and Tigrannes, to the prejudice of Lucullus, who having almost destroy'd them, deserved the honour of making an end of that war. A. M. 3987. R. 686. M. ANNIUS or AEMILIUS LEPIDUS, L. MANLIUS TOR∣QUATUS or L. JULIUS TULLUS. A. M. 3988. R. 687. L. AURELIUS COTTA, L. MANLIUS TORQUATUS. A. M. 3989. R. 688. P. JULIUS CAESAR, Q. MARTIUS. (Salustius adds the sirname of Figulinus to that of Martius.) During these three Consulates, Pompey carried on the war against Mithridates, and kill'd forty thousand
of his Men, having lost himself but twenty Soldiers. The reason they give of this great disproportion is, that they engag'd in the night, and the Roman Soldiers had the Moon behind them: So that their shadow being carried near the Enemies, the Enemies blows could do them no harm. This Battle was fought in Asia Minor: Mithridates escap'd with two men only, and Hipsicratea one of his Wives. A while after his own Son, ha∣ving rebelled against him, he killed himself out of grief. After his death Pompey entred the Territories of Tigrannes, and incamp'd within sixteen miles from Artaxates his Capi∣tal City. Tigrannes being weakned by so ma∣ny losses, and fearing the Army of Pompey, came to him and laid down his Diadem at his feet; Pompey took it up and gave it to him again, and contented himself with some Pro∣vinces of his Kingdom, with the best part of his Treasures, which he yielded to the Roman people. Pompey came a while after into Judea, and inquired into the Quarrel between Hirca∣nus and Aristobulus, upon pretence of being Mediator between them. Aristobulus, to shew how far he trusted him, put all his strong places into his hands, and made him several rich presents, and among other, a fine golden Vine a very curious piece of work; but he was deceived in the protection he expected from Pompey: Therefore he armed what forces he could, and got into Jerusalem. Pompey pitch'd his Camp at the very Gates of it, and carried on the siege vigorously: Aristobulus, to prevent the ruin of Jerusalem, came out to surrender himself to Pompey; but while the Roman Ge∣neral was flattering this Prince with hopes, Gabinius his Lieutenant got into the place, and after a slender resistance they open'd the Gates to Pompey. The faction of Aristobulus got into the Temple, being resolved to defend them∣selves; but Pompey besieged them, and took them after a siege of three months. The Holy Temple was prophan'd, not only by the un∣circumcis'd Nations that enter'd it, but also by the slaughter of the Jewish Priests, who were promiscuously killed with the Victims. Hir∣canus was made high Priest, but was deprived of the Royalty. Pompey left the Treasure of the Sanctuary untouch'd. A. M. 3990. R. 689. M. TULLIUS CI∣CERO, M. ANTONIUS. The City of Je∣rusalem was taken during their Consulate. Catiline began his seditious practices. Cicero quell'd this dangerous Conspiracy at its very beginning, having order'd such as were guil∣ty to be put to death., and obliged Catiline to quit the City. Cato, who was Tribune of the people, and bore a hatred to Julius Caesar, be∣cause he had an amorous Intreague with Porcia his Sister, would have his name set down in the number of the Conspiracy; but he put himself under the protection of the people. Catilline at his going out of Rome, caus'd the bundle of Rods to be carried before him, as if he had been Consul, and with this state he got at the head of twenty thousand men, that Manlius had privately rais'd. Antonius assem∣bled quickly an Army, and pursued Catiline with the utmost diligence, that he might have no time to encrease his Forces, and over∣took him in the plain of Pistois, where he en∣gaged him. The Fight was very bloody, but the greatest part of the Conspirators was killed, with Catiline himself. Scaurus made war against the Arabians, without any other design, than that he might have an opportuni∣ty to plunder the rich Town of Petra, the chief City of their States; but he took so ill measures, that his Army would have starved, had not Hircanus the High Priest of the Jews relieved them. Hircanus afterwards became Mediator of the Peace between Aretas King of the Arabians and the Romans; and the siege of Petra was raised, upon condition of paying three hundred Talents to Soaurus for the charges of the war. M. Otho or Roscius Otho then Praetor, procured a Law, by which it was order'd, that the Equestrian Order should have a distinct place at the Theater, from that of the people. A. M. 3991. R. 690. DECIUS JUNIUS SYLLANUS, L. LICINIUS MURENA. Pompey triumph'd for several days together, viz. over the Pirates, over the Kings, Mithri∣dates, Tigrannes and Aristobulus. The Sons of Mithridates and Tigrannes and Aristobulus himself followed the triumphal Chariot. A. M. 3992. R. 691. M. PAPYRIUS or M. CALPURNIUS PISO, M. VALERI∣US MESSALA. Cutiline was killed this year, according to Cassiodorus; but his opinion does not seem probable; for Salustus expresly observes that this Conspiracy began in June, during the Consulate of Caesar and Martius. Besides, 'tis undeniable that Anthony com∣manded the forces of the Commonwealth, when Catiline was defeated. A. M. 3993. R. 692. Q. CAECILIUS METELLUS CELER, L. AFRANIUS. Caesar asked the Consulates, and making in∣terest for it, reconciled Crassus and Pompey, and married his Daughter Julia to Pompey. A. M. 3994. R. 693. C. JULIUS CAESAR, M. CALPURNIUS BIBULUS. As soon as Caesar was made Consul, he proposed the Agra∣rian Law. Bibulus vigorously opposed these novelties, but it was to no purpose; for his Colleague carried every thing, and also abu∣sed him in his person, causing the Fasces that were carried before Bibulus, to be broke in the presence of Bibulus himself. Bibulus
durst not appear any more after so great an affront, and shut up himself in his own house, causing his oppositions to be posted up by night: wherefore the people seeing him no more, said in jest, Julio & Caesare Coss. Caesar got the Government of Gaul for five years. A. M. 3995. R. 694. L. CALPURNIUS PISO, AULUS GABINIUS PAULUS. The hatred of the Tribune Clodius broke out against Cicero, who had impeach'd him for having prophaned the Mysteries of Ceres, be∣cause he went into the house of Calpurnia dressed in a Womans Apparel upon the ac∣count of Galantry. Cicero to avoid his fury went into Gaul, where he served in the qua∣lity of Caesar's Lieutenant. Clodius's anger seemed to be over, because Cicero was out of his reach: but Cicero fell into the snare, for he returned to Rome, where immediately Clo∣dius accused him of having put to death Lentu∣lus, Cethegus, Sura and other accomplices of Catiline, without having observed any forma∣lity of Justice: Upon this accusation Cicero was banished Rome, and his Houses both in the Town and Country were burnt down. Alexander Son to Aristobulus having made his escape out of Pompey's hands, came into Judea, where he rais'd ten thousand Foot, and fifteen hundred Horse, and then attack'd Ga∣binius, but was beaten. Alexander lost three thousand men, and retired into Alexandria, where he defended himself for some time; but at last was forced to surrender. Aristobu∣lus King of the Jews, with Antigonus his Son, escaped also out of the Prisons of Rome, and would attempt to raise men in arms as Alex∣ander had done; but he had no better success than Alexander, for he was brought again pri∣soner to Rome. A. M. 3996. R. 695. P. CORNELIUS LENTULUS SPINTER, Q. CAECILIUS METELLUS. Pompey taking notice that the esteem the people had for him, was lessen'd by the Artifices of Clodius, resolv'd to be re∣veng'd of him, and to recal Cicero out of his banishment, and restore him to all his Estate. Clodius could never prevent it by his Veto or opposition, for the Senate ordered that all ex∣ercise should cease till Cicero's return. Clodius being afraid that this decree of the Senate should be approved of by the People, raised as many Men as he could to prevent it, and Pompey and the Senate likewise raised forces, and engaged Clodius and his Men. The sight was bloody, but the Senate got the best; and Cicero returned. The Commission for bringing Corn to Rome was bestowed upon Pompey, as a reward in consideration of Cicero's return. A while after Milo murthered Clodius: whereupon Cicero made a sine Apology in the behalf of the murther of Clodius his Enemy, which is to be seen in his Orations. A. M. 3997. R. 696. CN. CORNELIUS LENTULUS, L. MARTIUS PHILIPPUS. Caesar form'd the famous Triumvirat with Pompey and Crassus, which was so fatal to the Commonwealth, that at last it brought the Roman people under the subjection of one man. Cato and the Consul Martius his Father∣in-law attempted to break this league, but could not accomplish it. A. M. 3998. R. 697. CN. POMPEIUS MAGNUS, M. LICINIUS CRASSUS. The Consuls got an order, by which Caesar should remain in his Government for five years more, Pompey should be Governour in Spain and Afri∣ca, and that Crassus should have Syria and Ae∣gypt, with the absolute power of making war against what Nation soever he should think fit. Crassus was so impatient of being at war with the Parthians, that he put to Sea before the Spring, in a very hard season, so that he lost a great many of his Ships. He plunder'd the Temple of Jerusalem, which Pompey and Gabinius had spared out of respect, and car∣ried away two thousand Talents of consecra∣ted Silver. An Arabian, whom Plutarch calls Ariamenes, and Appianus Abaris, guided Crassus and his Ar∣my into a dry and barren Plain, and expos'd him to the Parthians fury, who defeated him, kill'd his Son, and the greatest part of his Soldiers; he attempted to escape in the dark, but another Arabian, whom he had took for his Guide, betrayed him also; for he guided his forces during the night, so that the next morning they were in a great plain, in sight of the Parthians. Surena the Parthians Com∣mander pretended to be willing to come to a treaty with Crassus; whereupon the Consul advanced to the Parley, but the Parthians surrounded him, and kill'd him with their Arrows. Caesar was more fortunate in his Govern∣ment, he defeated the Sicambri and Usipeles, which were the people of Guelderland and Zut∣phen, and laid a Bridge over the River Rhine, and passed over into Germany, where he stay'd but eighteen days, and came back again into Gaul, from whence he undertook the Con∣quest of England. A. M. 3999. R. 698. APPIUS CLAU∣DIUS PULCHER, L. DOMITIUS AENEO∣BARBUS. The death of Crassus created Jea∣lousy betwixt Pompey and Caesar. Julia, Pompey's Wife, and Caesar's Daughter, died in Child∣bed. And after her death, Pompey seeing that Caesar's Victories had got him the love of the people, could not bear his preference; where∣fore he would have laid down his Employ∣ments; but Cato, who was Caesar's Enemy per∣swaded him to the contrary.
A. M. 4000. R. 699. CN. DOMITIUS CALVUS, M. VALERIUS MESSALA. Caesar went over a second time into England with eight hundred Sail, and all the choice of the Nobility of Gaul. The English made no great resistance; Castivelanus their King sub∣mitted to the Romans. The people of Namur and Hainault took up Arms, and besieged Cice∣ro in his Camp, but Caesar came to his relief and got him off, being then reduc'd to the last extremity. Afterwards Caesar went to∣wards Rome, and sent to Pompey to borrow two Legions of him, which Pompey sent him. Scipio Hipseus and Milo stood both at Rome, with open force for the Consulship; whereupon the Senate named Pompey the only Consul, with the power of chusing a Colleague. A. M. 4001. R. 700. CN. POMPEIUS MAGNUS. He chose for his Colleague Q. Caecilius Metellus. Pompey being a Widower took Cornelia, Scipio's Daughter, for his second Wife, and all his care was to make himself sure of the Senate, to counter-ballance the fa∣vour of the people, who declared openly for Caesar. He was continued Governour of Spain and Africa for four years; and Caesar obtain'd the Government of Gaul for the same time. Many disturbances arose in Gaul, that kept Caesar very busie. He defeated Vercingentorix, besieged and took Avaricum now Bourges Bituri∣cum, now the chief City in Berry, and Alexia, near Vellacundirum (Auxerre), and forc'd Vircin∣gentorix to surrender himself. A. M. 4002. R. 701. M. CLAUDIUS MARCELLUS, SERVIUS SULPITIUS RU∣FUS. Marcellus upon Pompey's motion propo∣sed to send a successour to Caesar, but Sulpitius's Colleague, and the Tribunes of the people oppos'd it, saying, that Caesar had obtained his Government for four years, which time was appointed by the Senate, and that it would argue much injustice and imprudence in the people, to take his Government from him, while he was victorious, and before the time appointed by the Senate was expired. The Proposal was then rejected for this time. A. M. 4003. R. 702. L. AEMILIUS PAU∣LUS, C. CLAUDIUS MARCELLUS. Mar∣cellus, Cousin German to the last Consul of this name, proposed again to recal Caesar, and send him order to disband his Army; Aemili∣us on the contrary, added to the reasons al∣ledg'd the foregoing year by Sulpitius, that Caesar offered to disband his Army, if Pompey, who was his declared Enemy, would also break his Forces. The Tribune Curio seeing that the Senate favour'd Pompey, made that proposal to the people, who approv'd the same, and Anthony Curio's Colleague, openly read Caesar's Letters in the presence of the people, notwithstanding the opposition of the Consul Marcellus, who made all his endeavours to prevent it. Marc. Antony, who was on Ca∣sar's side was made their chief Pontiff, and Galba was debarred of the Consulate, because he had been Caesar's Lieutenant. A. M. 4004. R. 703. L. CORNELIUS LENTULUS, G. CLAUDIUS MARCEL∣LUS. The two Consuls favour'd the party of Pompey, and proposed to recal Caesar and disband his Army; but Curio and other Friends to Caesar, opposed boldly the Consuls, who dismiss'd the Assembly, upon pretence that they grew too hot. Labienus one of the chief∣est General Officers of Caesar forsook him, and went over to Pompey. The Consuls found out another way to bring their design about; they exaggerated the shame or disgrace that the defeat of Crassus by the Parthians had brought upon Rome; and that to revenge that affront, it was necessary to send two Legions of Cae∣sar's, and two other of Pompey's, with some other Forces to make war against them. As soon as Caesar had notice of this order, he sent two of his Legions, with two more that Pompey had lent him. Fabius came to Rome from Caesar, and delivered his Letters to the Consuls, who were hardly prevailed upon by the Tribunes, that the same should be read to the Senate, and would never consent that his offers should be taken into consideration, but ordered to consider of the present state of the affairs of the Republick. Lentulus one of the Consuls said, that he would never forsake the Commonwealth, if they would speak their mind boldly. Scipio, Pompey's Father-in-law, spoke to the same purpose, and said that Pom∣pey would never forsake the Republick, if the Senate would stand by it. Whereupon it was ordered that Caesar should disband his Ar∣my by a certain time, or otherwise he should be declared Criminal. Marc-Anthony and Q. Massius Tribunes of the people opposed this re∣solution. The Censor Piso and the Praetor Roscius offered themselves to go to Caesar, to inform him how the affairs went, but they were not allowed to go, and all the proceed∣ings were stopt. They had recourse at last to the last remedies, and to a Decree, by which it was ordered, That the Magistrates should take care of the safety of the Commonwealth. The Tribunes went out of Rome and retired to Caesar at Ravenna, where he was expecting an answer suitable to the equity of his De∣mands. The following days the Senate met out of the City, that Pompey might be present at the Assembly, for being Proconsul, by his Office he could not be at Rome. Then they raised Forces throughout Italy, and took Mo∣ney out of the Exchequer to bear Pompey's charges. Caesar having intelligence of all
these proceedings, assembled his Soldiers, and represented to them in a pathetical way the in∣justice of his Enemies, and exhorted them to stand by him against their violence. The Sol∣diers cried out presently that they were ready to protect his Dignity, and that of the Tri∣bunes. Caesar trusting himself to their fideli∣ty, brought them towards Rimini, where he met the Tribunes of the people, who came to him to implore his assistance. All the Towns of Italy where Caesar appear'd open'd their Gates, and sent away Pompey's Garrisons. This great progress surpriz'd Pompey's Followers, and obliged them to quit Rome, and Caesar pursu'd them as far as Brun∣dusium, where Pompey cross'd over the Sea with the Consuls. Caesar having no Ships to follow them, return'd to Rome. The Magistrates and the Senators that remain'd there made Lepidus Inter-Rex, who created C. Julius Caesar Dictator, who recall'd the banish'd Citizens, and restor'd them to the possession of their Estates: He laid down that great Office, after having kept it eleven days only, and then was made Consul. A. M. 4005. R. 704. C. JULIUS CAESAR, P. SERVILIUS VATINIUS ISAURICUS. Caesar had then no other thoughts, but to pur∣sue Pompey; but first of all he thought fit to make himself Master of Spain, where Pompey had fortified himself a long while ago. He had several skirmishes on the Segra near Laeri∣da, and so closely pursued Afranius one of Pompey's Generals, that he was obliged to dis∣band his Army, composed of seven Roman Legions, and of a great many Confederates. Varro another General of Pompey's attempted to defend Calis and Cordua, but all the Neigh∣bouring Provinces declared themselves for Caesar, so that he was forc'd to yield to his good Fortune, and delivered up his Forces, Ships, and all his Ammunitions. In the mean time Pompey got together a very strong Fleet, compos'd of several Squadrons from Asia, the Cyclades Islands, Corsou, Athens and Egypt, mak∣ing in all five hundred Ships, besides the Tenders, and other small Ships. His Land Forces were not inferior to his Naval Strength, but he had dispersed his Army into several places, to keep the Provinces in his Interest; and had then with him but forty five thou∣sand Foot, and seven thousand Horse: Caesar was not so strong, for his Army consisted on∣ly of a thousand Horse, and twenty two thousand Foot. These two Armies engaged in Thessalia near Pharsalia, and Pompey's Army was defeated, and himself forc'd to escape in disguise to Amphipolis, where he attempted to rally his scatter'd Forces; but Caesar pur∣sued him so close, that he had no time to do it, and fled away into Egypt, where King Ptolomy caused him to be murther'd before he landed. Caesar was so concerned at the news of his death, that the murtherers thought they could not avoid a punishment suitable to their Crime, but by the death of Caesar himself. Photinus the Eunuch, and Archaelas attacked Caesar, but Methridates King of Perga∣mus came to his relief, and deliver'd him from these Murtherers. A. M. 4006. R. 705. Q. FURIUS CALE∣NUS, P. VATINIUS. Tho' Caesar was ab∣sent from Rome, yet he was made Dictator the second time, and his Dictatorship conti∣nued for a whole year. He reduced the King∣dom of Pontus into a Roman Province, and be∣stow'd the Government of it upon Celius Vin∣cinianus. It was concerning this Victory that Caesar obtained over Pharnaces King of Pontus, that he wrote to his Friend Anicius, veni, vidi, vici, I am come, I have seen, I have overcome; to shew with what swiftness he had subdued the Kingdom of Pontus. Caesar return'd by way of Asia Minor, and gave the Kingdom of Bosphorus to Mithridates King of Pergamus, and from thence came to Rome, where his pre∣sence was necessary: After his arrival he dis∣banded a great part of his Forces, giving one hundred Crowns to each Soldier, with Lands enough to live there rich and contented. A. M. 4007. R. 706. C. JULIUS CAESAR, M. AEMILIUS LEPIDUS. Caesar did not stay long at Rome, but went over into Africa at the beginning of January, where at first he was worsted by Labienus's Forces. After∣wards he drew the Africans to a Fight near the Town of Tapsus, where the Forces of Labienus and Afranius, tho' reinforc'd by those of Sci∣pio, were cut in pieces. Caesar gain'd great Glory in this Battle; for he got three Camps of the Enemies, kill'd ten thousand Men, or fifty thousand, according to Plutarch; made several Prisoners, and lost but one hundred and fifty Men. After this Victory Caesar march'd towards Utica, where Cato command∣ed, who seeing all things in a desperate con∣dition kill'd himself. Tuba got off safe in the last battle with Petreius, and attempted to re∣tire to Zama a Town of his own, very strong and well provided, where he had left his Wife, Children and Treasure, but the Inha∣bitants thereof shut up the Gates upon him, and made a present of all his Treasure to Caesar. Afranius and Sylla had no better for∣tune, for they fell into a body of the Army, that Sitius, Caesar's Lieutenant commanded, and Sylla was made prisoner with Pompeia his Wife and Children. Sitius's Soldiers kill'd him and Afranius by Caesar's order, who spared the life of Pompeia and his Children, and restor'd them to their Estate. Scipio attempted to get into Spain, but the Winds and the Sea drove him
back to ona, where Sitius was return'd, who sunk easily all his Ships. Caesar having subdued Africa, made it a Pro∣vince, and subjected it to the Roman Laws. He caused all the Goods of Juba to be sold, and made presents to his Soldiers of the Mo∣ney arising by them. Caesar return'd to Rome, where he triumph'd for three days together: The first day he triumph'd over Aegypt, the second over the Kingdom of Pontus and Phar∣naces, and the third over Africa and King Juba; and in so modest a manner, that there was nothing seen in his Triumph, that could seem to insult over the memory of those he had vanquished: The next day after these Triumphs, he entertained all the Roman Peo∣ple at two and twenty thousand Tables, and gave them the diversion of a great many Fights of Gladiators, and a representation of a Sea-fight. The Citizens were numbered and were found 320000 heads of Families, who had escaped the fury of the Civil Wars. Pompey's Sons, with the remains of his Par∣ty, were retired into that part of Spain called Ʋlterior or Baetica, where Caesar pursu'd and de∣feated them near Munda, killing thirty thou∣sand on the spot, among whom were three thousand Roman Knights, and seventeen Field Officers, with Labienus and Actius Varus. After this Victory Munda and Cordua were both be∣sieged and taken; Pompey's Sons died of their wounds. A. M. 4008. R. 707. Q. FABIUS MAXI∣MUS, C. TREBONIANUS. Caesar crown'd with Glory after so many Conquests came to Rome, to make his triumphal Entry there; and then the Senate and the Roman people submitted to him, creating him perpetual Dictator, and render'd him such Honours that were only due to the Gods. Rome could never get a more illustrious Master. He ap∣ply'd himself carefully to all that could con∣tribute to the grandeur and welfare of the Roman people. He reform'd the Calendar, re-built and re-populated several Towns; and undertook to cut the Isthmus of Corinth, which joined Merco to the Continent of Greece, and terminates the Gulph of Lepanto. He would also join the Anio to the Tiber, by a Canal that was to be cut from Rome to Circae∣um, and fall in at Terracinae. This great man in the midst of his Grandeur and Prosperity was murthered in the Senate, and died of three and twenty wounds he received, being then fifty six years old. CONSUALIA, and Consuales Ludi. Feasts and Games instituted the tenth day of August, or of March, as Ovid says, in the third Book of his Fastorum, in honour of the God Con∣sus, or God of Counsel, (as 'tis interpreted by St Austin and Servius.) Romulus made use of him when he stole the Sabine Virgins, at the Games that were represented at Rome, where he had invited the Sabines. During this Feast the Horses and Asses were crown'd with Flowers, and rested, and a Mule was sacri∣ficed to this God. After this sacrifice they represented the Games call'd Consuales, after∣wards named Romani and Circenses; according to the report of Asconius Paedianus, in his Com∣mentary on the first Verina. Ad id tempus Cir∣censi spectaculo contenta erat civitas nostra, quod primus Romulus raptis Virginibus Sabinis Consualium nomine celebravit. Vid. again this word, be∣fore the word Consul. CONSUS. The God Consus, or the God of Counsel, according to Servius's interpretation. Consus, says this Grammarian upon the 8th of the Aeneid, is the God of Counsel, who has his Temple covered in the great Circus, to shew that Counsel ought to be kept secret: And St Austin lib. 4 de civitate dei, cap. 11. Consus is named so from the Counsel he gives or inspires men with; but Cyprianus calls him the God of Cheating and Malice, for it was he that inspired Romulus to ravish the Sabine Virgins, who came to Rome, to be present at the Games that were there represented, the Sabines having been invited to them by Romu∣lus. Livy speaking of the Rape of the Sabines. The Romans, says he, celebrate still in our time this Feast and Solemnity, and call it Consualia. There is an Altar under ground very near the great Circus, where they make Sacrifices, attended with great Illuminati∣ons of Fires and Lights; there are also ma∣ny Horse-races. Wherefore some name this God  or Neptune, and  or Earth-mover; affirming that for that rea∣son his Altar was hid under ground, because Neptune, who is the Sea, incompasses the Earth. Others pretend that this Feast and Horse-Ra∣ces were made in honour of Neptune; but that Altar was consecrated to a certain Spirit or Daemon, keeper of secret Councils. Varro confirms Livy's opinion, but Dyonysius Halicarnasseni tells us, that the Romans dedica∣ted a Temple to Neptune the Horse-tamer, and kept a Feast every year on the sixteenth of August, which the Arcadians call'd , and the Romans Consualia, during which time the Horses, Mules and Asses rested. CONTUBERNIUM MILITARE, A Company of Soldiers that lodge in the same Tent, commanded by a Decunus, or leader of ten men. This company was the tenth part of a Company of an hundred men called Centuaria. CONVIVIUM, V. Epulum, a Banquet or Feast. CORAGIUM, The Obsequies of a Virgin.
CORDAX, A kind of an old, merry and pleasant Dance, full of ridiculous and extra∣vagant postures, like Country dances. CORICEUM, A part of the Ancient Palaestra. Grammarians don't agree about the meaning of this word; the greatest part of Interpreters deriving the same from the Greek word  that signifies a young Girl, say, that Coriceum was a place where young Girls exercis'd themselves with wrestling and running. Palladio thinks they were little Schools for Girls. Others take its Etymology from the Greek word  i. e. the Hair, as if it were an ap∣pointed place for shaving. Mercurialis, with∣out troubling himself with the Etymology, affirms that it was a place where they laid up the Wrestlers Cloaths, or such as went into the Baths; and gives no other reason for the same, but only that such a room was requisite in the Palaestra: but Baldus tells us, that this word Coriceum is derived from the Greek word , which signifies a Ball, and his in∣terpretation of this word seems the most rea∣sonable; wherefore we may say, that Coryce∣um is a place where men play at long Tennis, vulgarly called Welsh Tennis, or at Baloon, which was a necessary thing in a wrestling place. CORINTHUS. Corinth the chief City of Achaia, placed in the middle of the Isthmus of Peloponnessus between the Ionian and the Aegean Seas. It was built first by Sisiphus the Son of Aeolus, and named Corcyra, according to Strabo; and after having been destroyed, it was rebuilt by Corinthus, Pelops his Son, and called after his Name Corinthus. The Corinthians abused the Roman Ambassadors, whereupon Mummius was sent thither, who put the Inha∣bitants to the sword, and razed the Town to the ground. CORINTHIUM. Viz. AES. Corinthian Brass. Pliny mentions three sorts of Corinthian Brass; viz. the white, red and the mixt coloured: this diversity arises from the pro∣portion of the three sorts of Metals whereof 'tis compounded, which are Gold, Silver and Copper, which according to Pliny and Florus, were mix'd together when the City of Co∣rinth was burnt, for many Statues and Vessels of these three Metals were melted down and so incorporated. CORINTHIUS, Viz. ORDO. The Co∣rinthian Order, one of the three orders of Ar∣chitecture; consisting in its Pillars and Cha∣piter, which is adorn'd with Carvers work, of two ranks of fine leaves, sixteen in num∣ber, being cut therein, and from whence come out so many small branches or stalks, cover∣ed again with the same number of Cartridges. This order was invented by Callimachus Stone∣cutter, who by chance found a Basket set upon a plant of Acanthus, covered with a tile, that had very much bent its leaves. This new Figure pleased him, and he imitated it in the Pillars he wrought afterwards at Corinth, settling and regulating upon this Model all the proportions and measures of the Corinthian Or∣der. Villappendus says, that this History of Callimachus is a Fable, that the Greeks did not invent the Corinthian Chapiter, but took the Model thereof from the Temple of Solomon, where the top of the Pillars were adorn'd, as he says, with leaves of Palm-trees, unto which the leaves of an Olive-tree are more like than those of an Acanthus, which he tells us, never were us'd by the Ancients in the Corinthian Chapiters: However, the contrary is observed in many tops of Pillars, that are yet to be seen in Greece, and even in the Pil∣lars called Tutelles at Bourdeaux, the tops whereof are of the Corinthian Order, with the leaves of Acanthus. CORIOLANUS. After the taking of the Town of Corioli, the Consul C. Martius took the Sirname of Coriolanus. Dionysius Hal∣licarnasseus tells us, that Coriolanus being upon the Guard, the Enemies made a sally out of the Town and attacked him in his post, but he beat them back so vigorously, that he en∣tered the Town along with them, and set it on fire; which brought such terror upon the Inhabitants and the Garrison, that they quit∣ted the place. Plutarch relates this in a diffe∣rent manner, and says, that the Consul hav∣ing engaged the Volsci some miles from Cori∣oli, he perform'd wonderful deeds of Valour; and having routed them, he went at the head of a body of Reserve, and charged the Rear of the Enemies, who flying into Corioli for shelter, he got in promiscuously with them, and made himself Master of the Town. This great Captain, proud of the Nobility of his Family and his Rank, does treat the Roman people with too much Authority, and exas∣perated them to that degree, that they banish'd him out of Rome. Coriolanus highly resenting this Affront, retired among the Volsci, and came at the head of them to in∣camp on the Cluvian Trenches, two leagues∣off Rome, after he had taken many Towns from the Romans. The Romans, afraid of their lives, attempted to move him by Prayers. The Pontiffs and the most considerable of the Senate were sent to him, but could not prevail with him, and he yeilded only to the solicitations of his Mother and his wife Vo∣lumnia. He brought again the Volsci into their own Country, but they put him to death for having been so favourable to his Country. CORNELIA, Viz. FAMILIA. The Cor∣nelian Family. Many great men and worthy Ladies in the Roman Commonwealth came from that Illustrious Family.
CORNELIA, Pompey's Wife, for whom he had more tenderness and regard, than for the whole Empire. All his fear was upon her account, and he took more care to save her from the publick danger, than to prevent the ruine of the Universe. —Seponere tutum, Conjugii decrevit onus; Lesboque remotam Te procul a saevi strepitu, Cornelia, belli. Lucanus. After the loss of the battle of Pharsalia, Pompey encouraged her to constancy, telling her, that if she had lov'd only the person of her Husband, she had lost nothing; and if she had loved his Fortune, she might be glad to have now nothing else to love but his Person. —Tu nulla tulisti, Bello damna meo. Vivit post praelia magnus, Sed forma perit: quod defles, illud amasti. Luc. Cornelia imbark'd with Pompey, and depart∣ed from the Island of Lesbos, where she was left during the war. The Inhabitants of the Island were generally sorry at her departure, because she had lived all the while she was there, during her Husbands profperity, with the same modesty as she should have done in time of his adversity. Stantis adhuc fati vixit quasi conjuge victo. After the death of Pompey, she took no other pleasure but in mourning, and seemed to love her grief, as much as she had loved Pompey. —Saevumque arctè complexa dolorem, Parfruitus lacrymis, & amat pro conjuge luctum. CORNELIUS COSSUS, A milita∣ry Tribune, who kill'd Volumnius King of the Veientes in a pitch'd battle, and consecrated his Spoils called Opimae, to Jupiter sirnamed Pheretrius. CORNELIUS MERULA, He was Consul and Priest to Jupiter. He sided with Sylla, and got his Veins opened, for fear of falling into the hands of Marius, who had seized upon Rome with his party. CORNELIUS GALLUS, An intimate Friend to Augustas and Virgil, whose Encomi∣um you may read in the 4th Book of his Georgicks; under the name of Aristeus. He kill'd himself be∣cause he had been suspected of Treachery. CORNELIUS SEVERUS, An He∣roick Poet and a Declaimer; Quintilian and seneca speak commendably of him. CORNELIUS TACITUS, A Fa∣mous Historian and a wise Politician, who wrote the History of the Roman Emperors in sixteen Books of Annals, beginning from the death of Augustus. The six, seven, eight and ninth Books are lost. There were many other Illustrious Men of that Family. CORNICEN. He that bloweth a Horn or Cornet, invented by Marsyas in Phrygia. 'Tis a kind of a great Flute, with seven holes; there are some that are straight, made of a whole piece of wood, of Service-tree or Plum-tree: Some others are of two pieces and crooked. The Ancients made use of them in War and Sacrifices; those that were used in Sacri∣fices were commonly made with Box-tree, and those used for the Games were of Silver, or of Bones of Asses Legs, the sound whereof was more clear, as Plutarch relates it. CORNICULARIJ. A kind of Officers that stood at a corner of the Bar, where the Magistrate administred Justice, to hinder the people from coming in and di∣sturbing the Magistrate: Cornicularii, quia Cornibus secretarii praetoriani praeerant, says Cassio∣dorus. CORNIX, A Crow, a Bird with black Feathers, lesser than a Raven, but croaking and feeding upon Carrion like him. She fore-tells the Rain with her croaking, which was accounted a bad Omen to him that began any undertaking. Saepè sinistra cava praedixit ab ilico Cornix. Virg. Eclog. 1. And sometimes it was a good Omen. Farpeio quondam quae sedit culmine Cornix, Est benè non potuit dicere, dixit erit. Epigram. Maronis. Yet the Crow was under the protection of Concord, for Aelianus tells us, that the Anci∣ents were used to call upon the Crow in their Weddings. Politianus affirms that he has seen a Golden Medal of the young Faustina, Mar∣cus Aurelius his Daughter, and Wife to L. Verus, on the reverse whereof a Crow was represented as the Symbol of Concord. CORNU, The Horny hard part that grows on the head and at the feet of many Animals. The Ancients, says Plutarch, hung up Stags horns in the Temples of Diana, to shew that she was the Goddess of hunting. Servius tells us, that they represented the God of Sleep with a Horn. CORNU-COPIA, The Horn of Plenty, according to the Fable; 'tis a Horn from which came out all things that could be wish'd for, out of a priviledge that Jupiter gave his Nurse, whom they supposed to have been a She-goat or Amalthea. This Fable is grounded upon the fruitfulness of a Territo∣ry
of Libia, whose Figure is like an Ox's Horn, very abundant in Wine and rare Fruits, which King Ammon gave to his Daughter A∣malthea, whom the Poets have supposed to have been Jupiter's Nurse. CORONA, A Crown. Crowns were added to Honour, Virtue and the Atchieve∣ments of great men, by Priests in Sacrifices, by the people in Game, Shews and Feastings: and because of their several uses, they were made of several Materials, as we shall see afterwards. The Crowns that were bestowed upon merit, and for reward of great Actions were called Civica, Obsidionalis, Muralis, Ca∣strensis, Navalis, Vallaris, Ovalis, and Trium∣phalis. The Crown Civica was made of Branches of Oak with Acorns, or of ground Oak, and was given to such who had sav'd a Citizens life in a battle, having defended him, and killed his Enemy. The Crown Obsidionalis, was made of Grass called Gramen, gathered in the Camp, and gi∣ven in honour of the courage of the Soldier or Captain, who had forced the Enemy to raise the siege of a Town or Camp. The Crown Muralis was bestowed upon him, who had first scaled the Wall of a besieged Town or some other place, and entred by the breach. This Crown was of Gold or Silver, with Battlements of old Walls round about, in the form of Beams. The Crowns Castrensis and Vallaris were granted to such, who forc'd the Palisadoes and the Camp of the Enemies, and beat them from the Trenches and the Fences where they were retired. This Crown was made of Gold and Silver, with Pales of Palisadoes round about, like so many Rays. The Crown Navalis was of the same metal with the two former, formed with Beaks of Ships, and was given to him who first board∣ed the Enemies Ships. The Crown Triumphalis was at first made of Laurel; but afterwards they made it of Gold: the Cities sent it to the victorious General, to wear on the day of his Triumphal Entry. The Crown Ovalis was granted to him, who had obtained the lesser Triumph, called Ovatio, and was made of branches of Myrtle∣tree. They likewise crowned the Conquerors in the publick Games of Greece; the Crown of the Olympick Games dedicated to Jupiter, was made of wild Olive-tree. That of the Pythian Games, celebrated in the honour of Apollo, for the defeat of the Serpent Pytho, was of Laurel. That of the Isthmian Games, so∣lemnized in the honour of Palemon, kept in the Isthmus of Corinth, was made of branches of Pine-tree: and that of the Nemaean Games, celebrated in the honour of the young Arche∣morus, they gave a Crown of Smallage: and this is confirm'd by the four following Latin Verses of Alciatus, translated out of the Greek of Archias. Sacra per Argivas-certamina quatuor urbes Sunt; duo facta viris, & duo Coelitibus. Ʋt Jovis & Phaebi, Melicertaeque Archemorique Proemia sunt pinus, poma, apium, atque olea. In publick Feastings and Rejoycings they were crowned with Ivy, Roses, and other natural and artificial Flowers. Pliny tells us, that these Crowns or Garlands of Flowers were not used, and that they were kept for the Statues of the Celestial Gods. Menestus and Callimachus both Physicians, wrote against the use of Crowns of Flowers in Feastings, saying that they were hurtful to the Brain: but Typho another Physician, and Aristo a Peripatetick Philosopher main∣tained the contrary, and said that Flowers may open the pores of the Head, and make a free passage for the fumes of the Meat and Wine. It might however fall out, that some Flowers and Herbs may hurt the Brain; and this may be the reason why they left off the use of Garlands of Flowers, and made use of little woollen Bands, which they tied up about their Heads in their merry Meetings. Livy tells us at the end of his first Decade, that in the Year 460, all the Romans assisted at publick Games, with their Heads crowned with Laurel or Flowers, eodem anno coronati primùm ob res bello benè gestas, ludos Romanos spectaverunt, and the Conquerors were crown∣ed with Palm-branches. They likewise crown'd themselves with Flowers and Herbs, at the Sacrifices and Feasts in honour of the Gods; as it appears by ancient Marbles. They gave also the Gladiators, that were made free, a Crown of Wool. CORONA, In Architecture, is that part of the Cornish, which is called the Caves. Vitruvius by the word Corona understands the whole Cornish. CORONA LATA, The Cornish of the Dorick Order, according to Vitruvius. CORONIS, The Goddess Coronis, wor∣shipp'd in Sicyonia, according to Pausanias: She had no Temple, but they offered Sacri∣fices to her in the Temple of Pallas. CORONIS, Phlegias's Daughter, loved by Apollo; but being grown too familiar with Ischis, the Son of Elatus of Thessalia, a Raven who saw them together, acquainted Apollo with it. This rais'd his jealousie to that heighth that he slew her; and took the
Child out of her Womb, with the help of Mercurius, and called him Aesculapius, whom he committed to the care of Chiron the Centaur to be brought up, and the Raven's Feathers that were white before were changed into black, that he might mourn for ever for the death of Coronis, Apollo's Mistriss. Pin∣dar doth not mention any thing of the Ra∣ven, but says, that Apollo discovered himself the Infidelity of his Mistriss, that he slew her, and took the Child out of the womb of Coro∣nis, as they were going to burn her on a Fu∣neral Pile. CORTINA TRIPOS, A three∣footed Stool, covered with the skin of the Serpent Pytho, whereupon the Pythonissa or Priestess of the Temple of Apollo of Delphis, sat down to pronounce the Oracles of that God. Virgil takes this word for the Oracle itself. Nec te Phaebi Cortina fefellit. 1. Aen. The Oracle of Apollo has not deceived you. CORVINUS, A Sirname given to Valerius Maximus a Tribune, during the Con∣sulate of Furius and Appius ccccv years after the foundation of Rome, when the Gauls entered Italy: The two Armies being then in pre∣sence, a Gaul, of the stature of a Giant, came out of the Camp, and challenged the stoutest of the Romans. Valerius accepted the challenge, having first obtained leave of the Consuls; and fought him in the sight of both Armies: But the Historians observe a wonderful thing, that a Raven fell upon the Giant, and some∣times blinded him with his Wings, some∣times peck'd him, and scratched his Face and his Hands, and sometimes pearching upon the head-piece of Valerius, he assisted him to get the Victory, insomuch that he killed his Enemy on the spot; whereupon he took the name of Carvinus, and was so much consider∣ed since, that Augustus erected him a Statue in the Market-place of Rome. CORVUS, A Raven, a Brid of good Omen. Apollo took an Antipathy against him, because his indiscreet prattling caused the death of Coronis his beloved Mistriss, whom he killed out of jealousie: in punishment where∣of, he changed his white Feathers into black ones, as we learn it from Ovid, l. 2. Meta∣morphosis. Sperantemque sibi non falsae praemia linguae, Inter aves albas vetuit consistere corvum. 'Tis said, that young Ravens taken out of their Nest, and exposed to the smoak of brimstone-flower, become white. Ovid tells us, that Phoebus sent the Raven to fetch water, but having tarried too long, he excused his long stay upon the want of a Pitcher, and the fright he was put in by a Serpent; but the truth was, that he staid till the Figs were ripe, to feed upon them. A∣pollo did punish his lying, and forbid him to drink all the while the Figs were growing ripe. Addis, ait, culpae mendacia, Phoebus? & audes Fatidicum verbis fallere velle Deum? At tibi, dum lactens haerebit in arbore ficus, De nullo gelidae fonte bibantur aquae. The Poets have disguised a Physical Truth under this Fable; for the Ravens are sick and thirsty, all the while the Figs are milky, ac∣cording to Pliny: Corvi aegrescunt sexagenis diebus siti maximè, antiquam fici coquantur autumno. CORVUS, An Engine to pull down a Wall, called also a Crane; this Engine of War was found out by Cetras a Chalcedonian, which was made use of, says Polybius, to grap∣ple the Ships of the Enemies. This Historian makes an obscure description of it, and all that we can understand, is that there was a Pillar and a Ladder that turned upon it, at the end of the Ladder there was a Pully, through which went a Rope, having a very heavy Iron Hook to it, which they let fall into the Enemies Ship. CORYBANTES, The Priests of the Goddess Cybele, the Mother of the Gods, ac∣cording to the Fable; at the celebration of this Goddess's Mysteries, they ran up and down by Precipices, with their hair dishe∣velled. Some made incisions in their Elbow and elsewhere, others blew a Horn, beat the Drum, and play'd upon the Cymbals: So that Mount Ida resounded with their cries and debaucheries. By the help of this hor∣rid noise they saved Jupiter from the hands of Saturn, who would have devoured him, accord∣ing to the agreement made with Titan his Brother. They first inhabited Mount Ida, in Phrygia, thence they went to an Island cal∣led Creta, or Candia, upon a Mount that they likewise called Ida; and here they saved Ju∣piter with skipping and dancing, which they did perform by striking with Swords and Darts against Shields. 'Tis said that Rhea taught her Priests this dance in Creet and Phrygia. Some Authors confound the Cory∣bantes with the Curetes and Idaei Dactyli. This word is derived from the Greek  which signifies to to toss the head to and fro, as mad men do; but Diodorus Siculus writes, that they are called Corybantes, from one Corybantes the Son of Jason and Cibele, who introduced the mysteries of that Goddess in Phrygia.
CORYCEUM, vid. Coriceum. COTHURNUS, A Buskin, a kind of Shoe that the Roman Ladies did wear, that they might appear the taller. It was worn also by Actors of Tragedies, that they might the better represent Hero's: wherefore to express the lofty strain or high style of an Author, 'tis said that he wears the Buskin: & in cothurnis prodit Aesopus novis. Phaed. Aesop raises his Stile. This Shoe was soled with Cork, and covered the calf of the Leg, therefore Virgil says, Purpureoque alte suras vincire cothurno, 1. Aeneid. COTYLA. . An ancient mea∣sure of Liquors, containing nine ounces of Italian Measure, viz. an onnce less than the Roman Hemina. Apuleius says, that the Cotyla and Hemina were synonymous among the An∣tients, and that they are both taken for half the Sextarius. The Hemina, says he, is the half of the Sextarius; wherefore the Greeks call it Cotyle, i. e. incision or division, be∣cause it divides the Sextarius in two. Isidorus says the same in his Origines. Epiphanius says positively, that the Cotyla is the half of the Sextarius, and that it is called Cotyla, because it divides the Sextarius in two. Galen in his Books of Physick, makes use of the like ex∣pressions. Suidas also tells us, that in his time the Cotyla was called half the Sexta∣rius. CRANA, Janus his Daughter, who suc∣ceeded Sabatius in the Government of the Aborigenes. Berosus says, that Crana was Ja∣nus's Daughter, but according to Ovid, she was Apollo's Sister, and Janus his Mistress, and this God gave her for a reward of the last favour she had granted him, the office of overseer of the hinges of Doors, where∣upon she was called Cardinea. Prima dies tibi, Crana, datur, Dea cardinis haec est. —Teque Potitus, Jus pro concubitu nostro tibi Cardinis esto, Hoc pretium positae virginitatis habe. CRANUS, the Son of Crana and Janus, and not his Brother, as Berosus says. He honoured Crana very much, having de∣dicated a Wood to her on the Banks of the Tiber, and instituted a Feast to be kept every year. He reigned four and fifty years over the Aborigenes. CRASSUS, called Marcus, was a very eloquent and covetous Roman, he sled away from Rome into Spain, during the factions of Marius and Sylla. He put an end to the War of the Slaves, who had rebelled under the Conduct of Spartacus, whereupon they granted him the lesser triumph, which was performed on Foot, and called Ovation. Af∣terwards he was chosen Consul and Censor. The Government of Syria and Egypt fell to him. He proclaimed War against the Par∣thians, and was so forward in it, that he would not tarry till the Spring, but em∣barked in a very bad Season, and lost many of his Ships. Then trusting to an Arabian, whom he had taken for his Guide, he ven∣tured himself and his Army too far in a Desart Country, where Surena the Parthian Commander, intirely defeated the Roman Ar∣my. Publius his Son was killed in the Fight, and a while after he himself fell by treachery, and had his Head and right Hand cut off, and sent to King Orodes in Armenia, who poured melted Gold into his Mouth, that his dead body might be burned with the same Metal, that had inflamed his mind with an insatiable desire of Riches. Flor. l. 3. cap. 3. Plutarch adds, that he had plundered the Temple of Jerusalem, carrying away above 2000 Talents of Silver, and all the Gold that was found there, and Sidonius Apollinaris has observed that he laughed but once in the whole course of his life. There was another called Pub. Licinius Crassus, who was chosen Pontiff before he arrived at the usual age, and afterwards elected Consul, and was no less covetous than M. Crassus. He made War in Asia against Aristonicus, who called himself the Son of At∣talus, and under that pretence seized upon the Kingdom of Pergamus. He had more re∣gard to the Treasures of Attalus, than the management of the War: wherefore he was vanquished and taken alive in the Fight; but as they were bringing him to Aristonicus, he was killed by a Soldier, whom he provoked to do it, by striking out one of his Eyes with a Switch that he had in his hand, CREPIDA, A kind of a Shoe used in former times, like Slippers without a heel, made up of three Soles sewed together, that made a small noise in walking, upon which account they were named Crepidae a crepitu; but there are some Authors who derive this word from  a kind of Shoe used a∣mong the Greeks, which Persius calls in the first Satyr Crepidae Graiorum, and Suetonius af∣firms c. 13. in the life of Tiberius, that this kind of Shoe came from the Greeks. They were more especially made for the use of Philosophers, and men that lived in austeri∣ty, and a retir'd life. CREPITUS, A Fart, a Deity wor∣shipped by the Aegyptians under an obscene Figure, which might be seen in some curious collections of Antiquities.
CROESUS, King of Lydia, who pos∣sessed great Wealth and Treasure, and sent some Wedges of Gold for an offering to A∣pollo, as a reward for his false Oracles. He was taken Prisoner by Cyrus, and condemn'd to be burnt alive: being brought to the place of Execution, and lying upon the pile of Wood, he cried out Solon, Solon, (a Philo∣sopher whose advice he had despised in the time of his prosperity.) Herodotus en∣larges this History, and relates in the first Book of Clio, that Cyrus having defeated and taken Croesus Prisoner, put him in Irons, and got him ty'd fast to a pile of Wood, there to be burnt alive with fourteen young Chil∣dren of the chiefest Lords of Lydia. In this condition Croesus pronounced three times the word Solon. Cyrus asked him what God he was calling upon, he answered, that Solon was a Philosopher, who foretold him this misfortune: whereupon he commanded im∣mediately the Fire should be put out, but they could not do it. Then Craesus called upon Apollo, and a sudden Rain fell, which did put out the Fire. Lucian relates that Solon went to wait on Croesus at Sardis, the Capital Town of his Empire, and that Croesus spoke to him thus; Now, Solon, I have shewn thee all my Trea∣sures and Glory, pray tell me who is the happiest man in the world? Solon. There are very few Croesus, that deserve that name, but of all that I have ever known, Biton and Cleobis seem to me the most happy, who died both at the same time, after they had drawn the Priestess of Argos their Mo∣ther in a Chariot to the Temple: and Tellus, that illustrious Athenian, who, after he had lived a good life, died for his Country; for no man can be called happy before death, and when he hath finished his course. —Dicique beatus Ante obitum nemo, supremaque funera debet. Horace took this thought from the Oedi∣put of Sophocles. Xenophon in the 7th Book of the Cyropedia, relates the History of Croesus, after another manner, and says, that being defeated by Cyrus, he retired for shelter to Sardis, where Cyrus, having vigorously pursued him, the Inhabitants of the Town, to avoid the fury of the Conqueror, delivered up Croesus and their Town into his hands; then Croesus ap∣pearing before him, called him his Lord and Master, and told him the answer he had from the Oracle of Apollo how he might be happy, which was to know himself, ; but that his prosperity and great riches had blind∣ed him. CREUSA, The first Wife of Aeneas, and Daughter of King Priam and Hecuba, who was lost in the taking of Troy, and was delivered from the Grecian slavery by Cybele the mother of the Gods, and entertain'd in her service; as it is related by Virgil l. 2. Aeneid. v. 785. Non ego Myrmidonum sedes, Dolopúmve superbas Aspiciam, aut Grais servitum matribus ibo..... Sed me magna Deûm genitrix his detinet oris. Some say that Aeneas put her to death by the order of the Greeks, that none of Priam's race should remain alive; and others more probably believe that she was killed or taken prisoner, as she was following Aeneas that night Troy was taken, having lost her way in the burning of the Town. CREUSA, The Daughter of Creon King of Corinth, whom Jason married after his divorce from Medea, who being inraged for Jason's forsaking her, resolved to revenge that af∣front; and to that purpose, she seemed to be pleased with the new match, and sent to the Bride a Casket full of Precious Stones, so vio∣lently inchanted with fire in it, that as soon as she open'd it, it burnt her, and her Father Creon, with the Palace. CRIOBOLIUM, A Sacrifice of Rams, from the Greek word  which is a Ram. This word is to be seen in an Inscription at Rome. Diis Omnipotentibus, Lucius Ragonius Venustus, V. C. Augur Publicus P. R. Q. Pontifex, Vestalis Major, Percepto Taurobolio Criobolioque X. Kal. Jun. Dn. Valentiniano Aug. IIII. Et Neoterio Conf. Aram Consecravit. CROCODILUS, a Crocodile, a Beast that lives in the River Nile, &c. and was worshipped by the Aegyptians. 'Tis said he is very greedy of Dogs-flesh, wherefore the Dogs run all the while they are drinking Water out of the River Nile, lest they should be devoured by the Crododiles. Phaed. CROESUS, vid. after Crepitus. CROTALUM, was a kind of Casti∣nietta made of a Reed, divided into two, lengthways, which being struck one a∣gainst the other with different motions of the Fingers, made a sound like that the Stork makes with her Bill, wherefore the Anci∣ents gave that Bird the Epither of Crotalistria, i. e. Player upon the Crotalum. And Aristo∣phanes the Poet, calls a great talker a Crotalum.
Pausanias tells us, that Pisander Camirensis re∣ported that Hercules did not kill the Stym∣phalides with his Arrows, but that he had frighted and driven them away with the noise of the Crotala; and according to this Author the Crotalum must be a very ancient Instru∣ment of Musick, if it was made use of in Hercules his time. Ovid joins the Crotalum with the Cymbals. Cymbala cum crotalis prurientiaque arma Priapo Ponit, & adducit tympana pulsa manu. They acted several sorts of postures when they played with the Crotalon, as Dancers do when they dance Sarabands, and play with the Castaniets; as appears by an ancient Poem intituled Copa, attributed to Virgil. Clemens Alexandrinus, who ascribes the In∣vention of this Instrument to the Sicilians, would have the Crotala banished from the Fe∣stivals of Christians, because of the unbecom∣ing postures their sound was attended with. CRUMATA, Another kind of Casta∣niets made of little bones or shells, as Sca∣liger observes upon the Copa of Virgil, they were very common among the Spaniards, and especially among the Inhabitants of the Pro∣vince Baetica about Cadiz, to which Martial makes allusion: Nec ae Gadibus improbis puellae, Vibrabunt sine fine prurientes, Lascivos docili tremore lumbos. Epigr. 79. lib. 5. The same Poet in another place speaks of a Woman that could play with that Instru∣ment, and make motions with her Body. Edere lascivos ad Boetica crumata gestus, Et Gaditanis ludere docta modis. Epig. 71. l. 6. The Inhabitants of that Country have kept to this time the use of that Instrument, and from them Castaniets come to us. Yet these Castaniets were not unknown to the ancient Greeks. Aristophanes calls them , Oyster's shells, and Marshal, Testae. Audiat ille testarum crepitus. CRUPEZIA, Another kind of Casta∣niets to play with the feet, and were cal∣led Crupexia from the Greek word , to strike, and , the sole of the foot, accord∣ing to the Aetymology which Hesychius the Grammarian gives of it. Pollux says that these Crupezia's were Shoes, made use of by Players upon the Flure. Ar∣nobius lib. 7. against the Gentiles calls them Sea∣lla, and laughs at their superstition, saying, What, are the Gods moved with the sound of Cym bals, and the noise of Castaniets, (Scabillo∣rum)? Salmasius, who in his Commentary upon the life of Carinus, has collected all that is to be found in Authors about this kind of Castaniets, says that they were also called Scabella, Scamilla and Scamella, because it was like a little stool or a foot-stool, which they struck several ways with a wooden or iron shoe; but I think that these Castaniets were of several forms. There are some re∣presented like a Sandal made of two Soles, and a Castaniet tied betwixt them. Those who will be further inform'd in this matter, may read Bartolinus's Treatise de Tibiis veterum. CRUX, A Cross, a Gibbet of the An∣cient Romans, whereon they hanged their Slaves and Malefactors. This punishment was made use of among the Jews, Persians, Aegyptians, Greeks and Romans. The Criminals were tied to it with Ropes, or nailed, and always died upon it, but when they had hung there a while, they broke their Bones to make them expire the sooner, as they used the Male∣factors that were crucified with our Saviour. But since our Lord was crucified, the Em∣perors gave orders that no Criminal should be put to death upon the Cross. These Crosses were of several Figures, as Justus Lipsius tells us in his Treatise de Crucibus. CRYPTAE: Vaults appointed for the in∣terment of particular Families. CTEISBIUS, a Native of Alexandria was a Barber's Son, and naturally endowed with an excellent Genius for Mechanical In∣ventions, for which he had a strong inclina∣tion. He hung a Looking-glass in his Fa∣thers Shop, so that it might be easily pulled down, or raised higher, by means of an hid∣den Rope, which he thus performed. He put a wooden Tube under a Beam where he had fastened some Pullies, over which the Rope went, and made an angle in ascending and descending into the Tube, which was hollow, that a little Leaden Ball might run along it, so that the Ball passing and re-passing in this narrow Cavity, by its violent motion expelled the air that was in∣closed and condensed by compression and forced it against the air without; these oppo∣sitions and concussions made an audible and distinct sound; and observing by this, that air inclosed and expelled with violence, made a sound like the Voice, he was the first that from this principle invented Engines, which received motion from Water, also all Automa∣ta's that go by the force of Water inclosed; Engines that depend on the power of the Circle or Lever, and many other pleasant and useful Inventions, particularly Clocks that move by Water. To set these Engines at
work, he bored a Plate of Gold or a precious Stone, and he chose such kind of materials, as being subject to wear by the constant pas∣sing of the Water, or liable to contract filth to obstruct its passage. This being done, the Water which runs equally through the small hole raises a piece of Cork, or little Ship inverted, which Workmen call Tympa∣num, upon which is a Rule and some Wheels equally divided, whose Teeth moving one another, made these Wheels turn very lei∣surely. He also made other Rules and Wheels divided after the same manner, which by one single motion in turning round, pro∣duces divers effects, made several small I∣mages move round about Pyramids, threw up Stones like Eggs, made Trumpets sound, and performed several other things that are not essential to Clocks. This we have from Vitruvius lib. 9. c. 9. CTESIPHON. A famous Architect who made the Temple of Diana at Ephesus. He invented an Engine to bring the Pillars of this Temple from the quarries where they were dug out, to Ephesus; for he durst not make use of Carts, as others commonly do, because the wheels would have sunk in the way, under such a weight, but he got four pieces of Wood, each of four inches square, two whereof were joyned cross the other two, which were longer and even with the body of each Pillar. At both ends of each Pillar he drove in Iron Pins made like a Swallows Tail, and made them fast there with Lead, having fastened into the cros∣sing pieces of Wood, Iron-rings, to put in the Iron-pins; besides, he put some strong short poles of Oak at both ends of the En∣gine, to which the drawing Oxen were fast∣ned, and when they drew the Iron-pins that were in the Iron-rings, could turn free∣ly enough to let the body of the Pillars rowl easily upon the Ground; and thus he brought all the Pillars of the Temple of Diana. CUBITUS, A Cubit, an ancient Mea∣sure. Philander observes, that there were three kinds of Cubits, viz. The great one, which was nine ordinary Foot long; the middle one was two foot long, which was about a foot and ten inches of the common foot, and the small one was of a Foot and a half, which was about an inch and a half less than a common foot of twelve inches. CUBUS, A Cube, a solid and regular Body, with six square sides, all even, like its Angles, Dies, are little Cubes. This word comes from , Tissera, a Dice. A Cubical number is that which is multiplied twice, once by its root, and another time by its pro∣duct ('tis the third power in Algebra) 64 is a Cube number, produced by the multiplication of 4, which is the root, which makes 16 its Square: and multiplied again by 4 it makes 64, which is the Cube. A Cubical foot Cube, is a measure of so∣lid bodies, which are a foot every way. CULEARIA VASA, Vessels of the greatest content. This word is derived from Culeus, an ancient measure containing about 540 pints (which is near two Hogsheads,) it was the biggest measure for Liquors, Culeus hac nulla est major mensura liquoris, says Fannius. It was made of Leather or baked Earth, as we learn it from Varro. CUNEI SPECTACULORUM. The Seats and Benches in Theatres, which having a large basis, and growing narrower, the nearer they came to the Center of the Theatre, had the form of a Wedge, and therefore were called Cunei. CUNINA, A Goddess, who had the charge of Childrens Cradles, called Cunae. CUPIDO, The God of Love, according to the fable. There are several opinions concerning his birth. Hefiod says, he was born of the Chaos and the Earth; Tully after Lucian, of Mars and Venus; Arcesilas says, that he was the Son of the Night and the Air; Sapho of Calus and Venus; Seneca of Vulcan and Venus. Ovid and Plutarch are of opinion, that there were two Cupids, one celestial, which is innocent Love, and the other terre∣stial, which is filthy Love; the first born of Venus and Jupiter, the second of Erebus and the Night. He is represented like a Boy, naked and winged, with a vail over his eyes, car∣rying a quiver upon his Shoulders; and holding a Torch with one hand, and a Bow and some darts with the other, wherewith he wounded the hearts of Lovers. Plutarch tells us, that the Aegyptians and Greeks had two Cupids, one Celestial, and the other Common. Lucian seems to be of that opinion in the Dialogue betwixt Venus and Cupid; for there Cupid confesses, that tho he had pierced with his Darts all the other Gods, yet he had met with some hearts that were impenetrable, viz. Minerva's, the Muses, and Diana's. CURATORES, Omnium Tribuum. The Syndicks, who were the Protectors of the Districts of Rome, like the Aldermen of the Wards in London. CURATORES, Operum publicorum. The Overseers or Surveyors of publick works, who took care of them. CURATORES, alvei, Tiberis & cleaco∣rum, The Commissioners for cleansing the Ti∣ber, and the Common-shore of the City, they were establisht by Augustus, according to what Suetonius says, Nova officia excogitavit, curam operum publicorum, viarum, & aquarum alvei & Tiberis.
CURATORES, Viarum extra Urbem. The Commissioners for the Highways, Cawse∣ways, and Bridges about the City of Rome. CURATORES, Denariorum Flandorum, express'd in ancient inscriptions by these three Letters, C. D. F. The Warden of the Mint, called also Viri Monetales, who had the care of coining. The inscriptions of old Gold and Silver pieces were stampt with these five letters, A. A. A. F. F. i. e. Aere, Argento, Auro flando, feriundo, overseers for melting and coining species of Brass, Silver and Gold. CURATORES Kalendarii. Men who put out the publick money to interest, which was paid at the Kalends, or the first day of the month, from whence they were called Kalendarii. CURETES. The Inhabitants of the Isle of Crete, to whom Rhea committed the care of bringing up young Jupiter. The Curetes were accounted Inhabitants of Crete, because that worship pass'd from that Island to the rest of Greece and Italy, as it formerly came from Phoenicia into Egypt, Phrygia, and Samothracia, and from thence to Crete, from whence it was at last communicated to the Greeks. CURIA. A place, says Festus, where those who were intrusted with the care of publick affairs met; but Curia among the Ro∣mans signified rather the persons who met in Council, than the meeting place; for there was no certain place appointed for the Assem∣blies, the Senate meeting sometimes in one Temple, and sometimes in another. Yet there was certain places called Curia, as Cu∣ria Hostilia, Curia Calabra, Curia Saliorum, Cu∣ria Pompeii, Curia Augusti; but Antiquity has left us no account of those Edifices. There were two kinds of these places or Courts, some wherein the Pontiffs met a∣bout the affairs of Religion, and were called by a general word, Curiae Veteres; there were four of these, viz. Foriensis, Ravia, Vellensis, and Velitia, which were in the tenth Ward of the City of Rome, and the other, wherein the Senate assembled about State Affairs. We have this division from Varro, in the fourth Book, de Lingua Latina: Curiae duorum gene∣ra; & ubi Sacerdotes res divinas curarent, ut Curiae veteres; & ubi Senatus humanas, ut Curia Hostilia. CURIA CALABRA. The Court of Calabra was built by Romulus upon Mount Palatinus, as Varro says, or in the Capitol, in the same place where now the Storehouse for Salt is kept at the Conservators Lodging, as 'tis some other Authors opinion. It was called Calabra, from the verb Calare, i. e. to call, because it was the place appointed by Romulus, where the King of the Sacrifices called the Senate and the people, to tell them of the new Moons, the days for Sacri∣fices, and publick Games. CURIA HOSTILIA. The Court Hostilia, built by Tullus Hostilius, in the place where the Senate often assembled. CURIA POMPEII, or POM∣PEIA. The Court of Pompey adjoyning to the Theatre, which he caused to be built in the place now called Campo di Fiore. It was a very magnificent Palace; the Senate was assembled there when Julius Caesar was mur∣thered, and the Statue of Pompey was sprinkled with Caesar's Blood. At the Entry of this Palace was a magnificent Porch, supported with an hundred fine Pillars: It remained intire near three hundred years, and was burnt down in the time of the Emperor Philip, who succeeded Gordianus III. CURIA SALIORUM. The Court of the Salii, on Mount Palatine, where, the Augurial staff of Romulus was found intire, having receiv'd no hurt by the fire, after the Court was reduc'd to ashes, as Tully relates in his Books de divinatione. CURIA JULIA or JULII. The Court of Julius Caesar. CURIA AUGUSTI, The Court of Augustus. CURIA OCTAVIA. The Court of Octavia, Augustus his Sister. CURIA POMPILIANA. The Pompilian Court. CURIA CATONIS. The Court of Cato. There are several other Courts mentioned by Vopiscus in the life of the Gordiani. All these places had nothing material, but that they were called after the names of those who built them. The Senate never met in those places till they were consecrated by the Augurs. CURIAE. The Roman People was at first divided into three Tribes, and each in ten Curiae. Each Curia had its Curio or Priest, who had the care of the Sacrifices, and Feasts proper to each Curia; as we learn from Dionysius Halicarnasseus. This was like Popish Parishes, which have their peculiar Saints Feasts and Curates, and these Curates a Bishop at their head, called by the Romans Curio Maximus, the first of the Curates, who, in spiritual Affairs, govern'd all the Curio's and Curiae, Maximus Curio, cujus authoritate Cu∣riae, omnesque Curiones reguntur, says Festus. Livy relates, that Romulus called each Curia after the names of the Sabin Ladies, whom he had stole away. Yet this is not likely; for there is no name of the Sabin Ladies in History: And Dionysius Halicarnasseus tells us, that they took their name from the part of the Town were they dwelt. Each Curia maintained its Curio with the offerings and tythes that each Inhabitant paid
him, or by some contribution of money; which Festus calls Aes Curionium, quod dabatur Curioni ob sacerdotium Curionatûs. The Sacrifices of the Curiae were called Curionia and Curialia Sacra, like the Parochial Masses of the Church of Rome, where every particular man of the Curiae is bound to be present: Wherefore Romulus and Numa had assigned Funds to bear the charges of these sacrifices, and keep the Feastings made after the sacrificing was over, which were called Agapae. CURIO. The Priest or Curate of each Curiae or Parish. Varro derives the Etymology of Curio from Curia, because the Curio's were established to be spiritual heads in the Curiae. Curioni dicti a Curiis, qui fiunt ut in his sacra fa∣ciant; others take it from cura care, because they offer sacrifices for their Parishioners. The Popish Curates have a great Analogy to these ancient Curio's, as to their office, (laying Paganism aside) for the name agreed with them, either taken from Curia or Cura: their office is alike; for the Curates are sub∣ordinate to a first Curate, viz. the Bishop, and receive orders from him concerning what must be done in their Parochial Churches, what rites and ceremonies ought to be observed, either in the administring of the Sacraments, or the rest of Divine service, and the list of the Feasts that are to be kept; likewise the Curions instituted by Romulus, were subjects to the Curio called Curio Maximus, who gave them directions about the Feasts of each month, the ceremonies of the sacrifices, and several other things contained in the ri∣tual or formularies they had made concern∣ing them. Therefore Festus defines this great Curio, a man by whom all is done in the Cu∣riae, and is an Overseer over all the Curio's: Maximus Curio, cujus auctoritate Curiae omnesque Curiones reguntur. After the Curio's Death, the Curiae chose themselves their Curio, as it was granted them by Romulus, and then presented him to the great Curio to be confirmed by him. The Christian Churches formerly chose their Cu∣rates after the same manner. CURIO MAXIMUS, The great Curio, who had authority over all the Curio's, with respect to the external Policy. He was chosen by the Assembly of all the Curio's, and then was confirmed by the Senate and the people. CURIUS DENTATUS, a Roman Consul, who triumphed over the Samnites and Sabines during his Consulship. The Sam∣nites, who had suffered great losses by this great man, attempted to bribe him. Where∣fore they sent him Deputies, who found him at Table sitting upon a form, and eating some Turnips in an earthen Dish: whereupon they offered him a rich present of Plate. But he smiling told them in contempt, That he had rather command rich men, than to be over∣burthen'd with these superfluities. CURSOR, a Courrier, such a one as Martial speaks of in an Epigram. Cursorem sextâ tibi, Rufe, remissimus horâ. Livy tells us, that Sempronius Gracchus, a very active youth, was chosen for a Courrier, and that in three days he arrived at Pella, having rid very fleet Horses appointed for that pur∣pose; and this shews that a long time before Augustus the Romans had Post-horses settled in their Empire, as is also mentioned by Sueto∣nius. Xenophon l. 8. de Cyropedia says, that Cyrus was the first inventer of them, and set∣tled Post-horses from place to place, with a Post-master, to receive and take care of the Packets that the Courriers brought, that he might have fresh news from the most re∣motest places. Herodotus in Urania says, that Xerxes was the first that established them after his defeat. CURTIUS QUINTUS, A Roman Knight, who devoted himself for the pub∣lick good, during the Consulship of Q. Servi∣lius Ahala, and L. Genutius. A great Abyss opened in the place where the Assemblies were kept at Rome, which they attempted to fill, but to no purpose; whereupon they had recourse to Oracles, who answered, that this Pit could never be shut up, but by throwing into it, that in which the Romans did excel above all other Nations. The Se∣nate assembled upon this answer, and Q. Curtius a young Roman Knight presented himself to the Senate, and shewed them, that Rome was not more fruitful in the pro∣duction of any particular thing, than other Cities, and that which made her so famous, was the brave men that she brought up; and that the Gods demanded but a Roman to expiate for that prodigy, and that he offered himself freely to lay down his life to fill up that Abyss. After this Speech Curtius put on his Arms, and riding upon his Horse, he spurr'd him on into the Abyss. The people that were spectators of that action presently threw flowers upon him, and made offerings; and the hole closed of itself by degrees. This place was called since the Curtian Lake. CUSTODES. Some Roman Officers appointed to prevent any deceit in the deli∣vering Tickets for the election of Magi∣strates. CYATHUS. A small Vessel, wherewith they took the Wine out of a larger Vessel. The Cyathus contained an ounce and a half of liquor.
CYBELE. The Daughter of Coelus, Si∣ster and Wife to Saturn, who begot Jupiter. Fabulous Antiquity gave her many names, sometimes she is call'd the mother of the Gods, Rhea, Cybele, Dindymia, Berecynthia, Pessmuntia, &c. Pliny says that the Earth is rightly call'd our Mother, because God gave it to men to be their Palace, as Heaven is his own. The Pagans called her the Mother of the Gods, meaning by those, Gods those who had been men; and honoured her under the name of Rhea and Cybele: She was principally honoured in Phrygia: She took from thence most of her names; Cybele, Dindyma and Ida are Mountains of Phrygia; Berecynthia, Pessi∣nus, Andira are Towns of Phrygia; Mygdonia is a little Country: and from these several places she has got her different names. She was not only called Cybele, as Faustus says, but also Cybebé; because, says he, she makes people run mad, from the Greek word , agere in furorem. Rhea is derived either from , to run, because of the rains and celestial influences, that make the earth fruitful; or because of the continual flowing of seeds and generati∣ons of all terrestrial natures; or rather this name comes from , terra, by a transposition like that of  in , aer. The Greek word , terra, comes plainly from the Hebrew Erets, which signifie the same thing, and Rhea might be directly derived from it. Dindymia. She had this name from a Moun∣tain in Phrygia or Troades, called Dindyma, where she was particularly worshipp'd, and from whence her Feasts and Ceremonies were brought to the Greeks and Romans. Idaea, because of Mount Ida in Phrygia, where she was likewise adored. Berecynthia, from a Castle of Phrygia of that name, near the River Sangaris, or from the Mountains of that name, as Fulgentius relates. Pessinuntia, from the Town Pessinus; or, as Herodian says, because a Statue fell formerly in the fields of Phrygia, which was thought to be the Statue of Cybele; or because the place where the Phrygians solemniz'd the feast of this Goddess was call'd Pessinus, on the banks of the River Gallus. The Romans ha∣ving conquer'd this Country, were advis'd by the Oracle, that if they could transfer to Rome the Goddess of Pessinus, their Empire should be raised to a soveraign degree of greatness: whereupon they sent a famous Embassy to the Magistrates of that Country, to ask them leave to bring her to Rome, which was grant∣ed them: and they carried that Deity (which was but a nasty, rough and unpolish'd Stone) on board of their Ship, and brought her to Rome: as Ovid says, Est moles nativa: loco res nomina fecit; Appellant saxum, pars bona montis ea est. Fast. l. v. v. 150. CYBELE, is derived either from the Greek word , and , i. e. to make Gam∣bols, and shake the head; because the Priests of this Goddess, called Corybantes, Daetyli Idaei, Curetes and Galli, danced and shook their heads like mad men on the day of the feast; or this word comes from the place cal∣led Cybele, or in fine from a little Grove of Pine-trees consecrated to her. She is also called Maja, i. e. Mother or Nurse. This word is common both to the Greeks and Latins: and in all likelihood is a Greek word, and signifies a Nurse, which is the Earth. But those that will have it a Latin word derive it from Majus, which is the same with Magnus, from whence comes Major and Majestas. The Romans honoured the Earth by the names of Tellus and Tellumo, Tellus was the fe∣minine name, and Tellumo the masculine, and so it was a God and Goddess. St Austin re∣lates to this purpose what Varro says on this subject: The same Earth has a double ver∣tue, a Masculine virtue to produce Seeds, and a Feminine vertue to receive and nourish them; from the latter she was called Tellus, and from the other Tellumo. The Romans called also the Earth Ops, be∣cause of her power to give help. Opis is dif∣ferent from Ops, and 'tis one of the names of Diona, among the Greeks, because she helps women in labour. King T. Tatius built her a Temple under the name of the Goddess Ops. They gave her also the name of , as much as to say , terra mater. Plato derives this name from , dans ut mater. St Austin, in the 7th Book, ch. 24. de Civi∣tare Dei, relates the explanation that Varro gives of all the mysterious particulars of the worship of Cybele or the Earth. She is cal∣led, says he, the mother of the Gods; the Drum which is ascribed to her, is the Figure of the Globe of the Earth; the Turrets that she carries over her head, re∣present the Towns; the Seats that sur∣round her, shew that she only stands still, while all things are in motion round about her; the Eunuch Priests who attend her, denote that to get Corn and Seeds the Earth must be manured, because all things are to be found in her Bosom; their agitations and motions before their Goddess, teach Husbandmen that they must not lye still, because they have always something to do; the sound of Cymbals denote the noise of
the Instrument of Husbandry; the Cymbals are made of Brass, because they were for∣merly of that Metal, before Iron was found. The tame and untied Lion gives us to un∣derstand, that there is no Land so wild and and barren, but may be manured. Besides, Tellus having many Names and Sirnames, she was taken for several Deities. They think, says he, that Tellus is the Goddess Ops, because she mends, and grows better by Labour; the Mother of the Gods, because she brings forth a great many things; the great Mo∣ther, because she produces Food; Proserpina, because Corn comes out of her Bosom; Vesta, because she cloaths herself with Grass and green Turf. This is the Physical Explication of the most particular things Poets and Historians have feigned concerning Cybele, so much reverenc'd by the Greeks and Romans. By all these names they meant the same Goddess, viz. the most effeminate part of the world, which is like its Mother; whereas the Sun and Stars are con∣sidered as the Father thereof Strabo informs us of the greatest part of the Ceremonies used in honour of this Goddess, which were always performed with fury and transport of mind. The fury of the Priests of Cybele was the voluntary agitation of Fana∣tick Men, who made a great noise and tumult, and cut their Bodies with Knives, so that these Sacrifices of Cybele, were like those performed by the Priests of Baal, related in the Book of Kings. Pliny tells that the Priests of Cybele used to cut off the marks of their Sex with a Knife, made of Medicinal Earth, found in the Island of Samos, and that they run in no danger of their Life, when they made use of that sort of Knives. There is an old Marble at Rome, cut in ho∣nour of the great Mother of the Gods, with the figure of that Goddess crown'd with a Turret, holding with one hand a Drum, and with the other some Ears of Corn: She sets upon a Chariot drawn by two Lyons, attend∣ed by Atys, who holds a Ball in his Hand, and leans upon a Pine-tree, for this Tree was con∣secrated to her. There are yet three Medals to be seen where Cybele is otherwise represented. One is of the Emperor Severus, where she is represented holding with one hand a Scepter, and with the other a Thunder-bolt, and her Head co∣vered with a Turret: She rid upon a Lyon flying through the Air. The other Medal is of the Emperor Geta, stampt after the same manner, with this Inscription Indulgentia Au∣gustorum. The third is of Julia, who represents the Mother of the Gods crown'd with Tur∣rets, attended by two Lions, and sitting upon a Throne, she holds with her right hand a branch of Pine-tree, and lays her left hand on a Drum, with this Motto Mater Deum. This Goddess is also represented with a great many Breasts, to shew that she feeds Men and Beasts, and carries Turrot on her Head, and has two Lions under her Arms. CYCLOPES, The Cyclopes, a race of fierce and haughty Men, who have but one Eye in the middle of their Forehead. Poets have given this Name to some Inhabitants of Sicily, whom they feign'd to be Vulcan's Assist∣ants in the making of Jupiter's Thunder-bolts, they made also the Arms of Achilles and Aenca. They were so named, because they had but one round Eye in the middle of their Fore∣head. They are the Sons of Heaven and Earth, as Hesiod tells us, or of Neptune and Amphitrits, as Euripides and Lucian say. Those of most note among them are Polyphemus, Brontes, Ste∣ropes and Pyracman. Apollo kill'd them with his Arrows, to revenge the death of his Son Aescu∣lapius, whom Jupiter had kill'd with a Thun∣derbolt, made by these Cyclopes. Poets say also, that Polyphemus was Shepherd to Neptune, and Galatea's Lover, and that Ulys∣ses put out his Eye with a Fire-brand, to re∣venge the death of his Companions, whom the Cyclopes had eaten. CYCLUS SOLIS, The Cycle of the Sun or of the Dominical Letters, is a revolu∣tion of 28 Years, which being expired; the same Dominical Letters return again in the same order. To understand this well, it must be obser∣ved, that the Year being composed of Months and Weeks, every Day of the Month is markt in the Calendar with its Cypher, and one of these seven Letters A, B, C, D, E, F, G. The first Letter begins with the first Day of the Year, and the others follow in a perpetual Circle to the end. Wherefore these Letters might be unalter∣able, to denote every Holy-day or every Day of the Week, as they are in respect to the Days of the Months, if there was but a cer∣tain and unvariable number of Weeks in the Year; and as A marks always the first of Ja∣nuary, B the 2, C the 3, so A should mark al∣ways Sunday, B, Munday, &c. But because the Year is at least of 365 Days, which make up 52 Weeks and a Day over; it happens that it ends with the same day of the Week with which it began; and so the following Year begins again, not with the same Day, but with the next to it: And from thence it fol∣lows, that A, which answers always the first of January, having noted the Sunday for one Year, (for which reason 'tis called the Domi∣nical Letter) it will note the Monday in the following Year, and G will note the Sunday: and so forward.
'Tis plain, by what has been said, that if the Year had but 365 Days, this Circle of Do∣minical Letters, should end in seven Years by retrograding G, F, E, D, C, B, A. But because every four Years there is a Leap-Year, which has one Day more, two things must needs happen. First, That the Leap-Year has two Domini∣cal Letters, one of which is made use of from the first of January to the 25th of February, and the other from that Day till the end of the Year. The reason of it is plain, for reckoning twice the 6th of the Kalends, the Letter F which notes the Day, is also reckon∣ed twice, and so fills up two Days of the Week: From whence it follows, that the Letter that till then had fallen upon Sunday, falls then but upon Monday, and that the fore∣going Letter by retrograding comes to note Sunday. The second thing to be observed is, that that having thus two Dominical Letters every fourth Year, the Circle of these Letters doth not end in seven Years as it would do; but in four times seven Years, which is 28. And this is properly called the Cycle of the Sun, which, before the correction of the Kalendar, began with a Leap-Year, whereof the Domi∣nical Letters were G, F. CYCLUS LUNARIS, The Cycle of the Moon. It was no less difficult to deter∣mine by a certain Order, the Days of the New Moons in the course of the Year. To this purpose a great many Cycles were propo∣sed, which afterwards Experience shewed to be false, and they were obliged to receive this Cycle of 19 Years, Invented by Methon of A∣thens, called the Golden Number, to make the Lunar Year agree with the Solar; for at the end of them the New Moons returned again on the same Days, and the Moon began again her course with the Sun, within an Hour and some Minutes or thereabouts. This Number was called the Golden Number, either for its excellency and great use; or because, as some say, the Inhabitants of Alexandria sent it to the Romans in a Silver Calendar, where these Numbers from 1 to 19 were set down in Golden Letters. This Number has been cal∣led the great Cycle of the Moon, or Deceunovenna∣lis, and , of 19 Tears; or Me∣thonicus from the Name of its Author. This Golden Number has been of great use in the Calendar, to shew the Epacts and New Moons, ever since the Nicene Council ordered that Easter should be kept the first Sunday after the Full Moon of March. However, this Cycle was not settled every where, according to the same manner in the Calendar; for the Western Christians, called Latins, imitating the Hebrews, reckon'd the Golden Number 1. on the first day of Janua∣ry of the first Year: But the Christians who Inhabited Asia, under the name of Christians of Alexandria, placed the Golden Number 3. at the same day. CYCNUS, A Swan, a Bird living in or about the Waters, very fine to behold, with a long and straight Neck, very white, except when he is young. Ovid in the 12th Book of his Metamorphosis, says that Cycnus was King of Liguria, and kin to Phaeton, who for the grief of his death was changed into a Bird of his name. 'Tis said that Swans never sing but when they are at the point of death, and then they sing very melodiously. Tully in his Tusculans tells us, that Swans are dedicated to Apollo the God of Divination, who being sensible of their approaching death, rejoice and sing with more harmony than before. I ucian on this account laughs at the Poets, in his Treatise of Amber or the Swans. I also expected, says he, to have heard the Swans warbling all along the Eridanus, having learn'd that the Companions of A∣pollo had been there changed into Birds, who still retain their singing, for a token of their excellency in Musick. But this I fouud as fabulous as the rest; for inquiring of the People thereabouts, they told me, that in∣deed, sometimes they saw Swans upon the Eridanus; but that their singing, or rather screaming, was not more grateful than that of other River-Fowls. CYDIPPA, A Noble and Beautiful Lady, whom Acontius lov'd and married by an Artifice; for his Birth not permitting him to pretend to so great a Match, he wrote these words upon an Apple, I take my Oath by the Mysteries of Diana that I will be thy Wife: then he let fall this Apple at the Feet of Cydippa; who took it up, and read what was written upon it, and so engag'd herself thereby to make these words good, for whenever she de∣sign'd to marry another Man, she fell dange∣rously ill, which she imputed to Diana's. an∣ger, and to appease her she married Acontius. Ovid in his Epistles of Acontius and Cydippa. CYLINDRUS, A Cylinder, a solid body extended in length, equally round, the extremities whereof are equal Circles. Archi∣medes has writ an excellent Book upon the Cy∣lendes. Petit has made a Treatise of the A∣rithmetical Cylinder, called Rabdology, which are Fillets of Past-board set in order upon a Cylinder, that is easily turned about. This Invention is owing to Napier a learned Scotch-man. CYMBALA. Cymbals, This word comes from the Greek , i. e. hollow, be∣cause they were made like two little Porrin∣gers
of Copper or Brass, and for that reason were sometimes called only Aera. These Cymbals were found, as we may see by the Figures that we have of them, and by this verse of of Propertius. Quâ numerosa fides, quâque aera rotunda Cy∣beles. Cassiodorus, who has described Cymbals, calls them Acetabula, i. e. a hollow piece, as the concavities of the Bones, that receive the head of another Bone, and are therefore called Acetabula, the Box of the Bones. St Austin, upon the 101 Psalm says, that Cym∣bals must touch one another to make a sound, and that antient Authors compare them often to the Lips. Fulgentius in the first Book of his Mythology tells us, that the two Lips are like Cymls that form the sounds, and the Tongue like the bow of a Musical Instrument, that cuts and divides them. Isidorus Pelutioca having compared the Psalte∣rion, the Cythara, the Drum, the Strings and the Organs, used in ancient Ceremonies, with several parts of the Body, compares al∣so Cymbals to the Lips, because they form sounds, by pressing and striking one against the other like Cymbals. Ovid, in the 3d Book, de arti amandi, calls Cymbals by a name that seems very difficult to be understood. Disce etiam duplici genialia nablia palma Verrere. He gave them this Epithet genialia, because they used Cymbals at Weddings, and other Diversions. This Instrument being com∣posed of two separated pieces, several Au∣thors call it by names in the plural number, as Petronius, Intrans Cymbalisiria & concrepans aera. A woman coming in, and playing on a Cymbal. CYNOSURA. The name by which the Grecians call the little Bear. It signifies Dogs-tail. 'Tis the nearest constellation to our Pole, consisting of seven Stars, four of them are in a square Figure like the four Wheels of a Chariot, and the three others in a long Figure like the beam of a Cart; whence the Country-people call that Star the Chariot, and from one the number of these Seven Stars, our Pole, and all that are of Heaven to the Aequinoxial Line, are called Septentrional. CYNTHOS. A Hill in the Isle of Delos, covered with very thick Trees, where Latona brought forth Apollo and Diana, and upon that account Horace calls him Cyn∣thius. CYPARISSUS, A young man of extraordinary Beauty, who was not to be comforted for the death of a Stag, that he had killed a hunting, and would murther himself; whereupon Apollo changed him in∣to a Tree called after his name Cyparissus, a a Cypress, which is carried in Funeral pomps, and consecrated to dead men. CYRUS. The Son of Cambyses, who transferr'd the Empire from the Medes to the Persians. He subdued the Assyrians, took Ba∣bylon, made war against Croesus King of Lydia, and took him prisoner. He set at liberty the Jews, who were captive in Babylon, and sent them again into their own Country, un∣der the conduct of Zorobabel, with order to rebuild the Temple of Jerusalem. This hap∣pened two hundred years after their captivi∣ty, as it was foretold by Isaiah and Esdras. But this Prince being at War with the Scy∣thians, and Massagetes, he was slain with two hundred thousand men in an ambush laid by Queen Tomyris, who cut off his head, and threw it into a vessel full of blood, with this invective, Satiate thy self with Blood, which thou hast so much thirsted after. CYTHARA. A Musical Iustrument with strings, of a triangular figure, which was played upon with a bow, as it is descri∣bed in a Letter attributed to Hieronymus. And according to what Pausanias says, Cythara and Lyra were two instruments, and Mercurius was the inventer of the Lyra, and Apollo of the Cythara. Yet most of the Ancient Poets con∣found these two Musical instruments, be∣cause they are very like one another. For Cythara was of a triangular figure, and the Lyra after the form of two opposite SS. There are some Statues and Medals whereon Apollo is represented with the Lyra in his hand, and sometimes with the Cythara. CYTHERA. An Island in the Aegean Sea, where the Goddess Venus was drove a∣shore in a Sea-shell, and there the Inhabitants built her a magnificent Temple, from whence Venus was call'd Cytherea. CYTHERON. Mount Cytheron near Thebes, consecrated to Apollo and the Muses: called upon that account Cytherides. There were celebrated the Orgia, or Feasts dedica∣ted to Bacchus.
D. D. The fourth letter of the Alphabet, cal∣led by the Hebrews Daleth, by the Greeks Delta, and the Romans D. This letter is like∣wise the third consonant, which is often pro∣nounc'd like a T; for 'tis properly but a di∣minution of the T, according to what Quin∣tilian says. Wherefore some learned men in the Greek tongue pronounce the Tau as a Delta after the , and pronounce , as if it were written ; which may be an ac∣ceptable softning in the pronunciation, tho 'tis not a fault to say otherwise. In the Latin tongue the D and the T have a great affinity, and are often chang'd one for another, as At for Ad. And Quintilian laughs at those who scruple to write indifferently, one for the other, set for sed, haut for haud, and others, to be seen in antient Inscriptions. D, is also a Numerical Roman Character, which signifies five hundred: because D is the half of a Gothick M, that makes a Thou∣sand. If there is a stroke over D, it stands for five thousand. D was formerly made use of instead of the Letter P, as in the antient Inscription, Denates for Penates. D, alone signifies Decius, Divus, Diis, &c. DACRYMAE, is often written by Livy instead of LACRYMAE, tears; from the Greek word  or  lacrymae. DACTYLI IDAEI Cybele having brought forth Jupiter and Juno at one Birth, the story tells us, that she only shew Juno to Saturn, and gave Jupiter to the Curetes or Cory∣bantes to be nursed up by stealth, because his Father would have devoured him. The Cory∣bantes, lest the crying of the little Jupiter should discover him, invented a kind of a dance which they called Dactyli, where they met one another, striking upon little Brass Shields with measured intervals. And this noise hindred Saturn from hearing the crys of his Son. Lucian says, that the Dactili Idaei, having received the God Mars from the hands of Juno, being yet a Child, they taught him dancing before the exercise of Arms, as if the dancing was a prelude of the War. , Daduchus, a Greek word that signifies Lamp-bearer. Hesichius explaining this word , which was the name for∣merly given to the Torch-bearer of the God∣dess Ceres, explains it by that of Lamp-bear, and renders the word , which signifies a Torch, by the word Lamp. Yet some an∣cient Authors make a distinction betwixt Lamps and Torches. Trebellius Pollio in the life of the Emperor Galitnus, gives an ac∣count of a procession, where the people car∣ried Torches and Lamps, cum cereis facibus, & lampadibus praecedentibus Capitolium petunt; but it must be observed, that the Torches of the Ancients were not made like our Flambeaus, for they had no wick; and a great many of them were Lamps set in the end of a Stick, or some Pitch put to the end of a Bundle. DAEDALUS, An Athenian, whom Mercury made famous in Mechanicks. He fled from Athens into Crete, where he went into the service of King Minos. There he made the Labyrinth with so many ways turn∣ing and winding about, that men who had got once into it, could never get out. Some∣time after Minos being displeased at him, put him into the same Labyrinth with his Son Icarus, but he made himself and his Son Wings, which he fastned with Wax, and so flew away. Icarus flew so high, and so near the Sun, contrary to his Fathers advice, that the Sun melted the Wax of his Wings, and he fell down into that Sea, which was ever since called after his name, the Icarian Sea. Dadalus flew safely to Sardinia, and from thence to Cumae, where he built a Temple to Apollo. Diodorus Siculus enlarges the History or Fa∣ble of Daedalus, and says, that Daedalus was the Son of Micio an Athenian, and the most ingenious Artificer of his age for Mecha∣nicks, and invented the Plummer, the Au∣gur, the Rule, and many other Tools for the perfecting of that Art. He was the first also who in Statues expressed all the parts of Humane Body, in their natural Scituation, which gave birth to a report that he gave motion to them. Notwithstanding he had got a great name by his works, yet he was forced to fly from Athens, having been con∣demned to dye by the Areopagus, for the death of Talus his Nephew, whom he killed out of jealousy, because he had found out the Potters, and Turners Wheel, with all Tools fit for the perfection of that Art. He retired then to King Minos in Crete, who had married Pasiphae, one of the Daughters of the Su. This King Minos offering one day a Bull in sacrifice to Neptune, kept a very fine one, and sacrificed a lesser in his place; whereupon the Gods grew angry, and inspired his Wife with an immoderate love for that Bull; and to enjoy him, Daeda∣lus made a wooden Cow, wherein Pasiphae putting herself, plaid the Beast with that Bull, and begot Minataurs.
Lucian thus unfolds this Fable. I fancy, says he, Daedalus and his Son were learned in Astrology, and that the one having puz∣zled himself in that Science, gave occasion to the Fable. Perhaps also Pasiphae, having heard the other Discourse of the Celestial Bull, and of other Stars, became enomour'd with his Doctrïne, whereupon the Poets feigned that she was fallen in love with a Bull, which she enjoy'd by his means. Au∣thors ascribe to Daedalus the invention of the Potters Wheel, the Plummet and the Sails for Ships; and this gave birth to the Fable of his having made Wings for himself to get out of Crete. Diodorus Siculus continuing that History, says, that the Cretians refusing to obey Minos, after the death of his Father Asterius, he begg'd the assistance of a Prince, called , with whom his Wife Pasiphae was in Love, and en∣joy'd him by the help of Daedalus, who fa∣voured it; but the King having discover'd the Intreague, they flew all away with Tau∣rus on board his Ships, to avoid the Anger of the Prince. Philochorus says, that the  was no∣thing else, but a cruel and bloody Officer of King Minos, called Taurus; and this King ha∣ving instituted Funeral Fights in remembrance of his Son Andregeas, Taurus did overcome all such who presented themselves to fight, and got the prize, which was a Tribute of some Children, that Minos exacted of the Athenians. Thesmus overcame him, and freed the Athenians from that unnatural Tribute. DAEMON, . Genius an Angel, ate. This word in the Holy Scripture, is always taken for the Devil, or a bad Genius. Aleius gives us a short definition of the na∣ture of Daemons, and tells us that they have a rational Soul, a Body of Air, and that they are everlasting, tho' they are obnoxious to the same passions with Men. And that the Predictions, Augurs, Divinations, Answers of Oracles, Dreams and Magick Performan∣ces belong to them. He pretends that they carry Mens Prayers to the Gods, and bring to Men the Favours they obtain'd from them. He has written a whole Book of Socrates his God, or Socrates his Devil, according to St Austin. He gives an account of the Opinions of the Platonick Philosophers, who divided Intellectual Natures into three Orders, viz. Gods, Men and Daemons; i. e. of Inhabitants of Heaven, Earth and Air. They said that Daemons were Immortal like the Gods, but were obnoxious to Passions like Men, and lo∣ved the filthy Diversions of Theatres and the Fables of the Poets. Cassianus has handled at large all Questions relating to Daemons in his Conferences, where he shews that there are Daemons of several kinds; some called Fauni, who love to play and laugh with Men, but do them no harm; others delight in hurting Men, and drawing them into all kind of Crimes. He tells us that Daemons were formerly Angels, whom God created before Corporeal Beings; but revolting against the Soveraign Power, they were precipitated into the Air, which is full of them; that God out of his goodness and mercy has not permitted that we should see them, lest the terror, example and conta∣gion of their Crimes should draw us into per∣dition. St. Justin says, that God having created the Angels, some of them forsook the Law of their Lord, and were taken with a brutish passion for Women, and begot the Daemons; afterwards these rebellious Angels and the Daemons, brought uncleanness and wars upon the Earth, and that Poets having described these Wars, have introduced Jupiter acting in part therein. By this word Daemons, 'tis said, St Justin understands the Titans and Giants, whom Idolatrous Nations have worshipped as their Gods, and many of the Fathers have been of the same opinion with Justin, that they were begot by the disobedient Angels and Women. Athenagoras has followed Justin's steps. Yet he has expresly observed, that Giants were begotten by the Apostate Angels and Women, and were called Daemons or Genius's, and that the Poets were not ignorant of it. The Christian Religion teaches us, that Dae∣mons are spiritual things, who in the person of Lucifer the first Angel were precipitated in∣to Hall, because he would equal himself with God. Doubtless the Pagans had some knowledge of the Books of Moses, and have made Fables of what is said in those Books of Angels and Daemons. DAGON, An Idol of the Philistins, men∣tioned in the Book of Kings. Some Authors say, that its uppermost part was like the Body of a Man, and its undermost like a Fish: The Hebrew word Dag signifies a Fish; yet it most be granted that Dugon may come from Dugas, i. e. Wheat: And Philo in Eusebius has render∣ed the word Dagon by that of  frumen∣tum or framenti praeses. DANAE, The Daughter of Acrifius King of the Argives, who being brought to Bed of a Son, her Father clapt her with her new born Child into a Chest, and cast them into the Sea, because she had lost her Virginity: He had shut her up close in a Brazen Tower lest she should be seen, but Jupiter changed himself into a golden Shower, and dropt in∣to her Lap through the Roof, and got her
with Child. King Acrisius performed this act of cruelty, because the Oracle had foretold that he should be slain by a Son of his Daughter. Danas did not refuse to dye, pro∣vided her harmless Child should be spared; but unmerciful Acrisius, who could not be moved neither with Prayers nor Tears, put away the young Babe, who stretched out his arms to him, as if he had implored his assist∣ance. The Chest was caught in the Fisher∣mens Net near the Isle of Scriphos, and both the Mother and the Child got safe ashore. DANAKH, A small Coin that the Greeks put into the mouth of dead Bodies, to pay their passage in Charon's Ferry-boat, cal∣led so from , i. e. of the dead. It was an obolus, worth about one Penny and one Farthing. Euripides calls that piece of Silver the honour of the dead, , because Charon refused to carry over the Sty∣gian Lake, the dead men, who had nothing wherewith to pay the Ferry-men. Aristopha∣nes confirms that custom; for he introduces Bacchus inquiring of Hercules, who descended into Hell, how much they paid for their passage; and he answers them two oboli, in∣timating, that if a dead man pay one obolus for his passage, a man who is alive ought to pay two oboli. Lucian laughs at that custom of the Greeks, in his Dialogue of Mourning. They put, says he, a piece of Silver into the mouth of those that dye, to pay the Ferry-man, without considering whether that Money be current in that Region: besides, I should think they would do much better, in not giving them any at all, that they might be constrained to send them back to life again.The same Lucian intro∣duces in another place, Charon and Menippas dscoursing thus on the matter. Char. Pay the Ferry-man, sirrah. Menip. Bawl as long as thou wilt, the Devil a far∣thing shall thou get. Char. Come, come a penny for your passage. Menip. How! would'st thou have Money from one that has none? Char. Can any man want a pen∣ny? Menip. I want it. Char. Sirrah, I will cut thy throat, or I will have my Money. Menip. And I will crack your Fool's crown for you, with this Staff. Char. How! must I have nothing then for ferrying you over? Menip. Since Mercury brought me hither, let him pay you your fare, if he will. Mercury. That would be a fine thing indeed? I should pay for the dead, after I had the trouble of conducting them. Char. Pay me, or otherwise you shall not budge from hence. Menip. Pull then thy Boat ashore; but what course canst thou take to make me pay thee, seeing I have no Money-? Char. You know well enough you was to have brought some. Menip. And grant I did know it, could I hinder dying? Char. What! Shall you be the only person to boast having passed in Charon's Ferry for nothing? Menip. How! say ye, for no∣thing; have I not drudged and tugged at the Oar and Pump, without molesting thee with my lamentations as others have done? Char. That is nothing at all to your fare. Menip. Restore me then to life again. Char. Ay, to be beaten by Aeacus, I thank ye? Menip. Leave me then at rest. Char. If I ever catch you again in my clutches. Me∣nip. There is no returning hither twice. Strabo says that the Inhabitants of Hermione, a Town of Mria, did not put this obolus in the mouth of their dead, as other Greeks did, for their Town was consecrated to Proserpina, wherefore they were ferried over gratis. DANAIDES. The Daughters of Da∣naus, old Belus his Son, and Aegyptus's Bro∣ther. The Poet tells us, that Danaus was ob∣liged to marry his fifty Daughters to his Bro∣thers Sons, who were like in number; but he ordered them all to murder their Hus∣bands upon the Wedding night, to prevent the death he was threatened with by the O∣racle. All of 'em obeyed his barbarous or∣der, except only one, who was struck with a just horror of that Crime. It is feigned that they were all sentenced in Hell, as a punish∣ment of their Crime, to fill a Tub full of holes with water; but Hypermnestra was ex∣empted from the punishment, because she had no share in their guilt, for she would not murther Lyceus her Husband. DANAUS, The Son of old Belus, and Aegyptus's Brother, who drove away Stenelus out of the Kingdom of Argos, where he reign∣ed five years. Pliny relates, that he was the first who made use of Ships to cross over from Aegypt into Greece. He had fifty Daugh∣ters, whom he used very severely, forcing them to work with their own hands, and married them to the Sons of his Brother Aegyp∣tus, who were also fifty in number. Pausani∣as tells us, that Danaus built a Temple to A∣pollo, sirnamed Lycienus, either from Licia, or the Greek word , i. e. a Wolf, or from  light; wherefore Homer calls him , begetting light. Once he came to Argos to dispute with Gelamor, the Son of Stenelus, about the Kingdom, and having re∣ferred the controversy to the people, it was put off to the next day. But the next morn∣ing by break of day a Wolf crossing the Country, fell among a herd of Cattle, that were feeding along the Walls, and assaulted a strong and vigorous Bull. The Inhabi∣tants went upon the Walls, and stood there to see the event of the fight, and ascribed
Gelamor's Party to the Bull, and the Party of Danaus to the Wolf. The Bull was over∣come, and the Wolf victorious, whereupon the Inhabitants adjudged the Kingdom to Danaus, who thought that Apollo had sent this Wolf on purpose to favour his right, who built him a Temple for an acknowledge∣ment of his good offices. DAPHNE, Daughter of the River Pe∣neus, according to the Fable, who was be∣loved and courted by Apollo, but had rather be changed into a Laurel or Bay-tree, than to yield to his violent pursuits. DAPHNE, The Daughter of Tiresias, was also one of the Sybils, as Diodorus tell us, l. 4 c. 6. Chrysippus calls her Sybilla Delphica; because after the destruction of Thebe, the Ar∣gives sent her to Delphi, where she learned the Art of Divination. Pausanias calls her Hero∣phila, she lived a long time before the War of Troy; she foretold that Helena should be brought up at Spart, for the ruin of Asia and Europe, and that for her sake the Greeks should destroy the City of Troy. The Inhabitants of Delos pretend that she has made Hymns in the praise of Apollo. DAPHNIS, Son of Mercury, born in Sicily. Diodorus tells us, that he was the first composer of Pastorals. Having passed his word to a Nymph whom he loved, upon pain of losing both his Eyes in case of false∣hood, he afterwards fell in love with another and was struck blind. DARDANUS, Son to Jupiter and E∣lectra, who killed Janus his Brother, and then fled away and retired into Phrygia, where he married the Daughter of King Teucer, who made him his Partner in the Government of the Country, which was called after their names, sometimes Teucria, and sometimes Dardania. This happened a∣bout the time, that according to holy History Joshua succeeded Moses in governing the Is∣raelites, seven hundred years before the City of Rome was built, and in the time that the Assyrians reigned in the greater Asia. Dardanus left Erichthonius Heir to his Domi∣nions, who had a Son, whose Name was Tres, Great Grand-Father to Priamus, who was King, and changed the Name of his capital City, and called it after his own Name Troy. His Chil∣dren were Ganimedes, whom Jupiter stole away under the figure of an Eagle, and Assaracus the Father of Capys, who begot Anchises the Favourite of Venus, who was Aeneas's Mo∣ther. DEA BONA, The good Goddess, whom some Writers call Fauna, Fatua and Dryas, Wife to Faunus, sirnamed Bona Dea, be∣cause she was so true to her Husband, that she never came out of her apartment, and saw no Man besides himself. Yet Varro and Macrobius say, that she was Faunus's Daughter, and not his Wife: Others tell us that Bonn Dea was one Flora, Faunus's Wife, who being so much given to drinking, was once whipt by her Husband with a Rod of Myrtle. This Chastizement reclaimed her, and she became a Goddess, and when they offered her Sacri∣fices they never carried Myrtle, because of the accident that befel her. All the Roman Ladies assembled to make her a Sacrifice in May, at the House of the High Priest, in the most retired Room; or as Plu∣tarch says, at the Consul's House. This Sa∣crifice was made in the Night, and it was re∣quired too, that they should have had no com∣pany with Men, during nine days before. There was no Man admitted to it, neither any representation of Man or Dog suffered there, and if there was any, they were obli∣ged to cover them with a Vail, as we learn it from Juvenal, Satyr 2. —Ubi velari pictura jubetur Quaecunque alterius Sexus imitata figuram est. The Wine that was used in this Sacrifice, which the chief Priestess and the others then drunk, was called by them Milk. This Ce∣remony in process of time degenerated into Drunkenness and shameful Debaucheries, which Juvenal describes in the 6th Satyr. Nota Bonae secreta Deae, cum tibia lumbos Incitat, & cornis pariter, vinoque feruntur Attonitae crinemque rotant ululante Priapo Maenades, &c. DEA NUNDINA, A Divinity, who presided on the ninth day after the birth of Children, at which time the Romans were us'd to give them a Name. DECANUS MILITARIS, A Lea∣der who commanded ten Soldiers. DECEM, The Number Ten, which the Romans figured thus X. We learn from Ovid, that this Number was very much re∣garded by the Ancient Romans. The Cabalist Hebrews and Pythagorean Philosophers are of opinion, that every number of Ten is full of Divine Mysteries. Romulus, says Ovid, made up the Year of ten Months only, he compo∣sed his Senate of one hundred Men, (which Number is made up of Ten multiplied by it self) divided still each of the three Tribes in∣to ten Hundred of Footmen, and ten Tenths of Horsemen. This number is so very perfect that Faith is represented with two right hands join'd together, and each of them being com∣posed of five Fingers, both together make up the number Ten: Numbers also don't go be∣yond
Ten, and after Ten we begin again with Unites, so ten and one make eleven. Plato teaches us in his Timeus, that Ten is composed of the four first Numbers, one, two, three, four, which joined together make Ten: that one represents the Point; two, the Line; three, the Superficies and the Triangle, which is the first plain Figure; and four the Square, and the solid Body in length, breadth and depth, or the Cube. DECEMBER, The tenth Month in the Year of Romulus, consecrated to Saturn. Un∣der the Reign of Commodus, this Month was called out of flattery Amaxonius, in honour of a Courtezan, whom that Prince passionately loved, and had got painted like an Amazon; but it kept that Name but during that Em∣perors Life. Upon the Kalends of this Month they made a Sacrifice to the Feminine Fortune, because she had appeased Coriolanus. The day of the Nones fell out upon the Feast of Faunus, called Faunalia, which was so∣lemnized by Countrymen in the Fields, with Games, Mirth and Feastings. The Eleventh of the Month, or the third of of the Ides, they kept the Feast Agonulia. The thirteenth, or the day of the Ides, they celebrated the Feast Septimontium, which was instituted upon the inclosing the seventh Mount within the compass of the City of Rome. The seventeeth day of the Month, or the sixteenth of the Kalends was the Feast Saturna∣lia, of which more afterwards in its place. In this great Feast was comprehended the Feasts called Sigillaria & Angeronalia. The two and twentieth they solemnized the Feast Lararia, in honour of the Gods Lares. The three and twentieth, they made a Feast called Laurentiualia, in honour of Acca Lauren∣tia the Wife of the Shepherd Faustulus. At the latter end of the Month they had the Juveniles Ludi, and the Country-people kept the Feast of the Goddess Vaouna in the Field, having then got in their Fruits and sown their Corn. DECEM-PEDA, A Pearch ten foot long to measure Land. It was called in Greek . DECEM-VIRI, Ten Magistrates cho∣sen at Rome, to govern the Commonwealth in∣stead of Consuls, with an absolute Power. They were created upon this occasion. The Tribunes of the People having obser∣ved for a very long time, that the Magistrates did always favour the Nobility to the preju∣dice of the People, demanded an equality of Laws for both. Tarentius or Tarentillius Arza, A. 289. ab urb. cond. shew'd himself very zealous in this Affair, and proposed the famous Law, called after his Name Tarentilla, which was the occasion of so many Troubles and Divisions in Rome. This Law ordered among other things, that five Magistrates should be created, as Livy says; or ten, as Dionysius Halicarnasseus tells us, to moderate and keep the Consulary Authority in favour with the People. The Senate oppos'd this Law; yet it was received afterwards. Three Deputies were immediate∣ly sent into Greece to fetch the Laws of Solon, and to inform themselves of the customs of the Commonwealth of Athens, and other the best forms of Government of Greece; for hi∣therto the Romans govern'd themselves by their own Customs. These Deputies acquitted themselves of their Trust with great fidelity and exactness. At their return the Senate created ten Magistrates to govern the Repub∣lick, and to examine the Laws of Solon, which being approved of by the Senate, and agreed by the People, were ingraven upon twelve Tables of Brass, and called them therefore the Laws of the twelve Tables, or the Decem∣viral Laws. The first difficulty they met with in the Election of the Decemviri, was whether they should be all taken out of the Patrician Body, or some of them out of the Body of the Peo∣ple; the Patricians carried it this time; and at their Election they were empower'd to quit their Office whenever they should think fit. They began to perform the functions of their Office A. cccii ab urbe condita, and did govern with such moderation and equity, that the Romans thought they lived still in the gold∣en Age of their Fathers; but the following Year the Decemviri, inticed by the sweetness of an absolute Power, made an ill use of their Authority; so that Appius Claudius one of them, having murthered Lucius Siccius Dentatus a valiant Roman Soldier, and ravish'd Virginia, a Maid of an extraordinary Beauty, the De∣cemviri were banished, and their State forfeit∣ed. They were called the ten Tarquins, be∣cause of their Tyrannical Government. And the People were so exasperated against them, that they demanded them that they might burn them alive. Then the Consulary Govern∣ment was resumed, and the Decem-viratus last∣ed but two Years. DECEM-VIRI, Sc. Litibus judicandis. Ten Judges established to administer Justice in the absence of the Praetors, when bu∣sied in foreign Wars. Their office became afterwards common; for the making Sale of Goods, called Subhastationes, because they set up a Pike in the place where the Sale was made. Theophilus speaking of it says, Sed quid vetat appellatione Decem-virorum intelligi qui liti∣bus judicandis & hastae praeerant.
DECENNALIA FESTA, Festi∣vals, that the Emperors in the declining times of the Empire, kept every tenth Year, by of∣fering Sacrifices to the Gods, and bestowing Largesses upon the People. DECIMATIO, A punishment that the Romans used to inflict on the Soldiers, who had quitted their Post, or raised a Mutiny in the Camp, or behaved themselves cowardly in the Fight; which was practised thus: The General assembled the whole Camp, then the Tribune brought to him those that were guilty, and impeached them, and reproached them with their cowardly Actions and Base∣ness in the presence of the whole Army; then putting their Names into an. Urn or a Head-piece, he drew five, ten or twenty of them, according to their Number; and the fifth, the tenth or the twentieth was put to the Sword, and the others were saved; and this was called Decimare. DECIMARE, A word of the ancient Roman Militia, who to punish whole Legions, when they had failed in their Duty, made every tenth Soldier draw Lots, and put him to death for an example to the others. DECIMAE, The tenth part of the Fruits of an Estate, or other like portion of Goods, which differs according to the custom of pla∣ces. They vowed formerly the tenth part of the Booty got at the taking of a Town, or the Spoils of the Enemies to their Gods, as Juno, Apollo and Hercules. Censorinus c. 1. de die Nat. says that the an∣cient Romans, being perswaded that they held every thing from the Liberalities of the Gods, not excepting their own life, offered them a portion of their Servants, Fields, Towns, and consecrated them also their Heirs, to give them thanks for their Health. After a famous Victory, Camillus declared, that he had promised and vowed to Apollo the tenth part of the Booty, Apollini se decimam vo∣visse partem cum diceret Camillus, Pontifices sol∣vendum religione populum censerent: These are the words of Livy, who says besides, that Ca∣millus protested that he had vowed the whole tenth part, and therefore they must include in it even the ground of the Town that he had took, and its Territory, urb is atque agri capti de∣cimam, quae & ipsa voto contineatur. This Historian relates still the vow of the holy Spring Ver Satrum, that the Senate and the Roman People made in a very dangerous time, when they were afraid of the Carthagi∣niaus and the Gauls. By this Vow they obli∣ged themselves to offer in Sacrifice to Jupiter, the whole increase of their Flocks and Herds, which that Spring should produce. Quod vir attulerit ex Suillo, Ovillo, Caprino, Bovino grege, Jovi fieri. Pliny observes that the Romans ne∣ver tasted of their Wine, or other Fruits of the Earth, before their Priests had offered the Primitiae or first Fruits thereof in the, Temples. The Greeks were not less religious than the Romans. Herodotus tells us, that Craesus when Cyrus had taken the Capital City of his King∣dom, advised him to place a Guard at the Gates, lest some part of the Booty might be carried away, before the tenth of it should be offered to Jupiter. The same Author relates in another place, that the Greeks, after the famous Victory of Salamina, consecrated the first Fruits of the Spoils to the Gods, and among others, three Ships taken from the Phaenicians. Dionysius Halicarnasseus says, that Hercules ha∣ving subdued Spain and Italy, promised to be∣stow the tenth part of the Booty for Sacri∣fices. And that Tarquinius Priscus had vowed to build a Temple to Jupiter, Juno and Miner∣va, if he got a Victory over the Sabines. Tar∣quinius Superbus performed the Vow of his Great Grand-Father, and bestowed upon that Magnificent Building the tenth part of the Spoils he obtained at the taking of the Town of Sinuesse. Diogenes Laertius in the Life of Solon, intro∣duces a Letter of Pisistratus to Solon, wherein he says that the Athenians laid aside the tenth part of their Revenues for Sacrifices, publick Wants, and the Charges of War. Plutarch proposes this Question, Why at Rome many rich Persons consecrated to Hercules the tenth part of their Estate? and he an∣swers, that it might be because Hercules him∣self consecrated to Rome the tenth part of the Oxen of Geryon which he was carrying away; or because he made the Romans free of the Tythes they paid before to the Tuscans; or because they thought that Hercules, who lived very soberly, was pleased that rich men would retrench some part of their super∣fluities. DECIUS MUS, A Roman Consul, who fought a Battle against the Latins, and devoted himself to death, to save the Roman Army. This great Man seeing his Soldiers cowed, and the Roman Legions lost ground, sent for M. Valerius the High Priest, who being cloathed with his Gown edged with purple colour, called Praetexta, he put both his Feet upon a Dart. his Head covered, and holding up his Right Hand, pronoun∣ced his Vow aloud, the High Priest uttering the words, which he repeated after him: Janus, Jupiter, and Fathers Mars and Quiri∣nus, Bellona, Larés, Domestick Gods, Gods Indigeti, whose power is extended over us and over our Enemies; and ye, Infernal Gods, I call upon you, I adore you, vouch∣safe
to bless the endeavours of the Romans, and give them the victory: Strike their Enemies with fear and death; wherefore I devote my self to the Gods of Hell and to the Earth, and with me the Enemies Le∣gions and their Confederates.Having thus spoken, he got on Horseback, and spurr'd on his Horse through the thickest Battallions of the Enemy. This Action raised the cou∣rage of the Legions, and gave an opportuni∣ty to the other Consul Manlius to defeat the Enemy, and obtain a full victory. DECUMANA PORTA, The back Gate in the Camp of the Romans. DECUMATES AGRI, Lands cal∣led Serves, manured by the meanest sort of the Gauls, now called the Dukedom of Wirtemberg. DECURIO. An Officer in the Roman Army, who commanded ten Troopers: for Romulus having at first divided the Roman people into three Tribes, he appointed at the head of each Tribe a Collonel to Command it, and afterwards divided each Tribe in ten Curia, or Compa∣nies, and appointed a Centurion or Captain to Command a hundred men, and a Decurion to command ten men. DECURIONES MUNICIPA∣LES. A Court of Judges or Councellours, who representing the Senate of Rome in the free Towns. They were called Decuriones, because in the times they sent Roman Colo∣nies into the conquered Towns, they chose ten men to make up a Senate, and a Court of Councellors, called Civitatum Patres Curiales; Florati Municipiorum Senatores, and their Court, was called Curia Decurimum, and Minor Senatus. They were chosen almost with the same ceremonies as the Senators. And were to be five and twenty years old, with a Revenue of two hundred and twenty five pounds Ster∣ling per Annum. This Election was made at the Kalends of March. Then the Duum-viri assembled for that purpose the Court of the Decurions, with the Judge of the Province, and were elected by the majority of Votes. The Decurion then chosen paid his welcom to the whole Body in Money, or a Present, which was more or less according to the custom of the place, as we learn by the Emperor Traja∣nas to the young Pliny, who had consulted him about that Duty of Entry. The Emperor answers him, that there was no general rule establish'd upon that account, and that every one must follow the custom of the place. Ʋlpianus tells us, that the Money was equally divided among the Decurions. Their office was to take care of all that was for the benefit of the Town, and the Reve∣nues of the Commonwealth. Some of this Re∣venue was bestowed for the re-building of the Walls, and other publick Edifices, and the rest for maintenance of learned men. They pronounced Sentences called Decreta Decurio∣num, with two D. D. at the top of them. DEDICATIO Templi, and DEDI∣CARE Templa. The Dedication of Tem∣ples; we shall here inform you by whom it was made, and with what ceremonies. When a Temple was built, it was to be dedicated to some Divinity, and the Dedi∣cation thereof belonged to some great Magi∣strate, at Consuls, Praetors, Censors, Decem-viri, Duum-viri, Vestal Virgins, and the High Priests in the time of the Common-wealth, or the Emperors during the Monar∣chick Government. The Temple built by Tarquinius in honour of Jupiter Capitolinus, was dedicated by the Consul M. Horatius Pul∣villus, An. 247, some time after the Romans had expelled the Kings. The Temple of Mars, consecrated in the War against the Gauls, was dedicated in the year 365 by the Duum-viri, appointed for the keeping of the Book of the Sybills. The Dedication was to be authorized by the Senate and the people, according to the Law Papyria, made by Pupyrius Tribune of the people; and the College of the Pontiffs was to give their consent to it, as Livy and Tully tells us. These things being exactly observed early in the morning, the College of the Pontiffs, and other Orders met, with a great Crowd of People, and many persons of note at the appointed place. They surrounded the Tem∣ple with Garlands of Flowers; the Vestal Virgins holding in their hands branches of Olive-tree, sprinkled the outside of the Tem∣ple with Lustral or Holy-water; then the person who consecrated the Temple drew near the Gate with a Pontiff at his side, to shew him the ceremonies, and tell him the Prayers that he was to make, holding with one hand the side-post of the Gate, and then said thus, Ades, Ades, for example Luculle, Dum dedico Templum hoc, ut mihi praeeatis, postem∣que teneatis. This ceremony was expressed with these words, Postem tenere, or apprehen∣dere. Then the Pontiff holding the Ceremonial in his hand, pronounced aloud the form of the consecration, which the consecratind per∣son repeated after him; and the ceremony was expressed by these words, Solemnia verba praeeunte Pontifice effari. Afterwards they consecrated the Court of the Temple by sacrificing a Beast, the in∣wards whereof were laid on an Altar of Green Turf, lustrabatur area, exta super ces∣pitem reddebantur.
Then the consecrating person came into the Temple with the Pontiffs, and took the Statue of the God and Goddess to whom the Temple was consecrated, and anointed it with Oyl, and laid it on a Pillow rubbed with Oyl, in temple ipsum quoque prius unctions dedicatum ana cum ara & pulvinari collocaba∣tur. After all the ceremonies were over, the Temple was called Augustum, i. e. Augurio Sacratum, and the person who had consecra∣ted it, might have an Inscription containing his name, his qualities, and the year of the consecration set upon the Temple, as we may see in the following Inscription. Nunc. R. Et Minervae. Sal. Ceno. Cohort. III. Brittann. Aram, Et Fl. Felix. Praefect. Ex voto Pesuit. L. M. Dedicavit Kalend. Decemb. Gentiano & Basso  Coss. Tatitus relates the Dedication of the Capi∣tol that was made by Vespastan's order, Annal. l. 4. In clear and serene weather, they sur∣rounded the Temple with Garlands and Ho∣ly-bands, and made those Soldiers whose names were of good omen, go into the Tem∣ple, carrying in their hands branches of such Trees as were acceptable to the Gods. The Soldiers were followed by the Vestal Vir∣gins, attended by young Children of both Sexes, whose Parents were still alive, and sprinkled the place with Spring and River∣water. Then the Praetor offered the ordina∣ry Sacrifices of the purification, and having laid the inwards of the victims upon Greens, pray'd Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva, and the o∣ther Gods, protectors of the Empire, to bless a work that mens piety was consecrating to their glory. Then immediately he toucht the Holy bands, that were tied to the Rope, which held the first Stone; and the Priests, and Magistrates, with the whole Senate, the Equestrian Order, and the greatest part of the people hoised up the Stone in the air with loud acclamations, till it was laid on its foundation, where they threw presently many pieces of Gold and Silver, and Metal as it came out of the Mine. As for the consecration of Christian Churches, some ascribe this institution there∣of to Pope Clement, others to Felix, who was Pope in the time of the Emperor Aurelianus, and some others to Sylvester in Constantinus's time. However, that institution is very an∣cient, being practised in imitation of the de∣dication of the Temple of Jerusalem, which God had commanded, and in remembrance of the same, the Israelites kept a Feast every year called Encaenia. DEFENSOR Civtiatis. The most con∣siderable Magistrate after Consuls and Du∣um-viri. He may be called Syndick, as he is named in the Roman Law, Defensores, says Arcadius, quos Graeci syndicos appellant, pro Repub∣lica agebant & convenichantur. This Magistrate was chosen out of the number of the Citizens, by the Decurion and the Priesthood, then this Election was con∣firmed by the Praefectus Praetorio, who deliver∣ed him his Letters Patent. This office was first for five years, but afterwards it was re∣duced to two years. The Duty of this place was to protect the people both in Town and Country, and to judge of their differences. He had two Offi∣cers under him to put his Sentences into exe∣cution, and prevent the peoples mutinying, having power to imprison those who should be the authors of any Sedition. DEJANIRA. The Daughter of Oeni∣us King of Aetolia, who married Hercules; but she was the cause of his death, having sent him by Licas a garment that Nessus the Cen∣taur had presentud her, which was dyed with the blood of the Serpent called Hydra, that Hercules had killed: for as soon as he had put it on he fell mad, and threw himself into a bonfire he had made in the Mount Oeta, where he was presently consumed by the flames. Dejanira hearing this mis∣fortune, slew herself with her Husbands Club. DEIDAMIA. The Daughter of Lyco∣medes King of Scyro. In the Court of this King Thetis had his Son Achilles brought up in a Girls habit, to preserve his life, for the Fates said that he should dye in the siege of Troy. Achilles begot a Son by Deidamia called Pyr∣rhus, because his father was called Pyrrha all the time of his disguise. DELATOR. An Informer of a capital crime or conspiracy, who discovers the whole matter to the King or Magistrates. Tacitus writes, that Informers were very com∣mon at Rome. These secret accusers, the plague of families, in the time of Tiberius, in∣stead of being suppressed by punishments, were encouraged by rewards; for the most famous were esteemed sacred and inviolable persons, and the others were left by Tiberius to the vengeance of the people. DELOS. The Island Delos. Neptune re∣ceived an order from Jupiter to stop this float∣ing Island, which had been separated from Sicily by stormy weather, that Latona who was in labour might lye in there. Juno be∣ing
highly provoked banished her out of Hea∣ven, and the Earth swore that she would not receive her; wherefore there remained no other place for her, but only that Island, which was not bound by the Oath of the Earth, because it was not then in the World. Latona was therefore received there, and de∣liverd of Twins Apollo and Diana, the fairest Children of Jupiter, as Lucian tells us. DELPHI, A City in Baeotia, near Mount Parnassus. There Apollo had a Magnificent Temple, enrich'd with Presents, that were sent thither from all parts. In this Temple was a Priestess called Pythia or Pythonissa, in∣spired by Apollo, who gave out Oracles, sitting on a little three-legged Stool, called Tripos or Cortina, because it was covered with the skin of the Serpent Pytho; wherefore Virgil says, Nec te Phoebi Cortina fefellit, i. e. The Oracles of Apollo have not deceived you. DELPHINUS, A Dolphin, a great Sea-Fish, with a crooked Back, pleasant to the Eyes, of a changeable Colour, according to the several Motions of his Body, which is covered with very thin Scales. He is a great Friend to Man, as Lucian gives us to understand in the Dialogue between Neptune and the Dol∣phins. Nept. I love you Dolphins, for conti∣nuing your Love and Affection towards Mankind. Dolph. No wonder, Neptune, we have a kindness for Men, since we were Men our selves once. Nept. In good earnest, I bear Bacchus a grudge for having thus Me∣tamorphiz'd you after his Victory. He might in my mind, have contented himself, with subduing you, as he did other People. But pray tell me the adventure of Arion: Now as for Melicerta, I know you wafted him over to Corinth, when he was tumbled down with his Mother from off the Scironian Cliffs. Dolph. As Arion was very much belo∣ved by Periander for the excellency of his Art, he dwelt commonly with him; but when he was become very rich, the Toy took him in the Crown, to return into his own Country, to make a figure there with his Riches. But after he was imbark'd in a Ship, the Seamen and people without Faith and Humanity, resolved to throw him overboard, that so they might have his Wealth. But he first of all desired them to suffer him to make his Funeral Oration, and to sing an Elegy on his Harp; then flouncing into the Ocean, with all the best things he had, the Dolphins throng'd about the Ship, allured by the Charms of his Har∣mony, saved him, and I my self carried him upon my back, as far as Taenarus. Pindar, Herodotus and Pliny, relate the great Affection Dolphins bear to Men; and tell us, that they brought back the Body of Hesiod, who was murther'd in the Temple of Neptune, and thrown into the Sea; and received Tele∣machus the Son of Ʋlisses, who fell into the Sea playing on the shore: Wherefore, ever since, his Father wore the figure of a Dolphin in his Scutcheon and Signet; and for that same reason Lycophron in his Cassandra gives him the sirname of , because he was a flat-nosed Man like the Dolphins, which Pliny calls Simos. DEMOCRITUS, A Philosopher who laugh'd at Men and Humane things; and said, that there was nothing solid, and all was Va∣nity, that a Man was but a concourse of A∣toms, and the Toy of Destiny or Fortune. DEMONAX, A Philosopher of the Isle of Cyprus, of an Illustrious and Rich Fa∣mily, but his Mind being yet above his For∣tune, he forsook all his Wealth to give him∣self to Philosophy. He studied first Humane Learning, then Philosophy, but embrac'd no particular Sect, and yet taking what was good in every Sect, he never determined which of them he valued the most. He disputed mo∣destly, hated Vice, bore no ill will to vicious Men, but took care to cure them as Physici∣ans do Diseases, without being angry with his Patients; for he thought that to err, was na∣tural to Man, but forgiving and correcting was the property of a Wise-man; and warn∣ed his wealthy Friends never to trust to the uncertainty of Fortune, neither to be proud of their Wealth, which was often the share of Fools, and encouraged the others to suffer patiently the miseries of this Life, because neither Men nor Miseries could last long; and that Custom softens the greatest hardships, and inur'd Men to pain. At last, seeing he was fallen into want, he voluntarily starved himself with hunger. The Athenians buried him very honourably at the publick Charge. DENARIUS, A Roman Penny, to the value of seven-pence-half-penny of English Mony. The Romans having for a long time used brass Mony, which they call At quasi Aes, or Libra and Pondo, because it was a pound weight, began to coin Silver, A. 585. ab urb. cond and coined first the Denarius, which was marked with the letter X, because it was worth ten Asses, and divided into two Quinarii marked with V, which were subdivided into two Sestertia, marked with these three Letters IIS. In the latter times of the Common-wealth, the Emperors reduc'd the Roman Penny to the weight of a Drachma, viz eight in an Ounce; for 'tis certain, as Pliny and Livy say, that be∣fore that time, it weighed more; for at first they coined six, then seven Denarii out of an Ounce. But there is a difficulty arising from what is said before, that the Roman Penny was
worth ten Asses; for Vitruvius says, that it was of the value of sixteen Asses. To ex∣plain this difficulty, we must understand, that formerly at Rome, each Ass (ten whereof made up a Roman Penny) weighed twelve Ounces; and that afterwards, in the time of the first Punick War, the Common-wealth being then in debt, it was thought fit to lower the Coin, and reduce the Ass to two ounces, and since that time in the War of Hannibal the Asses were reduced to one ounce; but at the same time the value of the Roman Penny was regulated, and then went for sixteen Asses in∣stead of ten, which was the value of the old Roman Penny, as Festus and Pliny tells us: And this resolves the Difficulty that arises from what Vitruvius says. DENDROPHORI, The College of the Dendrophori is often mentioned in the An∣cient Marbles Yet 'tis not well known what kind of Men the Dendrophori were. The Learn∣ed are divided upon this account; Salmasius in his Commentaries upon the Life of Cara∣calla, written by Spartianus says, that the Den∣drophori were those persons, who, in the Pro∣cessions made in honour of the God, carried Branches of Trees in their Hands, according to the Etymology of the word , i. e. Tree-bearer; wherefore the Epithet of Dendrophorus was given to the Silvan God in an old Inscription cited by Gruter, because this God is commonly represented carrying a Branch of a Pine-tree, in the Pro∣cessions made in honour of Bacchus. And we see often, in Basso relievos, where the Bacchanalia are represented as men carrying little Shrubs or Branches of Trees. The Title of the Theodosian Code seems to favour this Opinion in the 20th Law. 'Tis just, says the Text, that all the Places that the Dendrophori and other Religious Men a∣mong the Pagans have possessed, and were appointed for their Feastings and distribu∣tion of Money, be applied to the Revenues of our Houses, having banished the Error that instituted them. According to this Text Dendrophori was not a Name of a Trade, but of a religious or superstitious Order. How∣ever, most of the Learned are of a contrary opinion, which seems very probable, and say, that the Dendrophori were Men, who bought Timber for the War and Warlike Engines: Wherefore they were commonly joined in the same Company with those who made the Engines called Fabri. DERCETO, The Mother of Semiramis, she was represented half Man and half Fish, as Diodorus Siculus expresly speaks. But Lucian in his Dea Syria divides her Body otherwise. Semiramis, says he, founded that Temple in honour of her Mother Derceto, whose Image I have seen in Phaenicia, being that of a Wo∣man from the middle upwards, whose lower parts ended in a Fish's Tail. The transfor∣mation of Derceto, the Mother of Semiramis, in∣to a Fish, is a very famous Fable. Ovid men∣tions it in his Metamorphosis. DESIGNATOR. A Master of Cere∣monies in Funeral Pomps, or a sworn Cryer, who ordered all things at Funerals, either re∣lating to the Parade, or the Habits of that Ceremony. Ʋlpianus says, that this Officer was a noted Man, receiving his Office from the Prince, and was attended by two Li∣ctors and other Officers in Mourning Dresses. Horace makes mention of him Epist. 7. l. 1. Designatorem decorat Lictoribus atris. They not only furnish'd all that was ne∣cessary for the Funeral, but undertook the Funeral Games and Spectacles, says Tertul∣lian. DESULTORES and DESULTO∣RII, Men who leap from one Horse to another, at the Horce-races of the Games cal∣led Circences. From hence the Latins proverbi∣ally speaking, call inconstant and wavering men, desultoriae naturae homines. DEUCALION, A Scythian, the Son of Prometheus, who reigned in Thessalia, in the time of a great Deluge: For the Greeks relate, that the first Men being cruel and insolent, without Faith, Hospitality and Humanity, perished all by that Deluge, the Earth issuing out abundance of Waters, which swell'd up the Rivers, and with the excessive Rains cau∣sed an overflowing of the Sea, which covered the Earth with Water. Deucalion alone re∣mained, having got safe into an Ark with his Family, and two Beasts of every kind, who freely followed him into the Ark both wild and tame, without devouring one another, nor doing him any harm. Thus he floated till the Waters were retired, then re-populated Mankind, by throwing stones behind him, which were changed into Men. Pyrrha his Wife did the like, and threw Stones behind her, which were changed into Women; this they performed by the advice of Themis. The Inhabitants of that Country inlarge the Story with another Prodigy, and say, that an Abyss swallowed down all the Waters; and that Deucalion in remembrance of it, erected an Altar and built a Temple, where a very little Hole remains still. Wherefore the Inhabi∣tants of that Country and those of Syria, come twice a year to the Neighbouring Sea, where they draw a great quantity of Water, and pour it into the Temple that Deucalion built, and this Water runs through the Hole; and the Origine of this Ceremony is still ascri∣bed
to Deucalion, in remembrance of that Ac∣cident. Ovid says, that Deucalion and Pyrrha escaped from the Flood, and staid in a little Boat on the top of Mount Parnassius, which is above the Clouds and Meteors; that they were both of a perfect Innocency and Holiness: where∣fore Jupiter seeing that there were none left of all Mankind but those two persons, put an end to the Deluge, and made the World habitable as it was before. 'Tis plain by this account, that Ovid knew something by tradition of the Ark of Noah, and his singular Justice, and was told of the place where that Ark stood, and the choice of an only Family for the reparation of Mankind. And 'tis no wonder that the name of Noah was changed, and that of Pyrrha invented by Poets. As for the manner of multiplying afterwards Mankind, it was enough to name a Father and a Mother, a Husband and a Wife. As to the Fable of the Stones thrown behind their back, and their numerous posterity, 'tis a Poetick fancy, to shew with what facility God re-populated the Earth, and the hardness of those Men, who were the first Inhabitants of this new World. Plutarch has mention'd the Dove and the Ark of Deucalion. Pindar says, that Deucalion and Pyrrha, by an order of Jupiter, came down from Mount Parnassus, and without any con∣jugal Correspondence begat a great number of Children made of Stones; because the Greek word  signifies both a Stone and People; and in so little time, that it seem'd that the Stones were transformed into Men. Tzetzes explains this Fable something other∣wise; for he says, that Deucalion or Noah at their coming out of the Ark, set up on one side Stones like so many Altars, according to the number of Men who were in the Ark; and his Wife and other Women set up also on their side, as many Altars as they were in number, to give thanks to God for having escap'd this universal Deluge; and because there was as many Men as Women in the Ark, it was said, that the number was equal on both sides, so many Men according to the number of Stones; and that this multiplica∣tion of Stones or Altars, was the cause of the multiplication of Men. St. Austin affirms, that the deluge fell out during the reign of Cecrops at Athens, according to what Eusebius and Hieronimus say; but this Flood of Deucalion overflowed but one part of Greece. However, the Greeks changed the name of Noah into that of Deucalion, and con∣founded these two Deluges, that they might ascribe to their Country the glory of re∣storing Mankind, and re-populating the whole Earth. DEVERRA, One of the three Divini∣ties, whom the Ancients intrusted with the care of a Woman in Child-birth, as Varro and St Austin tells us, lest the God Silvanus enter∣ed the House and troubled her. DEUS, The Soveraign Being. Here we must explain the word Deus. Some derive it from the Verb Do, because God gives every thing, and can receive nothing from any Creature whatsoever. Wherefore when they offered Sacrifices, they did not say dare exta Diis, but reddere, to shew that they only ren∣dered him what he had first given them. O∣thers derive it from the Greek word , which signifies fear, because we ought not to draw near him, but with a reverential fear: and many Authors take its derivation from the Verb , i. e. to see and contem∣plate, because God sees all things, and nothing escapes his sight and knowledge. But tho there are several Opinions and Disputes concerning the Etymology of that word, the Ancients are yet more divided about the definition of the nature of God. Thales Milesius said that God was an Intelligence, who had made all things of Water, and was the principle of all the World. Anaximander assured, that God was born like the rest of Men. But Anaximines and Anaxa∣goras had more sublime thoughts, for tho they ascribed an Airy Body to God, nevertheless they acknowledged him for an infinite Being, who fill'd up all Imaginary spaces. Pliny tells us that God is an Independant Being, who is all Spirit, all Intelligence, all Sight, and all Hearing; and gives motion to all Beings, and is moved by none but by himself. Doubtless, Pliny and others, who have called God a Soveraign Intelligence, who fills, sees, knows, rules all things, and has no limits, neither to his power or duration, had that ex∣cellent notion from Plato. Seneca speaking of the Poets, who have de∣scrib'd Jupiter thundering against the wicked, says, that we must not imagine that the Poets thought that Jupiter struck men with Thun∣derbolts; but not being able to express better the punishments that attended wicked Men, they were obliged to perswade them, that God under the name of Jupiter, who sees all things, had always Thunderbolts in his hand, wherewith to punish their Impieties. And though the Ancients left us a ridicu∣lous Genealogy of Gods, yet they did not really believe that there was such a Multitude of Divinities: But they conform'd themselves to the Superstitious Error of the common People, to keep them the better in awe, and hope out of respect to so many Gods. Pliny ascribes the multitude of Gods to the weak∣ness of Man's understanding, who was not able to apprehend how only one God could
govern so many different parts of the World, wherefore Men fancied that there were many Gods, and that each of them had his pecu∣liar Employment and Function in the govern∣ment of the World. And when they made Beasts, Trees and Metals their Gods; they did not believe that they were really Gods (except it were the common sort of People) but observ'd some peculiar Qualifications and Proprieties in them, and for that reason called them Gods. DIA. No Author tells us who was that Goddess Dia, so often mentioned in the In∣scription of the Arvaux's. Sebastian Fesch of Basil, Doctor of Law, says that she was the Goddess Ops or Cybele, Saturn's Wife, the Grand-mother of the Gods, whom the Greeks called also Rhea. And she might by way of Eminency be called Dia, i. e. Di∣vina, as the Mother and Queen of other Di∣vinities. From this word Dea or Dia, is come the name of Die in the Province of Dauphine, which was called Dia or Dea Vocontiorum, be∣cause the Vocontij, who inhabited in its Neigh∣bourhood, especially worshipped that Divinity. DIANA, The Daughter of Jupiter by Latona, who was born in the Isle of Dolos. This is the same Goddess, who was called Lucina or Diana upon the Earth, and assisted Women in labour, as Poets tell us; the Moon in Heaven; and Hecate or Proserpina in Hell. Upon this account they ascribed unto her three Heads or three Faces, and she is also called Triformes. Virgil speaks thus of her; Tergeminamque Hecaten, tria Virginis ora Dianae. And Diana, the Moon and Proserpina were thus confounded in one single Divinity. All that was said concerning Diana, has re∣spect rather to a Fable than the History, or is rather it self a natural History. Yet Tully has spoken of her as an Historian, when he di∣stinguishes three Diana's; One born of Jupiter and Proserpina, who brought forth winged Cu∣pid; another better known, born of Jupiter and Latona; and a third, who had Ʋpis for her Father, and Glauce for her Mother, whom the Greeks call often Ʋpis after her Fathers Name: Dianae item plures; prima Jovis & Proserpinae; secunda notior, quam Jove tertio & Latona natam accepimus; tertiae pater Ʋpis traditur, Glauce ma∣ter; cam Graeci saepe Ʋpim paterno nomine appellant. And yet these were probably but the Diana's of Greece, in imitation of the Diana's of Aegypt. For Diana was among the Dieties in Aegypt, when Typhous made war against them, and she changed herself into a Cat, wherefore the Aegyptians call'd her Bubastis. Ovid speaking of these Transformations of the Gods, doth not forget that of Diana: Fele soror Phaebi la∣tuit. Herodotus tells us, that there was in the Town of Bubastis in Egypt, a Temple of Ba∣bastis, called by the Greeks Diana, and that the Egyptians said that Diana and Apollo were born of Dionysius and Isis. Sanchoniathon says, that Saturn and Astarte begot seven Girls, or seven Diana's. Strabo mentions one of the Grecian Diana's, whom they called Britomartis, and was also named Dictynna, from the word Dicte. And Solinus affirms, as Gasaubon observes, that the Inhabitants of Crete called Diana by that name, because it signifies a mild and sweet Virgin: Quod Sermone nostro sonat Virginem dul∣cem. Hesychius says, that the People of Crete called , that which was sweet, . Casaubon is of opinion that the other part of this word comes from , i. e. Companion, because a Virgin never forsakes the company of her Mother. In fine, Diodorus Siculus affirms, that the Cre∣tans, who introduce the Theology of Phaeni∣cia and Egypt into their own Country, said, that Jupiter begot Venus and the Graces, that Diana took care of new born Infants, and Lu∣cina presided over Women in Labour. She was called Diana because she was the Daughter of Jupiter, as it is intimated by her Name; for the ancient Latins said Dius instead of , Jupiter: She was named Delia, be∣cause she was born in the Island of Delia. This Goddess made a Vow of Virginity, which she carefully kept; wherefore the Po∣ets called her Casta Diana. She was the God∣dess of Woods, Hunting and Cross-ways. All the Nymphs are her Companions; but when they married they forsook her company, and were obliged to carry Baskets full of Flowers and Fruits into her Temple to paci∣fy her. The Ides of August was a day kept holy in her honour; and it was not then al∣lowed to hunt, because they imagine, that that day she permitted her Hounds, and all things that appertained to her Hunting Equi∣page to rest; every one crown'd his Hounds, and they lighted Torches in the Forrests, where they offered her in Sacrifice an Ox, a Boar and a white Hind. They presented her still the first Fruits; Oenus King of Aetolia for∣got it, in an offering he made to the Country Gods; which so highly provoked her anger, that she sent the Calydonian Wild-boar, who de∣stroyed all his Country. The Sythians, says Lucian, offered Men in sacrifice upon her Altar. Among all the Temples that were built to her honour, that of Ephesus was most remarkable, for its largeness and magnificence. It was 425 foot long, and 220 foot broad, adorn'd with an hundred and twenty seven Pillars of threescore foot high, wrought with so much art, and enrich'd with so much ex∣cellent
carved work, that nothing finer was ever seen: There was a Stair-case to go up on the Temple, made of one intire piece, which was the Wood of a Vine. This Temple was built by the Architect Ctesiphon in sixscore Years time, and was burnt by a profliigate Fellow, called Erostratus, who by this Con∣flagration, designed to transmit his Name to posterity, not being able (as he confess'd him∣self) to do any thing more remarkable. The Ephesians built it again, as magnificent as before. Diana had also a Temple in the Town of Magnesia, built by Hermogenes Alabandinus, a fa∣mous Architect. This Goddess had another Temple at Rome upon Mount Aventine, in the Reign of Servius Tullius, which was built by the Romans and Latins, at both their Charges; and there they met every year to offer a Sacrifice, in com∣memmoration of the League made between both Nations. This Temple was adorned with Cows-horns. Plutarch and Lavy tell us the reason of it, when they relate that Autro Coratius a Sabin, who had a very fine Cow, was advis'd by a Southsayer to offer it in a Sacrifice to Diana of Mount Aventine, promising him if he offered that Sacrifice that he should never want any thing, and that the City whereof he should be a Citizen should subdue all other Towns of Italy. To that purpose Autro came to Rome, but a Slave of King Servius having acquainted his Master with Autro's design, who being gone to puri∣fie himself in the Tiber, before he offered his Sacrifice, Servius made use of that opportunity, sacrificed the Cow to Diana, and hung the Horns in her Temple. She was commonly drawn Goddess-like, with dishevelled Hair, cloathed with a hairy Gown of purple colour, trimm'd with golden Buckles, which she tuckt up to the very knees. She held a Bow in her Hand, and carried a Quiver full of Arrows on her Shoulder. They also represented her sitting on a golden Cha∣riot drawn with Hinds. Albricus the Philo∣sopher in his Pictures of the Gods says, that Diana was represented holding a Bow and Arrow, with a Half-moon on her Forehead, and about her a great company of Dryades, Hamadryades, Naiades, Nercides, and Choires of the Nymphs of the Woods, Mountains, Fountains and Seas; and even Satyrs, who are Country Divinities. Strabo l. 14. de descriptione Mundi relates, that in the Isle of Icarus there was a Temple of Diana, called  or Taurica; Livy l. 4. Dec. 4. calls it Tauropolum, and the Sacri∣fices that were offered in that Temple Tauro∣polia. However, Dionysius in his Book Desitu Orbis says, that Diana was not called Tauropola from the People, but from the Bulls that a∣bound in that Country. DIAPASON. This Greek word signi∣fies a Chord, which includes all Tones, we call it an Octave, because all its tones are eight in number. Aristotle says that the Greeks did no not call it Diocto, i. e. Octave, because the Harp of the Ancients, which included all the tones, had but seven Strings. DIATONUM, A kind of Song, which proceeds out by tones and semi-tones, and is more natural and less forced than other kinds of Musick. DIAULON, Is a kind of Race, which was a Furlong in length, and at the end there∣of they returned back along the same Course. DICHALCA, The foruth part of an Obolus. DICTATOR, A Roman Magistrate, who was alone invested with the Consulary and Soveraign Authority, and had power of life and death over the Romans, he had Lictors walking before him. Pomponius Laetus allows him but two; but Raphael Volateranus says, more likely there were four and twenty Li∣ctors, for each Consul had commonly twelve. This Magistrate was never chosen, but when the Commonwealth was reduced to some great Extremity, either by an unexpected War, or some popular and epidemical Dis∣ease, to drive in the Nail, or chuse new Se∣nators. The Consul elected a Dictator by Night upon the Territories of the Common-wealth, and no where else. That Office was for six Months; at first none but Patricians only were admitted to it; but afterwards they were taken out of the People, and the first who was honour'd with that Employment was called T. Largus. DICTATURA, The Dictatorship, the Dignity of Dictator, which commonly lasted but six Months, yet the Senare might continue it. DIDO; or Elise, the Daughter of Belus King of Tyre. She married Sicheus, Hercules's Priest, whom Pigmalion, Dido's Brother, mur∣thered, to possess his Treasure. Dido fearing her life, sailed to the Coasts' of Africa, where she built a Town and called it Carthage. Jar∣bas King of Getulia would force her to marry him, but she refus'd to consent to it, and had rather kill herself, than stain her former Bed. Virgil relates this otherwise in his Encid, but by the account of Chronologers what he said is impossible, for Aeneas lived 260 Years be∣fore Dido. DIES, The Day. The Ancients di∣vided the day into a natural and artifici∣al. They called the natural day that which is measured by the duration of time, that the Sun takes to move round the Earth, which comprehends the whole space both of the Day and Night. And they called the artifi∣cial day, the duration of that time the Sun is above our Horizon.
The natural day is also called civil, be∣cause several Nations reckon it several ways; some begin it one way, and others another way. The Babylonians began the day with the rai∣sing of the Sun. The Jews and Athenians began it with the setting of the Sun, and the Italians follow them, and begin the first hour of the day with the Sun setting. The Egyptians began it as we do at midnight, and the Ʋmbri at Noon. The day that begins with the rising and set∣ting of the Sun is not equal; for from the Winter-Solstice to the Summer-Solstice, the day that begins with the Sun setting has some∣thing more than four and twenty hours: and on the contrary, less from the Summer-Sol∣stice to the Winter-Solstice; but the natural day that begins at mid-night or at noon is al∣ways equal. The artificial day on the contrary is un∣equal all over the World, except under the Aequinoxial Line; and this inequality is more or less, according to the diversity of Cli∣mates. The Romans distinguish'd the days into holy-days and working-days: In the one of these followed their Diversions, and the other their Business and Trading; some days were also accounted by them lucky, and others un∣lucky. We ought here to observe the general di∣vision that Numa made of the days called Fasti and Nefasti; the days called Fasti were divided in Comitiales, Comperendini, Stati, Praeliares. Fasti dies were pleading days, at which time the Praetor was allowed to administer Justice; and the word fasti is derived from fari, i. e. to speak or pronounce: Wherefore the juris∣diction of the Praetor consisted in pronoun∣cing these three words Do, Dico, Addico: On the contrary, dies nefasti were no pleading days, at that time there was no Justice admi∣nistred, which Ovid has expressed by these two Verses. Ille nefastus erit, per quem tria verba silentur. Fastus erit per quem lege licebit agi. The days called Fasti were marked with an F. in the Roman Kalendar, and the days called Nefasti were marked with an N. Paulus Manucius observes that there were three sorts of days called Fasti; some were meerly called Fasti, and those days were en∣tirely spent in the administration of Justice; others were called Intercisi or Enterocisi, because one part of those days was employed to offer Sacrifice, and the other to distribute Justice, which was administred from the time that the victim was sacrificed, till the inwards were offered upon the Altars of the Gods, during the time they were examining the Entrails, inter caesa & porrecta: and those days are markt in the Kalendar with these two Letters E. N. The third sort of days called Fasti, were fasti in the afternoon, and nefasti in the morning, markt in the Kalendar with these Letters N. P. Nefastus priore tempore, or priore parte diei, as we learn from Ovid. Neu toto perstare die sua jura putetis, Qui jam Fastus erit, mane Nefastus erat. Nam simul exta Deo data sunt, licet omnia fari; Verbaque honoratus libera Praetor habes. DIES SENATORII. Days that the Senate met about the affairs of the Com∣monwealth, which were commonly the Ka∣lends, the Nones, and the Ides of the month, except upon extraordinary occasions, for then there was no other days excepted, on∣ly those appointed for the Assemblies of the people. DIES COMITIALES. Days of the meeting of the people, markt in the Kalen∣dar with a C. When the Assemblies did not sit a whole day, the Praetor was allowed to bestow the rest of the day in administring Justice. DIES COMPERENDINI. Days of adjournment. After a hearing on both sides, the Proetor granted time to the Clients, either to inform more fully, or to clear themselves: this adjournment was commonly of twenty days, and was only granted to Roman Citi∣zens, and to summon a Foreigner at Rome. Macrobius says that this last adjournment was called Stati Dies. DIES PRAELIARES. Days during which it was permitted to engage the enemy. There were also other days called Justi, viz. thirty days that the Romans were wont to grant to their Enemy, after they had pro∣claimed War against them, and before they entered their Territories, and used any Act of Hostility, to give them time by this de∣lay to come to an agreement, or make satis∣faction for the wrong they had done them. Justi Dies, says Festus, dicebantur triginta, cum exercitus esset imperatus & vexillum in arce posi∣tum. There were other days called NON PRAELIARES or ATRI, fatal and unluckly, because of some loss the Romans had suffered during those days, wherefore it was not allowed to engage the Enemy upon such days. The Greeks called them . 'Tis certain that the Ancients accounted some days luckly, and others fatal, and that the Chaldeans and Aegyptians have first made
observations upon those days, and the Greeks and Romans in imitation of them, have done the like. Hesiod was the first, who made a Catalogue of lucky and fatal days, intituled , where the fifth day of the month is noted for an unlucky day, because, as he says, the Furies of Hell are walking that day upon the Earth: wherefore Virgil tells us in the first Book of his Georgicks. —Quintam fuge, pallidus Orcus, Eumenidesque satae: tum partu Terra nefando Caeumque Japetumque reat, saevumque Typhoea, Et conjuratos caelum rescindere fratres. The opinion of Plato was, that the fourth day of the month was lucky, Hesiod assures that it was the seventh day was fortunate, because it was Apollo's Birth-day; and that the 8th, 9th, 11th, and 12th days were also lucky. The Romans accounted also some days lucky and others fatal. And the following days after the Kalends, Nones and Ides were reckoned fatal and unfortunate. And this o∣pinion was grounded upon the answer of a Southsayer. For the Military Tribunes Vi∣gilius, Manlius, and Caelius Posthumius, seeing that the Common wealth suffered always some loss, presented a Petition to the Senate in the year 363, desiring them to enquire about the cause of these misfortunes. The Senate sent for a Southsayer, called L. Aquinius, who be∣ing come into the Assembly, they asked him his opinion about the same; he answered, that when Q. Sulpitius, one of the Military Tribunes, engaged the Gauls with so bad suc∣cess near the River Allia, he had offered Sa∣crifices to the Gods the next day after the Ides of July; that the Fabians were killed at Cremera, because they engaged the Enemy upon the like day. After this answer the Senate referred the consideration of the whole Affair to the Colledge of the Pontiffs, and desired them to give their opinion there∣in. The Pontiffs forbad to engage the Ene∣my, or to undertake any thing upon the next day after the Kalends, Nones and Ides, as Livy reports. Besides these days that were accounted unlucky, there were also some o∣ther days, that every particular man esteem∣ed unfortunate in respect to his own person. Augustus never attempted to perform any thing upon the day of Nones, others upon the fourth of Kalends, Nones and Ides. Vitelli∣us having obtained the dignity of the high Pontiff, made Ordinances concerning Reli∣gion upon the 15th of the Kalends of August, which were ill received, because of the loss they had suffered upon that day at Cremera and Allia as Suetonius relates in the life of that Emperor, and Tatitus in the second Book of his History, c. 24. They took for a bad omen, that being made High Priest, he ordained something concerning Religion upon the eighteenth day of July, which is fatal, because of the Battles of Allia and Cremera. There was also many other days account∣ed fatal by the Romans, as the day that they offered Sacrifices to the Ghost of deceased persons; the day following after the Feasts called Volcanalia, the fourth before the Nones of October, the sixth of the Ides of November, the Holyday called Lemuria in May; the Nones of July, called Crapotinae; the Ides of March, because Julius Caesar was killed that day; the fourth before the Nones of August, because of the defeat of Cannae that happened upon that day; the Holydays of the Latins called Saturnalia, and many others recorded in the Kalendar. However, some Romans slighted those ri∣diculous and superstitious observations; for Lucullus answered to those who endeavoured to dissuade him from engaging Tigranes, be∣cause upon the same day the Cimbri had rout∣ed the Army of Caepio, I, said he, I will make it of a good omen for the Romans. Julius Caesar transported his Forces over into Africa, tho the Augurs opposed his design. Dion of Syracusa engaged Dyonisius the Tyrant, and overcame him one day when the Moon was eclipsed. And so did many others. DIES FESTI, Holydays. See after Festum. DIESIS, The quarter of a Tone. This word is derived from the Greek , i. e. to pass and run through something; the Diesis among Musicians are the lesser parts of a Tone. Wherefore Aristotle says, that the Diesis are the Elements of the Voice, i. e. of Tones: However, the Pythagoreans who are thought to be the inventers of the name Diesis, do not make it so small; they divi∣ded the Tone in two inequal parts, the lesser, which we call the Semi-tone minor was called Diesis, and the greatest, which is our Semi-tone major, was called Apotome. DII, Gods. The Romans made two clas∣sis, or orders of their Gods; in the first were ranked the Gods called Dii majorum gen∣tium, in the second were the Gods called Dii minorum gentium. The Gods of the first order were the most powerful, nobiles & potentes, and were called upon under great exigencies. They were twelve in number, six Males, and six Females. Neptunus, Mars, Mercurius, Vulcanus, Apollo, Ju∣piter: Juno, Minerva, Ceres, Vesta, Diana, Venus.
The Gods of the second order, whom Ovid comprehends under the word Plebs, were of a much lesser consideration, and had no pow∣er but from the great Gods; wherefore they were called upon but in affairs of less mo∣ment. Tully l. 2. de legibus makes three orders of Gods. The first order is of Celestial Gods, the second of Demi-Gods or Hero's, who were carried up into Heaven on account of their atchievements, and in the third order were those who gave men the power to be∣come themselves Gods. They divided also the Gods, into Gods of Heaven, Gods of the Earth, Gods of the Sea; in Gods of Forests, Gods of Rivers, and Gods of Gardens. There is still another division of Gods into Gods called Consentes, and Gods elected, in Deos Consentes & Electos. The Gods called Consentes are the twelve Gods mentioned be∣fore. They had their share in the Govern∣ment of the Universe, and the chiefest em∣ployments in the administration thereof. The Gods elected were eight, whom the Gods called Consentes had chosen and entrust∣ed with a share of the government, relying so far upon them. And these twenty Gods, viz. twelve Males and eight Females, were adored as the Soveraigns of all the little Gods, who had but small and limited employments in the government of the Universe, are the names of the Gods called Consentes, and Gods called elected. JANUS, JUPITER, SATURN, GENIUS, MERCU∣RY, APOLLO, MARS, VUL∣CANUS, NEPTUNE, The SUN, HELL or PLUTO, LIBER: TEL∣LUS, CERES, JUNO, The MOON, DIANA, MINERVA, VENUS, VESTA. The Names of the Gods of the Sea, NEPTUNE, SALACIA, VE∣NILIA, EGERIA, JUTURNA, PORTUNA. The names of the Gods of Hell, PLU∣TO, ACHERON and STYX his Wife, PROSERPINA, AEACUS, MINOS, RHADAMANTHUS, CHARON,, The Three PARCAE, the FURIES. The names of the Gods called Indigites, or of the Heroes or Demi-gods, as HERCU∣LES, AESCULAPIUS, FAUNUS, CARMENTA, CASTOR & POL∣LUX, ACCA LAURENTIA, QUIRINUS or ROMULUS. The names of the Gods called Semones, or Semi-homines, who had the protection of men during the course of their life. Those that presided at Births, were the Goddess MENA or LUNA, for  signifies the Moon, or PRIVIGNA JU∣NO, and JUNO FLUONIA, LUCI∣NA or DIANA, LATONA or PAR∣TUNDA, and EGERIA, who assisted Women in their Labour. After a Woman was delivered of a Child, three Gods were called upon to preserve the Woman lying in, and preserve her from the God Silvanas; viz. INTERCINODA, PILUMNUS and DEVERRA. The Child who was born was put under the pro∣tection of these Gods, VAGITANUS to preside at his Cries; LEVANA, to take him up; CUNINA, to lay him in the Cradle; RUMINA, to suckle him; PO∣TINA, to give him Drink; EDUCA, to feed him; OSSILAGO, to knit his Bones; CARNEA or CARNA and CARDEA, to take care of his Vitals; JU∣VENTUS, presided over his Youth; OR∣BONA was called upon by the Parents, lest she should take away their Children. When the Child grew up, they prayed to other Gods in his behalf, viz. MURCIA, lest he should be idle; STRENUA, to act with vigilancy and vigour; ADEONA and ABEONA, to go and come again; AVERRUNCUS, to put away evil; ANGERONA, to drive away Melancho∣ly; and two GENII, one good and the other bad. The Names of the Country Gods, JUPI∣TER, the EARTH, the SUN, the MOON, CERES, LIBER, MI∣NERVA, VENUS, PALES, FLORA, POMONA, VERTUM∣NUS, SEIA or SEGETIA SE∣GECE, TULLINA, TUTANUS, ROBIGUS, PAN, SILENUS, SILVANUS, TERMINUS, PRI∣APUS; and an infinite number of others, as the Gods PENATES and LARES, of whom we will speak severally and in their Order. DILUVIUM, A Deluge, a general Inundation that God sent formerly upon the Earth to drown both Men and Beasts, to punish their wickedness. For that purpose God opened the Cataracts of Heaven, and preserved only Noah and his Family out of this Deluge, with two of each kind of all living Creatures in an Ark, that he ordered him to build for that purpose. There has been formerly five Deluges, yet there was but one universal one, sixteen hun∣dred years and more after the creation of the World, in the time of old Ogyges the Phaenici∣an, as Xenophon tells us. The second Deluge covered only the Land of Egypt with Waters, and was occasioned by
by an overflowing of the River Nile, in the time of Prometheus and Hercules, and continued but a Month, as we learn from Diodorus Si∣culus. The third Deluge happened in Achaia, in the Province of Attica, and lasted threescore days, in the time of Ogyges the Athenian. Dio∣dorus speaks of it in his sixth Book, and Pausanias in his Attica relates, that in the lower Town of Athens, in the way that leads to the Temple of Jupiter Olympius, there was a hole seen in the ground a foot and a half wide, and thro' that hole the Waters of the Flood were sunk, wherefore it was a custom among the People, to throw every year into that hole, a kind of an offering made with Wheat-Flower and Honey. The fourth Deluge was in Thessalia in Deu∣calion's time, and continued a whole Winter, as Aristotle tells us in the first Book of his Meteors. The fifth hapned about the Ostia of the Ri∣ver Nile in Egypt, in the Reign of Proteus, and about the time of the Trojan War. But Poets confound these Deluges, and say, that the Universal Deluge was in the time of Deucalion, the Son of Prometheus, who escaped alone with his Wife in a Boat on the top of Mount Parnassus in Phcis. Lucian seems to countenance this opinion of the Poets in the Dea Syriae. The most common opinion (says he) is, that Deucalion of Scythia is the founder of this Temple, (he means the Temple of Syria;) for the Greeks say, that the first Men being cruel and inso∣lent, faithless and void of Humanity, pe∣rished all by the Deluge, a great quantity of Water issuing out of the bowels of the Earth, which swell'd up the Rivers, and forc'd the Sea to overflow, by the assistance of Rain and violent Showers, so that all lay under water: only Deucalion remain'd, who escaped in an Ark with his Family, and two of each kind of all living Creatures, that fol∣lowed him into the Ark, both wild and tame, without hurting one another. He floated till the Waters were withdrawn, then po∣pulated the Earth again. They added ano∣ther wonder, that an Abyss opened of it self in their Country, which swallowed up all the Waters; and that Deucalion in memory of that Accident, erected there an Altar and built a Temple. A Man may still see there a very small Cliff, where the Inhabitants of that Country, with those of Syria, Arabia, and the Nations beyond the Euphrates, resort twice a year to the Neighbouring Sea, from whence they fetch abundance of Water, which they pour into the Temple, from whence it runs into that Hole; and the Ori∣gine of this Ceremony is likewise attributed to Deucalion, and instituted in commemorati∣on of that Accident. This is what Holy Scripture informs us concerning the Universal Deluge. The wickedness of Men being great in the Earth, at last the day of Punishment came. And the Lord commanded unto Noah to put in the Ark all sort of Provisions, and take two of each kind of unclean Animals, and seven of the clean Animals, viz. three Males and three Females to preserve their Specie upon the Earth, and one more for the Sacrifice after the Flood should be over. This being done, Noah shut up himself in the Ark, the seventeenth day of the second Month of the Solar Year, (which was the nineteenth of April according to our computation) with his three Sons and their Wives. It did rain forty days and forty nights. And God open∣ed the Cataracts of Heaven, and the Foun∣tains of the Deep; and the Waters increa∣sing during an hundred and fifty days, (the forty Days above-mentioned being included) were fifteen Cubits higher than the top of the highest Mountains. And all Flesh died, both Men and Beasts, and none escaped but those that were in the Ark. The hundred and fiftieth day the waters abated, by a great wind that the Lord raised, and the twenty seventh of the seventh Month, to reckon from the beginning of the Flood, the Ark rested upon a Mountain of Armenia; Hieronymus calls it Mount Taurus, because the River Araxes ran at the foot thereof.Others grounding their Opinion upon a more anci∣ent Authority, tell us, that the Ark rested upon one of the Gordian Mountains; and Epi∣phanius says, that at his time they shew'd yet the remainders of the Ark. Many Arabian Geographers and Historians are of this Opi∣nion. The first day of the tenth Month the tops of the Mountains appeared. And Noah and his Family went out of the Ark the twenty seventh day of the second Month (the twenty ninth of April according to our account) by the command of the Lord, as he went in before by the same order. DIOCLETIANUS, Born in Dalma∣tia, of a mean Parentage, and Slave to Annu∣linus the Senator. His great ability in War and Government raised him to the Throne. And as soon as he had obtained the Soveraign Power, he put Aper to death, to make good the prediction of an old Witch, who had foretold him that he should be a great Man, when he had kill'd the fatal Wild-boar (for till that time he was but a Wild-boar Hun∣ter;) nevertheless this Prediction was to be understood of Aper, Mumerian's Father-in-law, for Aper signifies in Latin a Wild-boar. This Emperor raised a most violent Persecution a∣gainst
the Christians, and was both ambitious and cruel. His folly grew to such an excess, that he ordered that the People should adore him like a God, and should kiss his Feet: a new thing, never required of them by his Predecessors, who were only saluted after the manner of Consuls. His Vices blasted the Glory of his Life, and his great ability, which might otherwise ren∣der him famous, either in Peace or War. From a Soldier of Fortune, he raised himself to the greatest Dignity in the World, and maintained it with much Glory, and left it with as much greatness of Soul. When his Colleague endeavour'd to per∣swade him to take again the Purple, he talked to him of the Lettices of his Garden of Salona, and no Man was ever able to remove him from the retirement he had chosen. He died in a very strange manner, for he felt dreadful pains all over his Body, which was falling to pieces, and stunk so horridly, that no body was able to come near him, and he was a ter∣ror to himself. After his death Licinius plac'd him among the number of Gods after the u∣sual manner. DIOGENES, A Cynick Philosopher, who called himself the Citizen of the Uni∣verse, the Physician of the Soul, and the Herald of Liberty, promising himself that he could perswade men to leave their pleasures. Lucian introduces him speaking in his Dia∣logue of the Sects of Philosophers exposing to Sale, delivering the Epitome of his Do∣ctrine. You must be audacious, impudent, snarl at all Mankind, and find fault with everything; for that is the compleat way to be admired: Let your Speech be rude, your Tone the like; your Looks stern, and your Mien barbarous; in short, your whole deportment wild and savage.He did wear an old patched garment, with a Staff and a Bag, and dwelt in a Tub, which he tumbled in the day-time, lest he should re∣main idle. DIOMEDES, King of Aetolia, the Son of Tydeus, and fair Deiphile, the Daugh∣ter of Adrastus, King of Argos. He went to the Trojan Wars with Achilles, and was killed by Ulysses, as they were coming back toge∣ther, after they had stoln the Palladium. Af∣ter his Death his Servants were changed into Birds called Diomedeae Aves, mentioned in Pliny l. 10. c. 44. I won't omit, says he, the Birds of Diome∣des, whose Feathers are white, and the eyes like fire. There are some of them found in an Island of Apulia, where Diomedes was buried. DIOMEDES, King of Thrace, who exposed all persons who came into his King∣dom to be devoured, by four Horses that he fed with Blood and Mans Flesh. Palaephatus tells us, that Diomedes was the first man that bred Horses, and spent all his Estate about it, wherefore these Horses were called An∣thropophagi, i. e. Men-eaters, and this gave oc∣casion to the Fable that Diomedes Horses were fed with Man's-Flesh. Philostratus affirms, that these four Creatures were four Mares, or four Daughters of Diomedes, who were ve∣ry lecherous, and consumed the Estates and the Health of all men that were in love with them. Hercules slew him, and gave his Corps to be eaten by his own Horses. DIONYSIUS, An Epithet given to Bacchus, for Jupiter to preserve Bacchus, whom he had begot of Semele, from jealous Juno, transformed him for a time into a He-goat, and Mercury carried him to the Nymphs, who inhabited the Neighbourhood of the Town of Nysa in Asia, to nurse him up. Where∣fore he was sirnamed Dionysius from , i. e. Jupiter, and  Nysa. This we learn of Lucian in his Dialogues of the Gods, where Mercury talking with Neptune about young Bacchus, whom Jupiter placed in his thigh, to compleat his time, and was just now de∣livered of him. I have carried him, says he, to Nysa, to be brought up by the Nymphs inhabiting there, who have nam'd him Dionysius, from the name of his Father, and their own Country. DIONYSIA. The Feasts of Bacchus. See Orgia and Bacchanalia. DIOSCORIDES. A Greek Physician of Anazarba, who came to Rome, and obtain∣ed the freedom of a Citizen. He got par∣ticularly acquainted with Licinius Bassus an illustrous Roman; and took the name of Pedacius or Pedianus of the Family Pedania, as Lambe∣cius observed in his Commentaries upon the Library of the Emperour; and he has left us some Books of the nature of Plants, and ver∣tue of Metals. DIPHILUS, An able Architect, but a slow Workman; from whence comes the Latin Proverb, Diphilo tardior, to represent a very slow man, who does not finish his work. DIRAE. The Furies of Hell, called al∣so Eumenides. Poets mention three of them, viz. Tisiphone, Megaera and Alecto, whom they represent with fiery eyes, their heads attired with Serpents, and holding Iron Chains in their hands, and Scourges with burning Torches to punish guilty Consciences. DIRCE. The Wife of Lycus King of Thebes, whom he married after he had di∣vorced Antiope. Zethus and Amphion tyed her to the tail of a Horse and dragged her a∣bout, but the Gods out of compassion turned her into a Fountain.
There was another of that name, who pre∣ferred herself in Beauty to Pallas, wherefore she was transformed into a Fish. DIS, The God of Riches, also called Plutus. He is represented lame and blind; wherefore when Jupiter sends him to any person, he arrives there but very late, and often when there is no want of him: But when he returns, he goes as fast as the wind, and men are amazed to lose the sight of him so soon. And if Riches come to men sleep∣ing, he don't walk then upon his own Legs, but he is carried away, and then 'tis not Ju∣piter who sends him; but Pluto, who is also the God of Riches, as 'tis intimated by his name, for he makes great Riches pass from one hand into another: And being blind, he often misses his way; but he turns so of∣ten up and down, and on every side, that he meets some one or another who takes hold on him. Wherefore he inriches but very few just men; for being blind, how can he find a just man, who is a thing so scarce to meet with? but the wicked being in great numbers, he easily met with them. DISCORDIA, Discord. The Anci∣ents have made Discord a mischievous Divi∣nity. Aristides represents her with dreadful and fiery eyes, a pale countenance, black and blue lips, wearing a Dagger in her bosom. Jupiter banish'd her out of Heaven, because she sowed divisions among the Gods. She caused the ruin of Troy, for being angry that she was not invited with the other Gods to the wedding of Thetis and Beleus, she threw a Golden Apple into the Banquetting room, which fell at the feet of Venus, Pallas and Ju∣no. Mercury took it up, and observed that there was written about it, 'Tis for the fairest. The three Goddesses fell out presently a∣mong themselves, each of them pretending that it belonged to her, and had not Jupiter commanded them silence, they would have come to blows. Yet he would not decide their quarrel, and referred them to Paris the Son of Priam to be judged by him, who gave it for Venus the Goddess of Beauty; whereupon Juno grew angry, and in revenge thereof, destroyed Troy and the Trojans toge∣ther. —Saevae memorem Junonis ob iram; Who remembred the judgment that Paris had pronounced in the behalf of Venus. DISCUS, A quoit which Gamesters used in ancient exercises. It was a round thing of Metal or Stone, a foot broad, which they threw into the air to shew their skill and strength. Discus was also a round consecra∣ted Shield, made to represent a memorable deed of some of the Heroes of Antiquity, and to keep it in remembrance thereof in a Temple of the Gods, where it was to be hung up. DIVORTIUM, Divorce between a Husband and his Wife. At first Divorce was rare among the Romans. Romulus, says Plutarch, made many Laws, but the most rigorous of all was, that which forbad the Wife to forsake her Hus∣band, and allowed the Husband the liberty of forsaking his Wife, in this three cases. If she has made use of Poyson to kill the Fruit of her Womb, if she has put another Child upon him instead of his own, and in case of Adultery. If the Husband dismissed his Wife upon any other account, he was bound to give her part of his Estate, and the other part was consecrated to Ceres; and then he was obliged to offer a Sacrifice to the Gods called Manes. Leges etiam quasdam tulit Romulus, inter quas vehemens est illa quâ mulieri maritum relinquendi potestas adimitur: viro au∣tem ejicere uxorem conceditur, si veneficio circa pro∣lem usa fuerit, aut alienam pro suâ subdidisset, aut adulterium commississet. Si quis aliâ de causâ repu∣diasset conjugem, ejus mariti bona partim uxori cederent, partim Cereri sacra forent, atque Diie Manibus rem sacram facere tenebatur. The Law of the twelve Tables permits Divorce upon the fore-mentioned causes, and prescribes some rites that are to be observed in that case, the neglect whereof made it void. It was to be made in the presence of seven Roman Citizens, all men of ripe age. Divortia septem civibus Romanis puberibus testibus adhibitis postea faciunto aliter facta pro infectis ha∣bentor, says the Lex Julia. The Husband took the Keys of his house from the hands of his Wife, and sent her back with these words, Res tuas tibi habeto, or Res tuas tibi agito, i. e. what is your own take it again. Tully says in his Phillippick, Frugi factus est, mimam illam suas sibi res habere dixit ex duodcim tabulis, clavis ademit, exegit. He is become an honest man, he has bid this lewd Creature to take what was her own a∣gain, and has took the Keys from her, and put her away. Though the Laws allowed Divorce, yet it was not put into practice at Rome till the year 70, when a certain person named Spuri∣us Carvilius Ruga, in the time of the Con∣sulship of M. Pomponius, and Caius Papyrius, or of M. Attilius and P. Valerius put away his Wife for barrenness. DODONA, A Town of Chaonia, fa∣mous for the Forest, where the Oaks spoke by the Oracle of Jupiter, called Dedonaeus. Aristotle (as Suidas relates) says, that there were two Pillars at Dodona, and upon one
thereof a Bason of Brass, and upon the other a Child holding a Whip, with Cords made of Brass, which occasioned a noise when the Wind drove them against the Bason. Demon (as the same Suidas relates) says, that the Oracle of Jupiter, called Dodoneus, is com∣passed round about with Basons; which, when they are driven one against the other, communicate their motion round about, and make a noise that lasts a while. Others say, that the noise proceeded from a sounding Oak, that shook its Branches and Leaves when it was consulted; and declared its Will by the Priests called Dodonaei. Poets tell us that the Ships of the Argonauts were built with Timber fetched out of the Dodonaean Forest, wherefore they spoke upon the Sea, and pronounced Oracles. There was in the Town of Dodona a Foun∣tain, the Waters thereof, though very cold, yet would light a Torch lately put out, when dipt in 'em. Lucretius ascribes this effect to the hot Vapours, that issued from the great quan∣tity of Brimstone which is in the veins of the Earth; and some others ascribe it to the Antiperistasis of the great cold, that conden∣sed the heat remaining still in the Torch, and thus lighted it again. DOLABRA, The Pontifical Ax, to knock down the Victim in Sacrifices. DOMITIANUS, The twelfth Em∣peror of Rome, Son to Vespasian, and Titus's Brother. During his Father's life he gave himself to Poetry, and made great progress in it; and Quintilian, Pliny and Silius Italicus commend him for the same. At his first coming to the Empire, he shew'd much mo∣desty and justice, making many good Laws, and forbad the making of Eunuchs. He re∣newed the Lex Julia against Adulterers, for∣bad the use of litters to publick Women, and deprived them of the right of Inheriting. To these Vertues was joined a great Magnifi∣cence and Liberality, giving to the People several very costly Games and Shews, but soon after he discovered his cruel and lascivi∣ous temper, which he had hitherto hidden. For he kept company with his Niece, as if she had been his lawful Wife. His Vanity was not less than his Incontinence, he took upon him the Name of God and Lord, and was proud of having that Title given to him in all Petitions presented to him. The Peo∣ple were obliged to comply with the fantasti∣cal Impiety of a Man, who was not then ca∣pable of hearing reason. The Poets of his time, and especially Martial were not sparing of his Praises; and their Verses are still shameful Testimonies of their Flatteries of a Prince, who deserved so little the name of God, that he was unworthy of bearing the Name of Man. He renewed the Persecution that his Father had begun against Philosophers, who were obliged to disguise themselves, and fly away into Foreign Countries. As for the Christians he cruelly persecuted them, and banished St John the Evangelist into the Isle of Pathmos, after he was miraculously come out of a great Kettle full of boiling Oyl, wherein this Ty∣rant had ordered him to be cast. His design was to ruin utterly the Christian Religion; but a Man named Stephen, made free by Cle∣mens the Consul, delivered the Church and Empire of this cruel Persecutor. Suet onius re∣lates, that the day before his Death, he said, that the next day the Moon should be bloody for him in the Sign of Aquarius. The Senate pull'd down his Statues, and razed out all the Titles he had usurped, and Men out of a base compliance had bestowed upon him. The greatest part of the day he passed in his Closet, killing Flies with a golden Bodkin, Wherefore it was said that he was always alone, and that there was not so much as a Fly with him. He built a Temple to the Goddess Health, having escap'd the danger that he had run at the coming of Vitellius. DOMUS, This word is commonly taken for all sorts of Houses, either Magnifi∣cent or Ordinary; but 'tis often taken by Writers to intimate a fine House of some great Lord, or Palaces of Princes, as it ap∣pears by these Verses of Virgil, speaking of the Palace of Dido. At Domus Interior regali splendida luxu. These great Houses were built with much Magnificence, and were of a vast extent; for they had many Courts, Apartments, Wings, Cabinets, Bagnio's, Stoves, and a great ma∣ny fine Halls, either to sit at Table, or to transact matters of consequence. Before these great Houses there was a large place or Porch, where Clients and Persons giving attendance to great Men, waited till it was day light, to be admitted to make their Court. 'Tis to be supposed that this Porch was covered, for the conveniency of Persons, who were sometimes waiting very long before they were admitted. There was a second part to these Houses, called Cavum-Aedium or Cavaedium, it was a great large Court, inclosed with Rows of Houses. The third part was cal'ed Atrium interius, i. e. in general the whole inside of the House. Virgil has took this word in Vitruvius's sense, when he said, Apparet Domus intus, & atria longa patescunt; for 'tis plain that Virgil means by the word Atria, all that may be seen in the inside of a House when the Doors are
opened. There was a Porter waiting at the Atrium, called Servus Atriensis. Within this place there were many figures; for the Ro∣mans, who passionately loved Glory and Praises, raised every where Trophies and Statues, to leave Eternal Monuments of their great actions to posterity, not only in the Provinces, which they subdued to the Em∣pire, but also in publick places, and their own palaces at Rome. There were painted or engraven Battles, Axes, bundles of Rods, and the other badges of the Offices that their Ancestors or them∣selves had possessed, and Statues of Wax or Metal, representing their Fathers in Basso re∣lievo, were set up in Niches of precious Wood or rare Marble. The days of their solemn Feasts, or their Triumphal Pomp, these Niches were opened, and the Figures crown∣ed with Festoons and Garlands, and carried about the Town. When some persons of the Family died, these Statues accompanied the Funeral Parade; wherefore Pliny says, that the whole Family was there present from the first to the last. Besides, there were great Galleries in these Houses, adorned with Pillars, and other works of Architecture, and great Halls, Clo∣sets for Conversation and Painting, Libraries, and Gardens neatly kept. These Halls were built after the Corinthian or Aegyptian order. The first Halls had but a row of Pillars set upon a Pedestal, or on the Pavement, and supported nothing but their Architrave, and cornish of Joyners Work or Stud, over which was the Ceiling in form of a Vault; but the last Halls had Architraves up∣on Pillars, and on the Architraves of the Ceilings made of pieces joined together, which make an open'd Terras, turning round about. These Houses had many apartments, some for men, and others for women; some for Dining-rooms called Triclinia, others for Bed∣chambers named Dormitoria; and some others to lodge Strangers, to whom they were ob∣liged to be Hospitable. Ancient Rome was so large, that there were eight and forty thousand Houses standing by themselves, being so many Insula, and these Houses were very convenient, because they had a light on every side, and doors on the Streets, and not exposed to the accidents of fire. But this must be understood of Rome, that was re-built by Nero, after he had re∣duced it himself (as 'tis thought) into ashes. The Greeks built after another manner than the Romans; for they had no Porch, but from the first door they entred into a narrow pas∣sage; on one side of it there were Stables, and on the other there was the Porters Lodge; at the end of this passage there was another door, to enter into a Gallery supported with Pillars, and this Gallery had Piazza's on three sides. Within the Greek's houses there were great Halls, for the Mistresses of the Family, and their Servant Maids to Spin in; in the Entry both on the right and left hand there were Chambers, one was called Thalamus, and the o∣ther Antithalamus. Round about the Piazza's there were Dining-rooms, Chambers and Wardrobes. To this part of the House was joyned another part, which was bigger and had very large Galleries, with four Piazza's of the same heighth. The finest Entries and most magnificent Doors were at this part of the House. There were four great square Halls, so large and spacious, that they would easily hold four Tables, with three Seats in form of Beds, and leave room enough for the Ser∣vants and Gamesters. They entertain'd in these Halls, for 'twas not the custom for wo∣men to sit amongst men. On the right and the left of these Buildings there were small apartments, and very convenient rooms to receive the chance Guests; for among the Greeks wealthy and magnificent men kept a∣partments, with all their conveniencies to receive persons who came far off to lodge at their Houses. The custom was, that after they had given them an entertainment the first day only, they sent them afterwards e∣very day some Present that they received from the Country, as Chickens, Eggs, Pulse and Fruits; and so the Travellers were lodg∣ed as they had been at their own House, and might live in these apartments privately and in all liberty. These apartments were paved with Mo∣saick or inlaid Work. Pliny tells us, that the Pavements that were painted and wrought with art come from the Greeks, who called them . These Pavements were in fashi∣on at Rome, during the time of Sylla, who got one made at Praeneste in the Temple of Fortune. This Greek word  signifies only a Pavement of Stones, but the Greeks meant by that word those Pavements made of small Stones of several colours, inlaid into the Ce∣ment, representing different Figures by the variety of their colours and order. This Pavement was not only used for pav∣ing the Courts of Houses and the Halls, but also in Chambers, and wainscoting the Walls, and these kind of Pavements were called Musaea, Musia and Musiva, because ingenious works were ascribed to the Muses, and that the Muses and Sciences were thereby represent∣ed. The word Mosaick is derived from the Latin word Musivum, but not from Moses nor the Jews.
Here we must explain two difficulties, viz. whether the Romans had formerly Chimneys and Privies in their Houses. 'Tis certain, that in former ages men had Chimneys in their Kitchins; but 'tis doubtful whether they had any in their Chambers, for their Chambers were warmed only by some Pipes that conveyed a warm vapour from a Fire made of a kind of Coals that burn with∣out making any Smoak, called by Suetonius, Miseni Carbones. Yet we read several things which seem to perswad: us that they had Chimneys in their Chambers. Suetonins tells us, that the Chamber of Vitel∣lius was burnt, the Chimney having took fire Nec ante in Praetorium rediit, quam flagrante tri∣clinio ex conceptu camini. Horace writes to his Friend to get a good fire in his chimney. Dissolve frigus, ligna super foco, Large reponens.Od. 9. l. 1. Tully writing to his Friend Atticus, tells him, Camino Luculento, tibi utendum censco. And Vi∣truvius speaking of the cornishes that are made in Chambers, give warning to make them plain and without Carver's work in places where they make fire. However, in those ages if they had any chimneys like ours, they were very rare. Blondus and Salmuth say, that chimneys were not in use among the Ancients; but Pancirollus, and many others affirm the contrary. Wherefore, without deciding absolutely the question, 'tis most certain they had Kilns to warm their Cham∣bers, and other apartments of their Houses, called Fornaces vaporaria; and Stoves called Hypocausta. Philander says, that the Kilns were under ground, built along the Wall, with small Pipes to each story to warm the Rooms. They had also Stoves that were removed from one Room to another; for Tully writes that he had removed his Stove, because the Pipe thro which the fire came out, was un∣der his Chamber, Hypocausta in alterum apody∣terii angulum promovi, propterea quod ita erant po∣sita, ut eorum vaporarium, ex quo ignis erumpit, es∣set subjectum cubiculo. The Romans did not only make use of Wood to warm their rooms, but also of the Beams of the Sun, which they gathered in some Kilns, as we do with our Burning-glasses. This Kiln was called in Greek , and in Latin Solarium, or solare vaporarium, and it was not allowed to plant Trees, that might be a hindrance to the gathering of the Beams of the Sun, as Ulpian says. It doth not appear, neither by the writings or buildings that remain of the Ancients. that they had Privies in their Houses. And what they call latrinas were publick places, where the persons who had no Slaves went to empty and wash their Pans, and these per∣sons were called latrinae from lavando, ac∣cording to the Aetymology of M. Varro; for Plautus speaks of the Servant-maid, quae latri∣nam lavat, who washes the Pan. And in this place of Plautus, latrina can't be understood of the publick Houses of Office, which were cleansed by Pipes under the ground, which carried the Waters of the Tiber to these places, and 'tis likely that Plautus made use of the word latrina, to insinuate that sella familiaris erat velut latrina particularis. The Publick Necessary Houses for the day were for the conveniency of the People in several places of the Town; and were called Sterqulinia, covered and full of Spunges, as we learn of Seneca in his Epistles: As for the night, they had running Waters thro all the Streets of Rome, and there they threw all their ordure; but rich men used Pans, which the Servants emptied into the Sinks, that carried all their Waters into the great Sink of the Town, and from thence into the Ti∣ber. DONARIA, Gifts and Presents offered to the Gods, and hung up in their Temples. DONATIVUM, A Gift and Largess in Money, which the Emperors bestowed upon Soldiers, to get their affection and votes in time of need. DRACHMA, A Dram, a kind of weight, composed of two Scruples, and each Scruple of two oboli; and so a Dram was six oboli. As for the proportion that the Dram of the Greeks did bear with the Ounce of the Romans, Q. Rommus in his Poem of Weights and Measures, makes the Dram the eighth part of an Ounce, which is not much different from the Crown of the Arabians, which weighs something more than the Dram. The Dram and the Roman Denarius were of the like value, so that the Dram may be worth about Sevenpence Halfpenny of English Money. DRACONARIUS, The Dragon∣bearer, the standard of the Roman Infantry, the head whereof was drawn in Silver, and the rest of the Body was of Taffety, hung up at the top of a Pike, fluttering in the Air like a Dragon, and out of it hung down great Bands with tufts of Silk at the end. DRACO, A Dragon, so called from , to see plain, to be clear-sighted; and for his watchfulness this Animal is dedicated to Minerva. 'Tis said that he loves Gold, wherefore a Dragon watched the Golden Fleece at Colchos, and the Golden Apples of the Garden of the Hesperides; and 'tis re∣ported
that the Dragon of Pallas dwelt near Athens, because the Athenians did wear their Hair tuckt up with Tresses of Gold. DRUIDAE, The Priest of the Ancient Gauls. Thus Caesar speaks of them l. 4. of the Wars of the Gauls. The Druides of the first Order are Overseers of the worship of the Gods and Religion, and have the direction of both Publick and Private Affairs, and teaching of Youth. If there is any Murther or Crime committed, or Suit at Law about an Inhe∣ritance, or some other Dispute, they decide it, ordaining Punishments and Rewards; and when a Man won't stand to their Judg∣ment, they suspend him from communica∣ting in their Mysteries. And those who are so excommunicated, are accounted wick∣ed and impious, and every Body shuns their Conversation; if they are at law with other Men, they can have no Justice, and are ad∣mitted neither to Employments nor Digni∣ties, and die without Honour and Repu∣tation. All the Druides have an High Priest, who has an absolute Power. After his Death the most worthy among them succeeds him, and if there are many Pretenders to his Office, the Election is decided by Votes, and some∣times by force of Arms. They met every Year in the Country of Chartres, which is in the middle of Gaul, in a place consecrated and appointed for that purpose, where those who are at Law, or at Variance met from all places, and stand to their Decisions.'Tis thought that their Institution came from Brittain, and those who will have per∣fect knowledge of their Mysteries, travell'd into that Country. They never follow the War, and are free from all Taxes and Sla∣very, wherefore many get into their order, and every one puts in for a place among them for his Son or Kinsman. They must learn by heart a great number of Verses; for it is forbid to write them, either to ex∣ercise their Memory, or lest they should profane the Mysteries in publishing them; wherefore they remain sometimes twenty Years in the College. In other things they make use of writing in Greek Characters. One of the chiefest points of their Theolo∣gy is the Immortality of the Soul, as a pro∣fitable Belief, that inclines Men to Vertue by contempt of Death. They hold Metemp∣sychosis, and have many Dogma's of Theo∣logy and Philosophy, which they teach their youth. Diodorous Siculus joins the Druides to Poets in the Authority of pronouncing like Soverign Judges, about Controversies of Private Men and States, and  binding the Armies ready to engage. Lucian tells us, that they were the Authors of the Doctrine of the Immorta∣lity of the Soul, which made the Gauls un∣daunted Men, having a generous contempt of Death, which was in their opinion, but a very short passage to an Immortal Life. The Origine of the word Druides is derived from the Greek, , i. e. an Oak, because they commonly met in the Forrests, where they began their Sacrifices with the Misletoe of Oak, that their youth gathered the first day of January. DRYADES, The Nymphs of the Woods. DRYOPE, A Nymph of Arcadia. Homer says, that Dryope kept company with Mercury, who begot upon her God Pan; Lu∣cian on the contrary, in the Dialogue between Pan and Mercury tells us, that he is the Son of Penelope, the Daughter of Icarus, whom Mercury ravish'd in Arcadia, having tranform∣ed himself into a He-Goat to surprize her: Wherefore Pan was born with Horns, a Beard, a Tail, and the Feet of a She-Goat. DUCENARII, The Receivers of the hundredth penny, a Tax that was paid to the Roman Emperors. DUUM-VIRI SACRORUM, The Duum-viri, or the two Magistrates, whom Tarquinius Superbus created at Rome, a Dignity that was a kind of Priesthood. This Office was set up upon this occasion: Tarquinius having bought of an unknown Woman three Books of Verses, which were thought to have been written by the Sybil of Cumae, he named two Magistrates or Commissaries for the Books of Religion, and all their Duty was to keep these Books, and consult them in some cases, about what was to be done for the good of the State. DUUM-VIRI MUNICIPALES, These two Magistrates were in the free Towns, what Consuls were at Rome. They were chosen out of the Body of the Decurions, on the Kalends of March, but did not enter upon their Office until three Months after their Election, that the People might have time to inquire if they were duly elected, and in case of an undue return, they chose o∣thers. They took the Oath, that they would serve the City and Citizens well and faithful∣ly, and were allowed to wear the Robe cal∣led Praetexta, edged about with Purple, and a white Tunick or Jerkin, as Juvenal tells us, Satyr 5. They had Officers who walked be∣fore them, carrying a small Switch in their Hands. Nevertheless, some of them assumed the priviledge of having Lictors carrying Axes and bundles of Rods before them, as we learn of Tully in the Oration against Rullus, Anteibant Lictores non cum bacillis, sed ut hic Prae∣toribus ante eunt cum facibus duobus.
After they had taken possession of their Of∣fice, it was a custom to make a distribution a∣mong the Decurions, and have some Show of Gladiators represented before the People. This Office was commonly for five years, wherefore they were called Quinquennales Ma∣gistratus. Their Jurisdiction was of a great extent, as we may see in the Treatise of Pancirollus c. 8. DUUM-VIRI NAVALES, Com∣missaries for the Fleet. These Commissaries were created in the Year 542, at the request of M. Decius Tribune of the People, when the Romans were at War with the Samnites. The Duty of their Office was to take care of the sitting of Ships, and ordering the Seamen who were aboard. DUUM-VIRI CAPITALES, The Duumvirs, sirnamed Capitales or Judges in Criminal Causes. It was lawful to appeal from their Sentence to the People, who only had power to condemn a Citizen to die. Some of these Judges were established at Rome and other free Cities; who were taken from the body of the Decurions, and had a great Authority and Power; for they took care of the Prisons, and were Members of the Publick Council. They had two Lictors walking before them. E. E Is the fifth Letter of the Greek and Latin Alphabet. The Greeks call it , and the Latins E. We find this Letter in the Medals of Anto∣ninus sirnamed Pius, to mark the fifth Year of his Reign. The Latins have several pronounciations for this Letter. First, they have a long and open E, like the  of the Greeks, which for that same reason is often doubled, as in Medals and upon Marbles; Feelix, Seedes, &c. The second E of the Latins is a short and closed E, as the  of Greeks: And these two dif∣ferent E's are distinctly observed in Ancient. Authors. E vocalis, says Capella, duarum Grae∣carum vim possidet. Nam cùm corripiter E Graecum est, ut ab hoc hoste, cùm producitur Eta est, ut ab kac die. But there is yet a middle pronounciation between the E and the I. Wherefore Varro observes that they said veam instead of viam? and Festus observes that the me instead of mi or mihi; and Quintilian tells us, that an E was put instead of an I in Menerva, Leber, Magester, instead of Minerva, Liber, Magister. Livy wrote Sebe and quase. And Donatus says, that because the affinity of these two Letters, the Antient Authors said Heri and Here; Mane and Mani, Ve∣spero and Vespere, &c. Wherefore we read in the ancient Inscriptions Navebus, exemet, orna∣vet, cepet, Deana, mereto, soledas, and the like. And from thence comes the change of these two Vowels in so many words, either in the Nominative Case, as Impubes and Impubis, or the Accusative, as pelvem and pelvim; or the Abla∣tive, as nave and navi, and the like names of the third Declension, and in the second, as Dii instead of Dei. The Latins also write E instead of A, where∣fore Quintilian says, that Cato wrote indiffe∣rently dicam or diem, faciam or faciem. And doubtless this is the reason why A was so of∣ten changed into E, either in the praeterit, as Facio, feci; Ago, egi; Jacio, jeci; or in the compound Verbs, as Arceo, coerceo, Damne, condemno; Spargo, aspergo; from this also it comes that they said balare instead of belare, as we see in Varro's writings; and that we meet with so many words written with an E for an A in Antient Authors Books, and old Glos∣ses, as Defetigari instead of defatigari; Varr. Effligi instead of affligi, Charis. Expars in∣stead of expers. Imbarbis instead of Imber∣bis. V. Gloss. Inars instead of of iners. V. Glos. It must be still observed, that the E has some affinity with the O, for the Latins have made of tego, toga; of adversum, advorsum; of vertex, vortex; accipiter instead of accipitor, as Festus says; hemo instead of homo; ambe and ambes instead of ambo and ambos in Ennius's writings; exporrectus instead of experrectus. This is also the reason why there are so ma∣ny Adverbs in E and in O, verè and verò; tutè and tutò; nimiè and nimio; rarè and rarò; in Charisius's writings, and the like. Likewise the E; has an affinity with the U; wherefore they said Diu instead of Die; Lucu instead of luce; Allux instead of allex the great Toe; Dejero instead of dejur; Neptunus instead of Nuptunus, à nubendo terram, i. e. operiendo, as says Tully. EACUS. See AEACUS. EANUS, instead of JANUS, as Tul∣ly calls him. ECASTOR. By Cassor's Temple, an Oatk of the ancient Romans, which may be rendred into English by truly, indeed, cer∣tainly. ECHO. A Nymph of the air, who fell in love with Narcissus, but being slighted by him, she retired into the Grots, and hol∣low places of the Mountains, where she pi∣ned away to a Skeleton, having nothing left but her voice. When we read in Virgil, vo∣cisque offensa resultat imago, or in Horace, Cujus
recinet jocosa nomen imago: or in Claudian, Tunc silvae, tunc antra loqui, tunc vivere fontes, Tunc sacer horror aquis, aditisque effunditur E∣cho. Clarior, & doctae spirant praesagia rupes. When we read, I say, these fine passages of the Poets, we can't but conceive this repeating of the sound and voice in the like manner, that we have told before, which has given occasion to Ovid to feign that it was a Nymph who being faln in love with Narcissus, and having made love to him ineffectually, was turned into a voice and sound. Inde latet silvis, nulloque in monte videtur, Omnibus auditur; sonus est qui vivit in illâ. EGERIA, See AEGERIA. EGISTUS, See AEGISTUS. ELAEOTHESIUM. A place where they kept Oyl and Wax mixt to anoint the Wrestlers. This mixture was also called Ceroma, and did not only render the members slippery and less fit to take hold on, but also more nimble and fit for Exercises. Vitr. ELECTRA. The Daughter of Agamem∣non, and Sister to Orestes, who killed his Mo∣ther Clytemnestra, to revenge the death of his Father Agamemnon, whom Clytemnestra had murthered in revenge of Polyxenes her Daugh∣ter, sacrificed by him. There was another woman of that name, the Daughter of the Ocean and Tethis, and At∣las's Wife, whose Daughter had by Jupiter, Dardanus the founder of Troy. Aratus in his Phoenomenon says, that she is one of the seven Pleiades, who hid herself, lest she should see the destruction of Troy. ELECTRIDES, The Islands of the Adriatick Sea, which are at the mouth of the River Po, where Poets seigned that there grew Trees distilling Amber. Lucian speaks thus of these Islands, in the Treatise of the Amber or the Swans. Hearing when a youth, that all along the Eridanus grew Trees distilling Amber, which was the tears of Phaeton's Sisters, who had been turned into Poplars, and still lamented his disaster, I imagined if I ever travelled that way, I would spread my Garment un∣derneath to catch that precious Liquor, but sailing lately on that River, and not seeing any of those Trees on the Banks, where the name of Phaeton is not so much as known, I asked our Waterman when we should arrive at those places so famous among the Poets. They fell a laughing at my simplicity, and wondered any were so insolent, as to retail and spread about such shams. They added, that if their Country afforded any such Trees, as produced so great a Treasure, they would not wear out their lives in tugging at the Oar, since they might enrich them∣selves in a moment. This nettled and put me very much out of countenance, in that I had thus sufferred my self to be so child∣ishly cull'd by the Poets, and I regretted these things, as if I had really lost them. Strabo l. 5. affirms that these Electrides Islands are not to be found, and that all that Poets say upon this matter, was but a fiction of their own brain. ELEGIA. An Elegy, or a mournful Poem. The verses of a Latin Elegy are by turns Hexameters and Pentameters. Quintilian accounts Tibullus to be the first Latin Poet for writing Elegies; but the younger Pliny gives the preference to Pro∣pertius. ELEMENTA, the Elements, Physi∣cal Principles, whereof all the natural Bodies are composed. The ancient Philosophers, as Pythagoras and Aristotle, allowed four Elements, viz. the Fire, the Air, the Water and the Earth. Cartes and the Moderns allow but three. Plutarch in the first Book of the Philoso∣phers opinions, says, that Empedocles admits of four Elements, which he calls Gods. Thales was the first who taught that Water was the principle of all things. Heraclitus of Ephesus said, that it was Fire. Democritus and Epicurus his Follower were for the Atoms, called invisible Bodies. The Pythagoreans, besides Water and Fire, allowed still Air and Earth for principles of all things. ELENCUS, The God of Liberty and Truth, mentioned in Maenander's Comedies, as we learn of Lucian in his Apophrades, or the bad Grammarian. ELEUSIS, A City of Attica, not far off from Athens, where Eleusius reigned, who re∣ceived Ceres, when she was seeking for Proser∣pina her Daughter, who had been stoln away. This Goddess in reward of her kindness, helped his wife in her labour, as Lactantius says, and succled the Child called Triptolemus, with Divine Milk. When he was grown up a man, she taught him to sow Corn: where∣fore the Inhabitants of Eleusis kept Holy-days called Thesmophores, or Cerceles, in honour of this Goddess. Solinus relates, that there is in that Country a Fountain of very quiet Waters, which are yet moved with the sound of the Flute, as if they were pleas'd with Harmony. ELEUSINA SACRA, The My∣steries of Eleusina, which were instituted by the Inhabitants of the City of Eleusis in Greece, in
honour of the Goddess Ceres; no Man was admitted to these Mysteries, but only Wo∣men, who took all immodest Liberties a∣mong themselves, which they kept very secret. ELEUTHERIA, Feasts celebrated in Greece every fifth Year in Honour of Jupiter Eleutherianus, i. e. Protector of Liberty. The Greeks instituted these Feasts, after the defeat of three hundred thousand Persians, whom Mardonius brought against Greece. There were still some other Feasts called Eleutheria, celebrated by the Semians in ho∣nour of the God of Love. ELISA, Otherwise called Dido, the Daughter of Belus King of Phaenicia, v. Dido. ELYSII CAMPI, The Elysian Fields, so variously spoken of by ancient Writers. Elysium is doubtless an Hebrew or a Phaenician word, which signifies a place of Delight and Joy. All the Nations have made themselves a Paradice and a Hell; the Phaenicians shew'd example to the Egyptians and the Greeks; and 'tis very likely that the Meadow, mentioned by Diodorus Siculus, in the description he has left us of the Egyptian's Funerals, was the Elysian Field of Egypt, which he placed about Memphis, very near the Acherusian Lake, which is surrounded with most delightful Meadows. Homer says that dead Men inhabit these Mea∣dows, because 'tis the Egyptians Burial place, who carry the Corps of the Dead over the Acherusian Lake. Pratum ficta mortuerum habi∣tatio, est locus propè Memphim juxta Paludem, quam vocant Acherusiam, circa quam sunt prata amaenissima. Appositè autem dicit Homerus mortuos istis in locis Habitare, quoniam maximae Aegyptio∣rum funerationes ibi peraguntur; mortui per lacum & fluvium Acherusiam transfretantur. Besides these Elysian Fields, Homer speaks of some others, which are in a very remote Country; and if we believe what Strabo says, they are in Spain. And Proteus King and Pro∣phet of Aegypt foretold to Menelaus, that the Gods will send you to the Elysian Fields, where is Rhadamanihus, and where Men live∣very pleasantly; there falls neither Snow nor Rain, and there is no Winter, but Zephirs cool Men with their sweet breath. Strabo applies this description to Spain, and affirms that the Fortnnate Islands are so cal∣led, because they are in the Neighbourhood of Spain. Diodorus Siculus has made a description of them, which is yet extant. Horace speaks of these Islands, famous for their Riches. Ereptum Stygiis fluctibus Aeacum Virtus & favor, & lingua potentiam Vatum divitibus consecrat insulis. Hesiod placed the Heroes in the Isle of the Blessed, which lies in the Ocean; therefore the ancient Geographers have placed an Ely∣sian Field and a River Lethe there. The Phaenicians found abundance of Riches in Spain, and that it was a very pleasant Country, wherefore they called it a Para∣dice. But after the Fortunate Islands were disco∣vered, and the Treasures of Spain were almost wasted, there they placed the Elysian Fields, and called those Islands the Isles of the Bles∣sed. Plato gave that name to the Paradice or Dwelling-place of Just Men. Hesychius dis∣covers some other places, that were account∣ed the abode of Felicity, Elysium, Beatorum In∣sula. Some Authors say that this place is in Egypt; others in the Isle of Lesbos, and many others in a place stricken with a Thunderbolt, and inaccessible to Men. Dionysius, who has made the description of the World, mentions the white Island in the black Sea, called also the Isle of the Heroes, where Achilles and the other Heroes dwell since their death, by the favour of Jupiter, who rewards Virtue. Italy had also her Elysian Fields, as Virgil relates in the 6th Book of the Aeneid, where he places the Elysian Fields in Italy, and says, that Aeneas went to see them, and there met Anchisos his Father. Plutarch places the Elysian Fields in the Moon. And when Hesychius said that some Writers thought the Elysian Fields were in a place inaccessible to Men, because of the Thunderbolts and stormy weather, it seems that he makes allusion to the Terrestrial Pa∣radice mentioned in the Holy Scripture, from whence Adam was driven away after his Sin, and the entry whereof was guard∣ed by a Cherubim, armed with a Flaming Sword. Pindarus makes a very fine description of the Paradice and Happiness of just Men, But he seems to allow two Paradices for just Men; and the most excellent of these Para∣dices is granted to them after they have kept their Innocency during three several Lives, and in three several Bodies. Statius is also for two Paradices, one in Heaven, and the other in the Elysian Fields upon the Earth. Lucian has left us a very pleasant descrip∣tion of the Elysian Fields, which may be de∣servedly inserted here. We were conducted to the City of the Isle of the Blessed, to assist at their Feasts, we were ravished at our entrance to see a City of Gold, and Walls of Emerald, the
Pavement all in-laid work of Ebony and Ivory. The Temples of Rubies and Dia∣monds, with great Altars raised upon one single precious Stone, on which Hecatombs were seen to smoak. They have seven Gates all of Cinnamon, and a Moat of sweet scented Lustral Water, a hundred yards broad, which was only as deep as was necessary to bath in at ones ease. Yet they have publick Baths of admirable Artifice, wherein they burn nothing but Faggots of Cinnamon. The Edifice was of Crystal, and the Basins or Bathing Tubs great Vessels of Porcelain full of Dew. Now the Blessed have no Body, and are inpalpable; yet they drink and eat, and perform the other natu∣ral functions; they never grow old, but remain continually at the Age they dye in, being that old Men there recover their Beauty and Vigour. Of all the Seasons they know none but the Spring, and feel no o∣other Wind but Zephirus, but the Earth is covered with Flowers and Fruits all the Year long, which are gathered every month, and they are said to bear twice in the Month called Minos: Their Ears, instead of Corn, are loaded with little Loaves like Mushrooms. There are three hundred six∣ty five Fountains of fresh Water, and as many of Honey, and four hundred of sweet Oyntment, but smaller than the others, with several Rivers of Milk and Wine. They keep their Feasts without the City in the Elysian Fields under the shade of a Wood, which surrounded it, there they sat upon Beds of Flowers, and have their Meat brought by the Winds. They are at no pains to make Garlands, for the little Birds, which hop round singing, scatter Flowers upon them, which, they have pillaged in the neighbouring Meadows; they never cease singing during the Meal, and rehear∣sing curious fine Verses. Their Dances are compos'd of Boys and Virgins, and their Musick-Masters are Eunomus, Arion, Anaereon, and Stesichorus. When they have finished their Songs, appears a second Quire of Mu∣sicians, composed of Swans and Nightin∣gales, which with the Zephirs make up a most pleasant Consort. But what furnishes most to the felicity of the Blessed is, that there are two Springs, the one of Laughter and the other of Joy, of which each Man drinks a whetting Brusher, before he sets down to Table, which renders him gay and chearful all the rest of the day. ELPENOR, One of Ʋlysses's Compa∣nions, whom Circe turned into a Hog, and being restored to his former shape, fell down along a Stair-case, and killed himself. ELYSIJ CAMPI, See before, after Elisa. EMPEDOCLES, A Philosopher and a Poet of Agrigentum, who wrote Verses concerning natural things. He taught that nothing living ought to be eaten, and that the seat of the Soul was not the Head nor the Heart, but the Blood; and because he wore brass Slippers, Lucian calls him in jest Mr Slipperman. He cast himself into the mouth of the burning Mountain Aetna. Dio∣genes Laertius ascribes his Death to pride and presumption, that the People finding him no where, might conceive he was taken up into Heaven; other Writers ascribe it to Melan∣choly, and some others to a meer Accident. Lucian in his Icaromenippus, introduces Menip∣pus speaking thus to Empedocles. Being at a great loss upon this account, says he, Em∣pedocles appear'd to me black like a Collier, as if he had been just then disembogued out of Mount Aetna. I retired at first, thinking it was a Fantome, or some Daemon of the Lunar-Globe, but he re-incouraged me, by telling me his Name, and informed me, how the smoak which came out of that burning Mountain had carried him up thi∣ther, where he now dwelt, and skipt up and down feeding upon Dew........... This having said, he vanished out of my sight, after I had promised to make him, at my return, effusions upon the tunnel of my Chimney, and to invoke him three times at the New-Moon; for which he thanked me, and answered like a true Philosopher, that he had not done it for Reward, but on∣ly for the love of Virtue. EMPOUSA, An ancient Fantome, and an excellent Dancer, as Lucian says. Eu∣stathius tells us, that it was a frighting Hob∣goblin dedicated to Hetate; and this Fantome turn'd herself into several shapes, as Suidas and Aristophanes report. And was called Empousa, because she walked only upon one Foot. Some Writers assure that it was Hecate her∣self, or one of the Lamiae or She-Devils. ENCHALABRIS, A kind of a Table that the Priest set up, whereupon the Victim that was killed, was stretched out to view its Inwards. ENCHALABRIA, The Vessels wherein they put the Inwards of the Victims after they were viewed. ENCELADUS, The Stoutest of the Giants, who, according to the Fable, made war against the Gods. Jupiter struck him with his Thunderbolt, and threw Mount Aetna upon him, having his Body half burnt, as Virgil tells us after Homer. Fama est Enceladi semi-ustum fulmine corpus, Ʋtgeri mole hac.
He was the Son of Tartarus or Abyssus and the Earth. ENDYMIO, A Shepherd, who was stolen away by Night in a deep Sleep, and made King of the Lunar-Globe, according to the Fable, as Lucian tells us. But the truth is, that Endymion gave himself much to the contemplation of the Moon, to observe her changes and motions, and impro∣ved so far in that study, that it was reported that he had lain with her. Some Writers tell us that Endymion was a very Just King of Elis, who obtained of Jupi∣ter to sleep for ever. Some others say, that Endymion loved much to Sleep, whereupon arose that Proverb of a sleepy and slothful Fellow; Endymionis som∣num dormit. He sleeps like Endymion. ENEAS, See Aeneas. ENNIUS, An Ancient Latin Poet born at Tarentum, or in Calabria. He had written several Books, whereof some Frag∣ments are yet Extant. His stile was harsh and unpolished. ENTAEUS, A prodigious Giant, the Son of the Earth, who was threescore Cubits high. He inhabited the Wilderness of Lybia, and dwelt in a Cross-way, where he commit∣ted many Robberies, and obliged Men who passed that way to wrestle with him. But at last he met with Hercules, as he was coming from the Garden of Hesperides, who took him up into the air, and strangled him with his Arm, having observed that his strength re∣newed every time he threw him on the Earth his Mother. Entaeus is the Emblem of Vo∣luptuousness, and Hercules of Reason, which overcomes Sensuality. Superata tellus Sidera donat, says Boetius; and the greatest Victory that a Man can obtain, is to overcome Vo∣luptuousness. And Scipio ordered the follow∣ing words to be engraved upon his Tomb. Maxima cunctarum Victoria, victa Voluptas. ENYALIUS, A God of the Sabins, called by them and the Romans, Quirinus; 'tis not well known whether it be Mars, or some other Divinity bearing an equal sway with him. They danced sacred Dances in his Temple. EOLUS, See Aeolus. EPEUS, The Son of Endymion, who was an excellent Ingineer among the Greeks, and among other war like Engines, invented the Battering Ram or Raven, to beat down the Walls of the Towns: Virgil says, that he made the Horse that was carried into Troy. EPHEBEUM, A place for young Boys in Greece. For Hebe in Greek signifies Rpe-age, which is at fourteen Years, and this is the time that the Boys begun to wrestle and exercise themselves: and all the Inter∣preters agree, that the Ephebeum was a place for these Exercises, and Vitruvius establishes this opinion, when he says that it was a place where was many Seats. EPHEMERIDES. Registers or Day-Books calculated by Astronomers, to mark the state of Heaven every day at mid-day, i. e. the place where all the Planets meet at noon; and these Journals are made use of draw Ho∣roscopes or Celestial Schemes. EPHESTIO, A Favourite of Alexan∣der the Great, whom he ranked among the Gods after his Death, and those who refused to acknowledge Ephestion for a God, were guilty of a high crime against Alexander; for he had not only been at the charges of many Millions for his Funeral Pomp, but the Ci∣ties had built Temples and Altars in his ho∣nour; and there was no greater Oath taken but by his name, and to ridicule these things was a crime deserving death. For the Cour∣tiers, to flatter the Passion of Alexander, told him many tales and visions; that Ephestion had appeared to them in a dream; that he cured men who called upon him; relating false O∣racles, and acknowledging him for their Pro∣tector; wherefore Alexander, having his ears continually battered with these discourses, at last believed them, and applauded himself that he could make a God, which was a greater thing than to be a God himself. And there were then many good men who fell in∣to his displeasure, because they would not comply with his passion, or shew'd some di∣staste for this madness. Captain Agathocles had been exposed to be devoured by Lyons, because he had shed tears at Ephestion's Grave, as if he had been Mortal, had not Perdical took his Oath by the Gods, and especially by Ephestion, that this new God had appeared to him while he was a hunting, and had bid him to report to Alexander that he should par∣don Agathocles, for having shed tears at the remembrance of his Friend, and that he was to take pity of humane infirmity. EPHESUS, A City of Asia, very fa∣mous for the Temple of Diana, which was accounted one of the seven wonders of the world. This City was built by the Amazons, and then augmented by Androcus the Son of Codrus. Asia was two hundred years about the build∣ing of the Temple of Diana, and all her Pro∣vinces had contributed towards the charges of that great design. This City was from all times much given to Magical Arts, and there were spells publickly sold. Eustathius ob∣serves that there were spells ingraven on the Feer, the Girdle, and the Crown of the Sta∣tue of Diana.
EPHORI. Overseers of the Common-wealth, or Lacedemonian Magistrates, like the Tribunes among the Romans, their office was to restrain and curb the authority of the Kings of Sparta. They were chosen five in number, thirty years after the death of Lycurgus, during the the reign of Theopompus, to be Ministers and as∣sistants to the Kings in the administration of Justice. But their Authority grew so great, that they attempted to reform their Kings and punish them, as they did in the person of Ar∣chidamus, whom they fined, because he mar∣ried a woman of little size. And they im∣prisoned Agis, as Pausanius relates. EPICHARMUS, A Pythagorean Phi∣losopher, who first invented Comedies, and has left us some rules concerning the same. EPICTETUS, A Stoick Philosopher, born at Hierapolis in Phrygia, Slave to Epa∣phroditus, Nero's Favorite, who comprehended all Philosophy in these two words, bear and forbear, and was so much esteemed that Lu∣cian says, that his Lamp, though it was but Earthen-ware, was sold for 3000 Attick Groats, which is about 92 Pounds of English. Money. This Philosopher lived till the time of M. Antoninus, and has left us a Manual, which seems rather the work of a Christian than of a Stoick Philosopher, speaking so well of the contempt of Riches, Sobriety, and submission to the Will of God. Arianus his Disciple has published four Books of his Sayings or Sentences, wherein he shews that he had much improved under so good a Master. EPICURUS, A famous Philosopher; Author of the Epicurean Sect. He was Dis∣ciple both to Democritus the great laugher, and Aristippus a very debauched man; and was, says Lucian, more impious and debauch∣ed than all of them together, yet good company and a lover of Feasting. He placed the chief Felicity in pleasure and voluptuous∣ness of mind, which brings tranquility to the Soul and Body. EPIDAURUM, A City of Sclavonia, now Ragusa. This City was consecrated to Aesculapius, and the Epidaurians built him a magnificent Temple, wherein the Statue of that God was set up, made of Gold and Ivo∣ry of Trasimedes's work, an excellent Sculpto of that time. EPIMENIDES, A Philosopher and a Poet of Creta, who stopt the Plague with a Sacrifice of Sheep, which he offered to the unknown God of the Athenians, mentioned by St Paul. 'Tis said that he fell asleep in a Cave, where he slept seven and fifty years. EPIMETHEUS, The Son of Japetus, Brother to Prometheus, who had forbad him to accept of any present from Jupiter. But Pandora came to him from Jupiter, and pre∣sented him with a Box, wherein all the evils of Nature were inclosed. At the opening of the Box all these evils flew out and filled the Earth with Diseases and Calamities, and there remained nothing but hope only at the bottom of the Box. EPITAPHIA, Epitaphs, Inscriptions set on the Tombs of the dead, or the Marbles of the Sepulchers. The Greeks set on only the name of the dead, with these Epithets, Good man, or Good woman, Good morrow. . Nicon the Son of Zenon. Good man. Good morrow. . Olympia. Good woman, Good morrow. Pausanius observes that the custom among the Sicyonians was to set on the Tombs only the name of the persons, with the word of greeting XAIPE: yet the Greeks added often to their Epitaphs the words  and , tho all the Men for whom these Epi∣taphs were written, were not Heroes, as this word signifies. The Athenians set on only the name of the dead, with the name of his Father and Tribe. The Romans added at the top of their Epi∣taphs Diis Manibus, which was sometimes ex∣pressed only by Halves. DIS. MAN. And very often with two Letters D. M. and the Roman Natives wrote their Epitaphs in Greek,  i. e. , as in the following Inscription. To the Gods Manes. To Julius Alcaeus his Father very Pious, Julius Lamprocles has dedicated this Monument. This Epitaph and the like are of Romans who inhabited Greece, or of Greeks living at Rome; and 'tis not likely that the Natives of
Greece, and especially, those who lived before they were Subjects to the Romans, dedicated thus their Tombs to the Gods Manes. The Romans were also used to introduce their Dead, speaking in the Epitaphs. C. JULIUS C. L. BARNAEUS. OLLAM EJUS SI QUI VIOLARIT, AD INFEROS NON RECIPIATUR. C. Julius Barnaus, Freed-man of Caius, lies here, if any Man prophanes his Urn, don't let him be admitted in Hell. Sometimes their Epitaphs were full of mo∣ral Expressions, adorned with fine Carving∣work and Architecture, which not only ser∣ved for an Ornament to their Monuments, but also for an Instruction to posterity, by the Atchievements they represented, and the moral thoughts thereby suggested. EPULONES, Ministers of the Sacri∣fices of the Gods. Pomponius Latus relates their History, taken out of a Passage in Cicero de Oratore, viz. The Pontiffs not being able to attend all the Sacrifices that were offer∣ed at Rome, upon the Altars of so many Gods who were ador'd there, ordain'd three Ministers whom they called Epulones to at∣tend the Holy Feast at the Solemn Games. He adds, that this Priesthood was very anci∣ent, tho' no Man can tell exactly the time of the Institution thereof. Livy tells us, that it was instituted in the year 553, during the Consulate of Fulvius Purpurio and Marcellus, and that there were but three created upon the motion of T. Romulcius. The priviledge of wearing the Gown edg'd with Purple like the Pontiffs, was granted to them. After∣wards their Number was increased to seven, to whom Julius Caesar added three more to make up the number of ten. Their Duty was to furnish Banquets for Jupiter, and the other Gods of his Retinue, at their publick Sports, or at the Birth of Emperors; where∣fore these Officers were called Epulones, and the Banquet Jovis Epulum. Jupiter was there lying upon a Bed, with a Pillow under his Head, and Juno with Miner∣va sitting at his sides. The Sacrifice being over, the Gods were served as if they were able to eat; the Epulones performed that Function for them. EPULUM, A Banquet, a holy Feast pre∣pared for the Gods; their Statue was com∣monly laid upon a Bed, and they were served as if they had been hungry; but this was the Function of the Ministers of the Sacrifice, called for that reason Epuloet. ERAT e of the Muses, who ru∣led amoro ERATOSTHENES, A Cyreneus Philosopher, Scholar to Aristo and Callima∣chus, Library Keeper at Alexandria to Ptolomcus Evergetes King of Egypt. He was besides, a Grammarian, a Poet, a Philosopher, and was called for his Learning, the second Plato. He was also skilful in Astronomy, and the first Man who corrected some mistakes of ancient Astronomers; he died in the 82 year of his Age. ERATOSTRATUS, A Man of Ephesus, who set on fire the Temple of Diana, to perpetuate his Name to posterity. The Ephesians to disappoint him, under severe pe∣nalties, forbad the mentioning his Name. EREBUS, A God of Hell, born of the Chaos and Darkness. 'Tis also the Infe∣rior part of the Earth, from the Hebrew Ereb, i. e. vespera, nox. Poets take him for Hell, and Virgil for a River of Hell. ERESICTHON, A Thessalian, who destroyed a Forest consecrated to Ceres, and was therefore so cruelly punished by Fa∣mine, that having consumed all his Wealth, he was obliged to sell his Daughter Metra, who having obtained of Neptune the ability of transforming herself, she sold herself a great many times, to get Money for the mainte∣nance of her Father; but her cunning was at last discovered, and Eresicthon forced to eat his own Flesh. ERICTEUS, The sixth King of A∣thens, brought up by Minerva. He had a Daughter called Creusa of an extraordinary Beauty, whom Apollo enjoyed, and begot a Son by her called Janus. Ericteus married her to Xipheus, who had no Children by her; wherefore he had his recourse to Jupiter, to desire of him a worthy Successor to reign in his room after his death. Apollo by an Oracle rendred upon the Tripos at Delphi, ordered him to take for his Son the first Man he should meet; and by chance, or rather by the care of his Wife Creusa, he met the young Janus. Ericteus took him to be his Son, and brought him up like the Son of a King. But Janus touch'd with an eager desire of reigning, for∣sook Athens, and went into Italy. The Histo∣rical and Poetical Dictionary on the contrary says, that Ericteus had some Daughters, who grew mad, and precipitated themselves, for having against the order of Minerva open'd the Chest, wherein the Serpent born of the Seed of Vulcan was lock'd up; but Tully in his Oration for Sextis, says, that these Princesses were very , and died for the defence of their Country. ERICTON, The Fourth King of Athens, born of the Earth like his Predecessors, as the Athenians say. Some Writers tell us, that he was born of the Seed of Vulcan spilt on
the ground. He first found out the use of Coaches, to hide the deformity of his feet, which were like the feet of a Dragon. ERIDANUS, The River Po in Italy. Phaeton fell into this River when Jupiter struck him with a Thunderbolt. Apollonius of Rhodes, in the fourth book of the Argonautes, relates this Fable. They entred far off into the Ri∣ver Eridanus, where Phaeton being struck on the Stomach with a Thunderbolt fell half burnt off the Sun's Chariot into a Lake, the Waters whereof cast forth a vapour so infe∣ctious, that no Bird can fly over it without dying. Round about it, how swift soever be the Lake, are the Heliades his Sisters turned into Poplars, and their Tears are flowing Amber. But all this is fabulous, as Lucian tells us. See Electrides. ERINNYS, The name of one of the Fu∣ries of Hell, and sometimes common to them all, who torture guilty Consciences on the Earth and in Hell, i. e. , discordia mentis. Notwithstanding 'tis more likely that this word is derived from , malè facere. The three Furies were, Tisiphone, Alecto and Megara, and draw their etymology from the Greek , ultio coedis: , quietisnescia; , odiosa. Pausanias says, that the Goddesses called Se∣verae, whom Hesiod calls Erinnyes, had a Tem∣ple at Athens near Areopagus, or Judgment-Hall. Aeschylus the Poet is the first who had described them with hanging Serpents. Vir∣gil has follow'd this Idea. And Homer had mentioned the Eriunyes before Hesiod, and in some place he has described them as the re∣vengers of the wrong done to the poor. ERYMANTUS, A Mountain in Ar∣cadia, inhabited by a huge wild Bear, that wasted the Country, whom Hercules carried away alive upon his Shoulders. ERYPHILA, The Wife of Amphiaraus and Sister to King Adrastus, who for a Brace∣let of Gold given her by Polinices, discovered to him the place where her Husband was hid, because he was unwilling to go to the Theban Wars, where he knew he should dye, accord∣ing to the Oracle. But being acquainted with the covetousness of his Wife, he com∣manded his Son Alcmaeon to murther his Mo∣ther as soon as he should hear of his death, which he performed according to his Father's orders. ERYTHREA, The Name of one of the Sibyls, born in the City of Erithrea in Ionia, where she delivered her Oracles. She lived in the time of the War of Troy. Fenestella relates, that the Senate of Rome sent Ambassadours to Erithrea, to fetch the Verses of this Sibyl. Eusebius in the life of Constantine tells us, that Constantine repeated some Acro∣stick Verses of this Sybil, mentioning the coming of the Son of God, and the Day of Judgment. 'Tis asserted, that Tully had translated these Verses into Latin; and St Austin affirms, that he had seen them written in Greek, being in number twenty seven, recorded by Sixtus Senensis. ERYX, A Mountain of Sicily, from this word is derived ERYCINA, An Epithet given to Venus, because Ericus built her a Temple on the top of Mount Erix in Sicily. ESCHYLUS, A writer of Tragedy. Dionysius the Tyrant bought his Table-book, wherein he had writ his excellent Tragedies, to the end that he might therewith mend his own. ESCULAPIUS, See Aesculapius. ESQUILINUS, The Mount Esquilinus inclosed by Servius in the City of Rome. This Mount was also called Exquilinus, because Ro∣mulus mistrusting the Sabines, set Centries up∣on it for his Guard; it was still called Ces∣pius, Oppius and Septimius, because it contain∣ed some little Hills called by those names. ETEOCLES, Born of the Incest of OEdipus and Jocasta his Mother. Eteocles ha∣ving deprived his Brother Polynices of the Royalty of Thebes, tho an agreement was made between them, that they should reign yearly by course, Polynices retired to Argos, where he married the Daughter of King Adrastus, and then returned with an Army to bring Eteocles to reasonable terms. Jocasta their Mother attempted in vain to make them friends: they prepared on both sides to engage: Tiresias a South-sayer, decla∣red that the Victory should remain to the Thebans, if they offered Monaeceus the Son of Creon in sacrifice to Mars, whereupon Monaeceus sacrificed himself. The Armies engaged, E∣teocles and Polynices killed one another; and Jocasta seeing that they were both slain, mur∣dered herself. ETESII, mild Northerly winds arising every year after the Summer-solstice, at the rising of the Dog-star, which blow for six weeks together, to cool the air from the heat of the Dog-days. EVANDER, King of Arcadia, the Son of Carmenta, who for his Eloquence was esteemed the Son of Mercury. Ha∣ving by chance slain his Father, he for∣sook his Kindom, and by the advice of his Mother, (who was a Prophetess) retired into Italy, from whence he drove out the Aborigi∣nes, and possessed himself of their Country, where he built a Town upon Mount Pala∣tinus, which he called Palanteum, from the name of his great Grand-father.
EVANGELUS, A rich Citizen of Ta∣rentum, who attempted to get the prize at the Pythian Games, and because he was nei∣ther strong nor nimble enough to dispute the prize of the Race, he endeavoured to obtain that of Musick. Wherefore he came to Delphi at the perswasion of his Flatterers, and presented himself at the Games dressed in a Gown of Golden Linnen, and crowned with Laurel, the Leaves whereof were of Massy Gold, and the Fruit composed with great Emeralds. His Harp was also made of Gold, set off with precious Stones, and adorn'd with the Figures of Orpheus, Apollo, and the Muses. At this sumptuous apparel the whole Company was struck with admiration, and they conceived great hopes to see and hear wonderful things; but when he came about to sing and play upon his Harp, instead of wonders that were expected from him, they heard but a pitiful shrill voice, which he was never able to bring in tune with his Harp, and to accumulate misfortunes, when he at∣tempted to strike the strings of his Harp a little harder, he broke three of them. The whole company fell a laughing, and the more willingly, because they were well pleased with another Musician who had plaid before him: Then laughing being turned into anger, the Presidents of the Games ordered that he should be whipp'd off the Stage, and being all over bloody he was forced to cross the Scene, taking up the Ornaments of his Harp which fell down under the lashes. EVERGETES, i. e. well doing or Be∣nefactor. The Greeks called by that name, Men who had done some considerable Kind∣ness to their Country: Wherefore so many Kings were proud of the Epithet Evergetes. 'Tis no wonder then, if the Greeks, who were naturally inclined either to Flattery or Satyr, according to the good or bad usage they had received, were used to bestow this Title upon their Kings. Demosthenes says, that being deceived by the counterfeited Ver∣tue of Philip of Macedonia, they called him Benefactor. Antigonus, Sirnamed the Tutor and Giver, was by consent of all the Greeks called Evergetes. The Emperor Julian says, that the Titles of Saviour and Benefactor of the Country were formerly bestowed upon the River Nile, because of the Fertility that its overflowing brings every year to Aegypt. And at the birth of Osiris a voice was heard, says Plutarch, proclaiming that the great and well-doing King Osiris was born. Wherefore the Elogy of Evergetes flattering the Ambition of Princes, became afterwards a Sirname, affect∣ed by a great many of them, to distinguish them from those, who were called by their Name. The Kings of Syria have very much affect∣ed this Epithet, as we see in their Medals. Alexander Eupator Evergetes, Demetrius, Philome∣tor Evergetes, Philippus Evergetes. Mithridates King of Pontus, the Father of Mithridates the Great, Sirnamed Eupator, is also called Evergetes in Strabo and Appian. The Kings of the Parthi∣ans have followed their Example, as it ap∣pears by the Medal of Arxanes, where he is named King of Kings, Just, Evergetes and Phil∣thellenes or Lover of the Greeks. After the Romans had subdued Greece, the Greeks gave the same Titles to the Roman Em∣perors. And Philo the Jew, in imitation of them, gives the Titles of Saviour and Everge∣tes to the Emperors Augustus and Caligula. The Romans bestowed the same Titles upon Vespa∣sian at his return from Judaea, and upon Con∣stantine, after he had obtain'd the Victory over Maxentius the Tyrant. EUMELUS, An excellent Musician of Elis, who was admired by all the Specta∣tors at the Pythian Games, and proclaimed Victorious, tho' he was ill-cloathed, and had but an old fashioned Harp. EUMINIDES, The Furies of Hell, Daughters to Acheron and Nox, or to Pluto and Proserpina; respected by the Ancient Hea∣thens, as Executors of the Vengeance of the Gods against wicked Men. They were re∣presented with Heads dressed with Serpents, having Fire in their Eyes, and a fierce Coun∣tenance, holding in their Hands burning Torches. They had a Temple at Cesyna a Town of Achaia. See Erinnys and Furiae. EUMOLPIDES, The Priests of the Goddess Ceres and Eleusina, a City of Attica, They were called Eumolpides from Eumolper their Ancestor. This Eumolpes, Nephew to the King of Thrace, was ordained Pontiff to celebrate the mysteries of Ceres, by Ericteun King of Athens, and Eleusina, and became so powerful by this Priesthood, that he made War against the Prince who had bestowed it upon him. They were both killed in this War, and their Children made a Peace, on condition that the dignity of Priesthood should remain for ever to the posterity of Eumolpes, and the Royalty to Ericteus's Off-spring. The sacred Rites in honour of Ceres, were accounted so Holy, that they were cal∣led by way of pre-eminence, Mysteries, and were kept so secret, that scarce any account of them has reached us. EUNUS, A Slave born in Syria; who not being able to bear any longer the mis∣fortune of his condition, played at first the Enthusiast, and pretended to be inspired by the Goddess of Syria, and sent by the Gods to procure Liberty to the Slaves. And to get
credit among the People, he put in his mouth a Nut full of Brimstone, and set it cunning∣ly on fire, and blew softly through the same, and thus cast Fire out of his Mouth, to the great amazement of the People. Two thou∣sand Slaves and other simple Men, pressed with Misery and drawn in by his juggling Tricks join'd themselves to him, and in a short time he was at the head of fifty thou∣sand Men, and defeated the Roman Praetors; but Perpenna reduced them by hunger, and all those who escaped death were nailed up∣on the cross. EVOHE, An Epithet given to Bacchus, in the celebration of his Mysteries (this word signifies Merry Companion and Good Son.) Jupiter gave him this Epithet for a Reward, because he help'd him to defeat the Giants. EURIPUS, A narrow Sea between Eubaea and Boeotia, that ebbs and flows seven times in four and twenty hours. Aristotle is said to have drowned himself in this Sea, be∣cause he could not find out the cause of its ebbing and flowing so often. The Canals of Water which surrounded the Circle at Rome, where the Sea-fights were represented, were also called Uripes. EUROPA, The Daughter of Agenor King of Phoenicia, whom Jupiter ravished for the sake of her Beauty; for being one day come down with some other Virgins to di∣vert herself on the Sea-shore, Jupiter came and play'd about her in the shape of a Bull, that was so fair and handsom, that she had a mind to get upon his back, seeing he was so mild that he let her stroke him. But so soon as he had got this fair Lady upon his back, he run into the Sea, and swam towards Greece. The poor Lady asham'd, took hold with her hand on one of his Horns, to keep herself fast, and with the other hand she made fast her Veil that was tossed up by the wind, and turned her Head toward the shore, where she saw the other Virgins stretching out their arms to her. The Sea immediately grows calm, the Winds kept in their breath, a thousand Cupids came fluttering about her, without dipping their Wings in the water, but only their Toes. Some of them carried in their Hands the Wedding. Torch, the others sung the Hymen-Song, and were followed by the Sea-Gods, the Nereides half naked riding up∣on Dolphins, and waited on by the Tritons, who were playing about. Neptune and Amphi∣trites march'd before, representing the Father and the Mother of the Bride. Venus was car∣ried by two Tritons in a Sea-shell, and was spreading Flowers upon this fair Virgin. This Spectacle lasted from the shore of Phaenicia, till Creta, where as soon as Jupiter was landed, he took again his former shape, and holding his Mistriss by the Hand, he led her into the Dictean Cave. Some are of opinion that she gave her name to this part of the World that we call Europa; but others say, that this name came from Europus, who was one of the first Kings that reigned there. EURUS, A Wind called by the Greeks Apeliotes, blowing from the Equinoxial East. The Roman Mariners call it Subsolanus, and is represented black all over, having a flaming Sun upon the Head, because the Ethiopians, who inhabit towards the rising Sun, are black. Cartari in his Images of the Gods. EURYDICE, The Wife of Orpheus, who flying from Aristeus King of Arcadia, who attempted to ravish her, on a Serpent, and died of his Sting. Orpheus to recover her went to Hell, and with his Musick charm'd Pluto and Proserpina, who granted him his Wife, upon condition that he should not turn his Head to look on her till he saw the light. But he failed, and so lost his Wife for ever. EURYLOCHUS, The only Man of Ulysses's Companions, who tasted not of Circe's enchanting Cup, and escaped being turn'd into a Swine. EUTERPE, One of the nine Muses, the inventer of the Flute, and other Musical Instruments. Ex. S. C. i. e. ex Senatus consulto, which signifies by a Decree of the Scante. EXAUCTORATI, Viz. Milites, Soldiers discharged from going to the Wars. EXCOMMUNICATIO, Excom∣munication, excluding Men from participating of the Mysteries, and cutting them off from Communicating with Men of the same Reli∣gion. The Excommunication was practiced among Pagans, and was declared by their Priests, with the usual Ceremonies in such cases. The Excommunicated Persons were forbid to be present at the Sacrifices, and to enter in the Temples in the presence of the Gods; then they were delivered to the De∣vilish Spirits and the Furies of Hell, with some Imprecations expressed by these words, Sacris interdicere, Diris devovere, Exsecrare: And because this was a dreadful Punishment, therefore it was inflicted only upon wicked Men hardned in Crimes. And the She-Priest Theana the Daughter of Menon was highly commended, for refusing to excommunicate Alcibiades at Athens, tho' the People had or∣dered her to do it. And the Priests called Eumolpides, on the contrary, were blamed for the performance of the same. Plato l. 7. of the Laws, forbids all Priests of both Sexes to excommunicate any body, but after a dili∣gent enquiry into the case, and to do it but at the last extremity, and according to the Laws.
We have an illustrious Example of an Ex∣communication among the Romans, in the person of M. Crassus, as 'tis related by Plutarch in his Life; for Atteius Tribune of the Peo∣ple, not being able to stop his Journey into Syria against the Parthians, he run to the Gate, out of which Crassus was to go out of the City, and set in the middle of the way, a Cahfing-dish with a great fire in it, and when Crassus drew near, he threw some Perfumes in it, and pronounced Curses against him, with dreadful Imprecations, and called upon some Gods, whose names only served to fright Men, and so Excommunicated him. The Romans, says Plutarch, did hold this Ceremony of Imprecation to be very anci∣ent, but they put it in practice but very sel∣dom. The most rigorous punishment inflicted by the Druides among the Gauls, was the Excom∣munication, as we learn of Caesar, l. 6. When a Man, says he, speaking of the Druides, won't submit to their judgment, they ex∣clude him from partaking of their Mysle∣ries. And those who are struck with that Thunderbolt, are accounted wicked and im∣pious Men; every one shuns their meeting and conversation; if they have any busi∣ness, they have no justice done them; they are not allowed to possess any Office or Dig∣nity, and dye without Honour and Reputa∣tion. When an excommunicated Man came to repent, and had his Wickedness in horrour, and beg pardon of the Gods for the same, he went to the Priests to be restored again, then the Priests, after a strict Examination re∣stored him to his former condition. And this Action was called Resacrare, or sacris re∣stituere qui execratus fuerat. But if a Man died during the time of his Excommunication, and before he had repent∣ed of his Crime, and was restored again, after his death the Priests made a solemn service to the Gods called Manes, to beg of them that his Soul might be set at rest in Hell. EXCUNEATI, Those who had no place in the Amphitheater, and were standing in the Corners thereof to see the Games. EXECRATIO, See Excommunicatio. EXEDRAE, Halls with many Seats, whereupon the Philosophers, Rhetoricians and Men of Learning sat, when they met for dis∣course or disputing. This Greek word is va∣riously interpreted by Writers. Alexander ub Alex. says, that it was an open Gallery in form of Boxes. Accursius takes this word for a Window, but it signifies literally, a place where many People are sitting upon Seats made fast. It seems that Philander was of this opi∣nion, when he says that the Exedra of the Greeks was a place like that which is called a Chapiter, in the Cloisters of Religious Houses. And Vitruvius Cap. 9. l. 7. speaks of the Exe∣drae, as if they were places open and exposed to the Sun. EXPIATIO, Expiation. When Men had their recourse to Temples, Altars and Prayers, it was look'd upon as the beginning of the expiation of a Crime. Homer relates the Discourse of Phaenix to Achilles, to exhort him to forgive, because the greater and mightier the Gods are, they are also the more merciful and more inclined to pardon, when it is begg'd by Prayers; for the Prayers are the Daughters of Jupiter, who disarm, in fa∣vour of the Petitioners, and oblige him to send the Goddess of Revenge against the Men who won't be reconciled. Ovid thinks it very odd, that our Crimes that are never inexpiable in respect to the Gods, should be unpardonable in respect to Men; and that Augustus would not forgive him a fault that God himself had pardoned him, because he sincerely repented of it; and that the Fault he committed was more grie∣vous to him, than the banishment he suffer'd for the same. Saepè levant paenas, ereptaque lumina reddunt, Cùm benè peccati poenituisse vident. Paenitet, ô, si quid miserorum creditur ulli, Paenitet & facto torqueor ipse meo! Quámque sit exilium, magis est mihi culpa dolori, Esque pati paenas, quàm meruisse, minus. Then according to this Poet, Crimes were expiated, either with temporal pains which God sends to Men, or with grief and re∣pentance of the guilty Soul, and a pure love for Justice, which makes men fear the Crime more than the Punishment which at∣tends it. Herodotus reports, that a Phrygian Prince of the Royal Blood, yet unfortunate, came to the Palace of King Craesus, to desire him to purge him by Sacrifice, which Craesus per∣form'd, according to the usual Ceremony of the Lydians, which was very like the Ceremony used by the Greeks, in cases of Ex∣piation. Dionysius Hallicarnasseus says, that the people pardoned young Horace the murther of his Sister, but that the King of Rome ordered, that he should be purged with all the Expia∣tions prescribed by the Laws of the Pontiffs, in cases of involuntary murder. Then he re∣lates the Ceremony of the Expiation: Altars were set up, one to Juno, the other to Janus; they offered Sacrifices, and young Horace went under the Yoke.
This Writer speaks still of another Expia∣tion, when after a Fight between the Citi∣zens, they were obliged to purifie the City, before they offered Sacrifices. Here are many kinds of Expiations for Men and Cities, to abolish Murther, and to prepare Men for Sacrifices; they had still other Expiations to purge the Natives of the Country and the Foreigners: For the Scho∣liast of Aristophanes says, that they instituted small Mysteries to purifie Foreigners, because the great Mysteries were not to be commu∣nicated to them. Diodorus Siculus observes, that Hercules was admitted to the Mysteries of Ceres Eleusina. Plutarch says, that Theseus, in imitation of Hercules, was purified, because he had com∣mitted many Murthers. The Mysteries of the Expiations were brought from Egypt into Greece. These mysterious Expiations were attend∣ed with Fastings; wherefore Clemens of Alex∣andria says, that when those who were only taught the principles of these prophane My∣steries, answered the questions asked them, they affirmed that they had kept themselves fasting: Symbolum mysteriorum Eleusiniorum, (je∣junavi.) Continency was also observed in these Ex∣piations; wherefore St Hierome says, that the Priests made use of Hemlock, to keep them∣selves more easily continent. But the most common Expitation, was that of ablutions; and this plainly shews, that all these Ceremonies of the Gentiles, were copied out of the Ceremonies of the Hebrews. There is nothing more common in the Poet's Writings, both Greek and Latin, than the washing of Hands, and even the whole Body before the offering of Sacrifice, and to make libations to the Gods. Sophocles, in his OEdipus, Tyrannus affirms, that the Crimes, both voluntary and invo∣luntary, were expiated in Waters. Euripides in his Hyppolitus introduces this chast Lord, saying, that he thinks himself de∣filed, because he was tempted to commit a Crime, and that he must wash his Ears for the same. Aeneas in Virgil desires his Father Anchises to carry his Dii Penates, because he had de∣filed himself with Blood and Slaughter in the defence of Troy, and was not yet puri∣fied. —Donec me flumine vivo Abluero. The Greeks had learnt these Laws of Expia∣tion and Purification of the Egyptians, and the Egyptians of the Hebrews. EXQUILINUS, See Esquilinus. F. F. The sixth Letter of the Alphabet, and the fourth Consonant, 'tis pronounced effe, and its pronounciation is extended to the words derived of the Greek that begins with Ph. Covarruvias says, that this Letter is the same with that which the Greeks call Digamma Aeoli∣cum, because it was formed with two Gamma's one over the other. And that the Emperor Claudius Caesar prescribed that the Letter F turned upside down, should serve for an V Consonant, which may be observed still in old Inscriptions, as serkus, servus; Eale, vale. In the Civil Law two ff's joined together sig∣nifie Digest. This Letter among the Latins signified in number 40. Sexta quaterdenos gerit haec quae distat ab Alpha. And when there was a tittle over it, it sig∣nified 40 thousand. This Letter is pronounced like φ, but not with so hard an aspiration, as Terentianus tells us; wherefore Tully jeers a Gracian, who in∣stead of Fundanius pronounced φ undanius, i. e. with an aspirate P. However, in the decay of the Language, these two Letters were pro∣miscuously taken one for another, as we may see in the Antient Glosses, Falanx instead of Phalanx. FABA, A Bean, a kind of Pulse. For∣merly they made use of Beans to gather the Votes of the People, and for the Election of Magistrates. A white Bean signified absolu∣tion, and a black Bean condemnation. There was also a Precept of Pythagoras, ordering to forbear eating of Beans. This Precept was variously interpreted, and some are of opini∣on, that Men should forbear Trials and Ver∣dicts, which were then brought by throwing Beans in the Urn. Lucian introduces Pythago∣ras himself, handling this matter in the Dia∣logue of the Philosophers expos'd to publick Sale; for after he had said, that he eats nothing of what had life, but of all other things except Beans; they ask him for what reason, and he answers, because they have something that is divine: First, they resemble the privy parts, which you will easily observe, if you take but one that is green, and shell it from its husk or cod: besides, being boiled, and ex∣posed to the Moon, for a certain number of Nights, they turn into Blood; but what is most considerable, they make use of them at Athens in election of Magistrates.
FABARIA, A Sacrifice made with Bean-Flower and Bacon, offered upon the Kalends of June on Mount Caelianus. FABER, A general Latin word, signi∣fying a Workman, as we read in the Ancient Monuments. Faber Agentarius a Goldsmith: Faber Ferrarius, a Smith or a Blacksmith: Fa∣ber Tignarius, a Carpenter: Faber Eburarius, the worker in Ivory, a Table-maker: Faber Nava∣lis, A builder of Ships: Faber Balneator, a Keeper or Builder of Baths. And Plautus taxing a Man with making counterfeit Mo∣ney, says ingeniously, Tace tu faber qui plum∣bos nummos cudere soles. The Greek word  answers to the Latin word Faber; wherefore, those who said that Joseph was rather a Smith than a Carpenter, don't observe that the word Teeton, made use of in the Original, doth not determine the signification rather to a Smith than a Carpenter: And Hesychius explaining this word, says, that it signifies all kind of Workmen; wherefore the vulgar Transla∣tion of the Bible, renders the Text of St Matthew thus, Nonne hic est fabri filius. Hippo∣crates one of the most Ancient Writers of the Greeks, speaking of Carpenters who saw Tim∣ber, he calls them Tectones. FABIANA FAMILIA, The Fa∣bian Family, Illustrious among the Romans, which has given many great Men to the Commonwealth. This only Family, under the command of Fabius Caeso, made war against the Veyentes, and lost 306 Men in an Engage∣ment at Cremera. This Family obtain'd seven several Consulats next after one another; from whence you may conjecture that they were able to make up a great Army, with the addition of their Friends, Clients and Freed∣men. The Veyentes having drawn the Fabians into an Ambuscado, defeated them, took and plundered their Camp, and of the whole Fa∣bian Family left alive only one young man, fourteen Years old, the Son of M. Fabius, and the Off-spring of all the Fabians, who were since so serviceable to the Commonwealth, and particularly Fabius sirnamed Maximus; who seeing Rome divided in two Factions, divided the People in four Tribes of the City, and by this means took away from the People the Authority of bestowing Offices, upon those who gave them the most, and of whom they expected greater rewards. This Fabius throughly routed Hannibal with a prudent slowness, and repaired the losses that the Ro∣mans had suffered by the Arms of Hannibal, whereupon he was called Cunctator the delayer, because he did only keep Hannibal close, and incamped to his own advantage, without en∣gaging him; wherefore Ennius said. Unus cunctando qui nobis restituit rem. Q. Fabius Rutilianus, Colonel of the Horse, engaged the Samnites, during the absence and against the order of the Dictator Papyrius, and routed them. The Dictator prosecuted him, and would have him be punished with death, though the Senate interceded for him; but at last Papyrius granted him his life, at the request of the People, speaking thus to him. Live thou, Fabius, said he to him, more glorious in this universal Love that the Roman people shews thee, than the Victory which thou hast obtained over the Enemy. And grant the Gods, that thy bad Example be not pre∣judicial to the State. C. FABRICIUS LUSCUS, Who was sent against Pyrrhus. This Enemy of the Roman People attempted to bribe the Loyalty of Fabricius, and made him very advantageous Proposals; but Fabricius being a generous Ro∣man, though needy, stood always firm to his Country. Then Pyrrhus's Physician came secretly to him, and proffered him his Service to poyson his Master; but this Pro∣posal struck him with such horror, that he sent back this perfidious Servant to Pyrrhus; who admiring the generosity of the Consul, set at liberty all the Roman Prisoners, taken at the defeat of Livinius. And Fabricius also sent back all the Prisoners, who were taken from Pyrrhus's Army. The Nations called Bruti and Lucani, having besieged Turinum in Calabria, Fabricius marched directly to them, to force them to raise the Siege; but while he was considering which way he should attack the Enemy in their Intrenchments, a young man appear'd at the head of the Legions with a Ladder in his Hand, encouraging the Sol∣diers to scale the Rampart; whereupon the Soldiers followed him without the order of their General, took the Rampart by storm, and drove away the Enemy. After the Vi∣ctory, the Consul being inform'd of what had been done, sent to look for this unknown Man, to honour his Valour, but he could never be found. Whereupon the Romans fan∣cied that Mars himself had assisted them. Af∣ter the death of this great Man, his Daugh∣ters were married at the charges of the Com∣mon wealth, because he was poor. FABULA, A Fable. Aphthonius the So∣phist says, that the Poets were Authors of the Fable, which is a Story made on purpose to instruct Men, being an Image fit to repre∣sent the Truth. The Fable is called Sybiri∣tica, Ciliciana and Cypriana, from the seve∣ral Countries of the Men, who were the In∣venters thereof.
The Historians having no other aim but the Instruction of Men, thought that the Fable was very fit to teach, not only young Men, but also to instruct all sorts of Persons, who being always Men, have also, during all the time of their Life, some remainders of In∣fancy, and will have Instruction it self be a diversion to them. Wherefore, when the Authors of the Fable related Histories, or un∣folded the Mysteries of Nature, or taught mo∣ral Precepts, they intermixed always some∣thing of the Fable with the Truth. Plutarch has bestowed the whole begin∣ning of his Treatise, of the manner of read∣ing Poets, to shew that the Fable was very conducible to the instruction of Men, both young and old, when 'tis handled to the purpose. Clement of Alexandria observes, that this way of folding and unfolding the Truth with Fa∣bles, is very proper to awake and whet the Wit, and inflame Men with the love of Di∣vine and Moral Truth. Plutarch tells us, that the Egyptians wrapped up the Mysteries of their Philosophy in Fables and Riddles; and had Sphinxes at the Gates of their Temples to unfold them; and that the Pythagoreans understood the Unity by the name of Apollo, and the number two by the name of Diana; the number seven, by that of Minerva; and the Figure Cube by Neptune; to shew that the Fables were the Images of the Philosophical Truths, that were of great moment amongst the Egyptians and Pythago∣reans. Salustius the Philosopher says, that the Fa∣bles have somewhat of Divine, because they are made use of by Poets, who are animated with a divine Spirit, and by the Philosophers, the Pontiffs, and the Gods themselves in their Oracles. That the first use of Fables is to awake the mind, and raise it to the unfolding of the meaning thereof; and he compares the Fable to the Divinity, who exposes some of his Excellencies to the sight of all Men, and keeps some others hid, which are discover'd but by Contemplation. Then this Philosopher distinguishes many kinds of Fables; some that have relation to the Divinity, as when Saturn devoured his Children; the meaning thereof is, that God, who is the supream Intelligence, keeps in his bosom all his operations: Some others are concerning Nature, as when Saturn, i. e. Time, devours all his Productions and Tem∣poral Natures. The others belong to the Soul, who gets into herself all her operations like Saturn. And the fourth kind of Fables concerns the Body, wherefore the Egyptians said, that Saturn was the Element of the Wa∣ter. In fine, there are mixt Fables made up of the foregoing. We must not look upon Poets as upon meer Tale-bearers, but as Historians, who adorned the ground of their History with many plea∣sant Fictions, to render it more diverting to the Reader. And 'tis a false prejudice to think that Poetical Narrations have nothing of Truth. Learned Men assert the contrary opinion, for 'tis upon a solid ground of a true History, that Poets have wrapped up in their Poems, some Stories that were not true, but likely. Polybius, Strabo, and many other Historians affirm, that the ground of the Iliad and Odysses of Homer is a true History, appearing to be so by the Ancient Historians. Poets have intermixt the Fable with the Truth, to adorn their Narrations, and yet this ornament it self is grounded upon some Truth. The most remarkable Writers, who have handled moral Fables, and introduced Beasts and Trees speaking, were Aesop among the Greeks, and Phaedrus among the Latins. Philostratus in his Image of the Fables, re∣lates in what manner Aesop received of Mercury the Gist of writing Fables. Aesop, says he, being a Shepherd, was often feeding his Flocks near a Temple of Mercury, wherein he entered sometimes, and offered to the God some Milk, Hony-combs and Flowers, earnestly begging of him some Beams of Wisdom. Many others met also in the same Temple, to the same purpose, and made him considerable Presents. Mercury, to ex∣press them his gratitude for their Piety, be∣stowed upon them the gifts of Sciences; some of them he endowed with the gift of Astrology, others with Eloquence, and some others with the gift of Poesy and Musick. But he forgot Aesop. Yet having a mind to reward him, he granted him the gift of wri∣ting Fables, because he remembred, that be∣ing still in his Cradle on the Mount Olympus, the Hours who nursed him up, told him the Fable of an Ox that had spoke to a Man, and had inclined him to desire the Oxen of the Sun. Phaedrus in the third Book of his Fables, de∣dicated to Utychius, speaks thus Now I will declare in few words, to what purpose Fables were invented. Man being in slavery and dependency, because he durst not utter his Mind, made use of these fabulous Narra∣tions, to declare the thoughts and agitations of his Soul, and secured himself from Ca∣lumny with these pleasant Stories. FABULINUS, The little God Fabuli∣nus, to whom Men offered Sacrifices, when their Children began to speak. The God of Speech.
FACTIO, Factions distinguished by Colours, Gruter in his Inscriptions mentions four chief Factions; viz. Russatam, the Red; Prasinam, the Green; Venetam, the Blue; Al∣batam, the White. 'Tis thought that the An∣cients intended thereby, to represent the four Seasons of the Year, when Nature puts on new Cloaths; each Faction or Troop of Horse representing one of the Seasons with his Co∣lour: The Green represented the Spring; the Red, the Summer; the Blue, the Autumn; and the white the Winter, covered with Snow and Ice. Domitianus says, Suetonius added to these four Factions, the Gold and the Purple, i. e. two new Troops, who went by the name of their Colours. These Factions in the Games, grew some∣times so hot one against the other, that they came to Blows. Zonoras tells us, that at Bizan∣tium in Justinian's time, two Factions concei∣ved so factious an emulation one against the other, that forty thousand Men of both sides were killed on the spot. Caligula took a great fancy for the green Colour, and had his Horse Incitatus put among them. FALCIDIUS, A Roman Tribune, Au∣thor of the Law called Falcidia, so remarkable in the Roman Law. This Law was made some∣time before the Empire of Augustus, during the Triumviratus. By the Law Falcidia, it was ordered that Men should dispose by their last Will, but of the three parts of their Estate, and were bound to leave the other fourth part to their lawful Heir. And if they transgressed against this Rule, the Heir deducted the fourth part of each particular Legacy, to make up the Sum ad∣judged to him by this Law. FALERNUM, A Country in Campa∣nia near Capua, abundant in excellent Wine, so much commended by Horace and others. FAMA, Fame. Ovid has left us a de∣scription of Fame, and the Graces that com∣monly attend her, and represents her won∣derful Palace, surrounded with a thousand reports, true or false. Mistaque cum veris passim commenta vagantur Millia rumorum. Credulity, Error, false Joys, Fears, Suspi∣cions and Seditions commonly meet here. FAMES, Hunger. Poets have very in∣geniously described Hunger, and in particular Ovid, who hath left us her Image in the eighth Book of his Metamorphoses, under the shape of a tall lean Woman, with a dreadful Counte∣nance, and hollow Eyes, her Body transpa∣rent out of leanness, lying upon the ground and feeding upon Grass. Virgil places her abode at the entry of Hell, with Griefs, Tears, Diseases and Old Age. Luctus & ultrices posuere cubilia Curae, Pallentesque habitant Morbi, tristisque Senectus, Et malè-suada Fames. FANNIUS, A Roman Consul, Author of the Law Fannia, whereby the charges of publick and private Feasts were fixed, and Excesses and Superfluities forbid. FANA, Temples consecrated by the Pontiffs, pronouncing certain words, Fan∣tur. FANUS, A God of the Heathens, pro∣tecting Travellers, accounted also the God of the Year. The Phaenicians represented him, says Macrobous, under the Figure of a Snake, with his Tail in his Mouth. FARONIA, See Feronia. FASCES, These Fasces were Axes fast∣ned to a long Staff, tied together with a bundle of Rods, which the Officers called Lictors, carried before the great Roman Ma∣gistrates, Romulus was the first who instituted Fasces, to inspire a greater respect and fear in the mind of the People, and to punish Male∣factors. J. Lictor expedi virgas. When the Magistrates, who by right had these Axes carried before them, had a mind to shew some deference for the People, or some person of a singular merit, they sent back the Lictors, or bid them to lower the Fasces before them, which was called sub∣mittere Fasces. For that same reason the Con∣sul Publicola, a great Politician, being ready to make a Speech to the Roman People, sent back his Lictors; Fasces, says Livy, Majestati populi Romani submisit. And Pompey the Great, coming into the House of Possidonius the Phi∣losopher, when he was at the Door, sent back the Lictors in honour of Possidonius's Learning. FASCINUM, A Man's Yard. At the Wedding the Bride sat upon the Knees of a naked Priapus, to prevent by that Ceremony, charming and bewitching. FASTI, The Roman Calendar, wherein all days of Feasts, Games and Ceremonies were mark'd. The six last Books of the Fasti of Ovid are lost. See Calendarium. Fasti were also Table-Books, whereupon they wrote the Names of the Consuls, and the most memorable things that were transacted in the Commonwealth. The Consuls gave also some small Pocket-books of Silver or Ivory, wherein their Names were written, as Sidoni∣us Apollinaris says, speaking of the Consulship of Asterius datique fasti.
FASTIDIES. During these days the Romans were allowed to sue at Law, and the Praetor to pronounce these three words, Do, Dico, Abdico. FATUA. See Fauna. FATUM. Fate, Destiny. It was repre∣sented as of a Goddess, treading upon the Globe of the World, because all that is con∣tain'd in it, is submitted to her Laws. She holds in her hand a Vessel, or the fatal Urn, wherein (as Poets say) all the names of mor∣tal men were deposited. The Heathens com∣plained in their Epitaphs, of the malice, en∣vy and cruelty of the Fates, that were inflexi∣ble, and could not be moved with tears. It can't be objected that the Latin word Fatum is not of the feminine gender, and therefore the Destiny should not be represented by the figure of a Goddess, for we see that many Di∣vinities, as Venus, the Moon and Bacchus were accounted both male and female. And this seems to have been taken from the opinion of the Stoicks, who maintain'd that the Gods were of both Sexes. And the Greeks themselves, who were Au∣thors of the Roman Superstitions, called Desti∣ny by a feminine name,  as we learn of Phurnutus in his book of the nature of the Gods. Destiny, says he, is that which disposes and rules all things according to the order of an eternal principle. There is a Golden Medal of Dioclesian, ingraven in Pignorius's observations upon the Images of the Gods, where the Destinies are represented on the reverse thereof by the figures of three women: Procopius tells us, that the Temple of Janus was built at Rome in the Market-place near the three Destinies, called by the Romans Parcae. This Writer, like Apuleius, confounds the Parcae with the Destinies. The Ancients reckoned the Fates to be three in number, because, said they, all things that are under Heaven have their beginning, progress and end. Wherefore these same Fates are represented by three different female terms, i. e. by three Women, represented only with half-bodies like the terms, as we may see by the following Inscription. FATIS Q. FABIUS NISUS EX VOTO. For the terms were the Gods of bounds, and the Fates sets bounds to our Life, and put an end to all our undertakings. Lucan in many places of his Books has confounded Fortune with Fate. Ovid introduces Jupiter speaking to Venus, and telling her, that 'tis to no purpose to at∣tempt to break the decrees of the three Parcaes which are immutable and eternal, and rule all things that are done. —Sola insuperabile fatum, Nata, movere pavas? Intres licet ipsa sororum Tecta trium, cernes illic molimine vasto Ex aere, & solido rerum tabularia ferro; Quae neque concursum coeli, neque fulminis iram, Nec metuunt ullas tuta atque aeterna ruinas. Invenies illic incisa adamante perenni Fata tui generis: legi ipse animoque notavi. Lib. xv. Metam. But this Poet and all others have plainly expressed that the will of Jupiter is Fate. For we must distinguish the fable of the three old Sisters called the Parcae (which was but a Poe∣tical fancy) from the universal opinion of all Poets. Tully rejects the Fate of the three Si∣sters, which is a fate of Superstition, and tells us, that Fate is the etetnal truth, and the first predominant cause of all Beings. Where∣fore the Idolaters represented the Hours, and the Parcae placed upon the head of Jupiter, to shew that the Destinies obey God, and that both hours and time are at the disposol of his will. Pausanias says to this purpose: In Jevis capite Horae & Parcae consistunt; Fata enim Jovi pa∣rere & ejus nutu temporum necessitudines describi nemo est qui nesciat. And he speaks thus some∣where else of Jupiter sirnamed , Parcarum Dux, not only as knowing the reso∣lutions of the Parcae, but also as being their Master. Plutarch tells us, that these three God∣desses called Parcae, are the three parts of the World, viz. the firmament of the fixed Stars, the firmament of the wandering Stars, and that great space of the Air from the Moon to the Earth; the concatenation of all the bo∣dies and causes contained in these three parts of the world, makes this Fate in a manner bodily, producing natural effects according to the common course of Nature: but this is not perform'd without some Divinity, who is like the foul of the world, and moves it by himself, and the Intelligences whom he has set therein, and to whom he has given his order, and are the intellectual Fate. Diogenes Laertius affirms, that Zeno said that Jupiter, God, Fate and Intelligence were all the same thing. 'Tis also the opinion of E∣pictetus and many other ancient Philosophers. FAVISSAE. Festus by this word under∣stands Cisterns to keep water in. But the Favissae in the Capitol were Cellars under ground, or dry Cisterns, where they laid up old decay'd Statues, and other things that were grown out of use. Favissae, locum sic ap∣pellabant in quo erat aqua inclusa circa templa;
sunt autem qui putant Favissas esse in Capitolio cel∣lis cisternisque similes, ubi reponi erant solita ea qua in templo vetustate erant facta inutilia. Aulus Gel. l. 2. c. 10. tells us, that Servius Sulpitius a Law∣yer, wrote to Marcus Varro, to inquire of him, what was the meaning of these words Favissae Capitolinae, which he had observed in the Books of Censors, but was not able to understand them. Varro sent him word, that he remem∣bred that Q. Catulus, to whom the care of repairing the Capitol was committed, having a mind to lower the ground that was about the place, could not perform it because of the Favissae, which were like dry Cisterns, where they laid up old Statues and broken Vessels, and other things appointed for the service of the Temple, Id esse cellas quasdam & essternas, quae in areâ sub terrâ essent, ubi reponi solerent signa vetcra quae in eo Templo collapsa essent. FAUNA FATUA, Sister and Wife to Faunus, and a Deity of the Romans. Lactan∣tius speaking of her says, l. 1. c. 22. Faunus instituted infamous Sacrifices to Saturn his Grand-father in the Latin Country, and ren∣dered divine honours to his Father Picus, and his Sister and Wife Fatua Fauna: And C. Bassus tell us, that she was called Fatua, because she foretold Women their destinies, as Faunus did to Men. Varro tells us, that this Fatua was so chast, that no Man saw her nor heard of her, but her own Husband. Wherefore Women Sacrifice to her in pri∣vate, and call her the good Goddess. Faunus in Latio Saturno suo avo nefaria sacra constituit. & Picum patrem inter Deos honoravit, & sororem suam Fatuam Faunam eamque conjugem consecravit, quam C. Bassus Fatuam nominatam tra∣dit, quod mulieribus fata canere consuevisset, ut Faunus viris. Eandem Varro tradit tantae pudicitiae suisse, ut nemo eam, quoad vixerit, praeter virum suum mas viderit, nec nomen ejus audiverit. Ideirco mulieres illi in operto sacrificant & bonam Deam ne∣menant. If Fatua never saw any other Man but her Husband, as Lactantius relates after Varro, this certainly must be the reason why the Romans gave her the Name of the good Goddess. Justin says, that Fools were called Fatui, because they behave themselves like Fatua, when she was transported with prophetick fury. The good Character that Lanctantius and Varro give of Fatua's Chastity, doth not agree with what Plutarch relates in his Roman Que∣stions, when he says that she was given to drinking. Arnobius relates the same of her, in his sixth Book upon the report of Sextus Claudius. FAUNALIA SACRA, Feasts kept the 5th of December in honour of Faunus, where the Country People leaving off work, danced and were merry. FAUNUS, The Son of Picus, the first King of the Latins. This Faunus is sometimes confounded with Pan, and it seems that Ovid himself makes no distinction of them; how∣ever, Dionysius Hallicarnasseus says, that Faunus the Son of Mars reigned in Italy, when Evan∣der landed there, and that the Romans made him afterwards one of the Tutelar Gods of the Country. The same Historian says some∣where else, that in progress of time the com∣mon opinion was, that Faunus was that wild God, whose voice was heard by night in the Forests, and frighted the People. Whereby it doth appear that he ascribes pannick fears to Faunus, and makes but one God, both of Fau∣nus and Pan. Eusebius reckons up Faunus among the Kings of the Aborigines, an ancient People in Italy, for he accounts the number of them thus, Janus, Saturnus, Faunus, Latinus. Notwith∣standing the Latins made him a Genius, and a God uttering Predictions, and this agrees with his proper name. For Faunus is derived from , fari, loqui, and his Wife was named Fatua from the same origine a fatu, as vates comes from . Pan and Faunus were likely but one and the same, seeing that the name of Pan is the same with that of Faunus in the Hebrew Tongue; for Pan in Hebrew signifies Fear; and Fan, foun is the same thing. Aurelius Victor is of the same opinion. Virgil make Faunus a God of Oracles and Predictions. At Rex solicitus monstris, Oracula Fauni Fatidici genitoris adit, &c. FAUNI, Called also Satyrs, Pans and Silvans, were formerly taken for Genij and Demi-Gods, inhabiting Woods and Moun∣tains; (according to the common opinion) were the Sons of Faunus, King of the Alori∣gines in Italy. They were represented with small Horns on their Head, and pointed Ears, and the rest of their Bodies like Goats. The Country People worshipp'd them, and offered them Goats in Sacrifice. These Demi-Gods were only the Gods of the Latins, and were unknown to the Greeks. FAVONIUS, The West-wind, that blows from the Equinoxial Line of the West, i. e. from that place where the Sun sets in the time of the Vernal Equinox. The Greeks call it Zephirus, i. e. bringing life, because it re∣vives and renews Nature in the Spring. FAUSTA, Sister to the Emperor Max∣entius, and second Wife to Constantine the Great. She fell in love with Crispu her Son∣in-Law,
and accused him of having attempted her Virtue, because he refused to yeild to her impure desires. The Emperor provoked to anger, put him to death, without inquiring any further after the accusation of his Wife. But a while after the Imposture being disco∣vered, Constantine ordered her to be smothered in a hot Bath. FAUSTINA, The Wife of Marcus Aurelius, who taking occasion from her Hus∣band's kindness, to lead a lewd life. Her Husband prudently winked at it; yet he cannot be ex∣cused, for raising to the greatest Imployments in the Empire, those who defiled his Bed: Whereupon the People passed many Jeers up∣on him. And those who were zealous for the service of their false Gods, were asham'd to see Faustina, the lewdest of all women, rank'd amongst the Divinities, served by Priests, and worshipped in a particular Temple like Pallas, who was accounted a Virgin. FAUSTULUS, Numitor's Shepherd, who saved Remus and Romulus, two Children of Rhea the Vestal, whom Amulius her Father had exposed on the River Tyber, and brought them to Acca Laurentia his Wife, who brought them up secretly. FEBRIS, A Fever, an Ague, a Disease, proceeding from an excess of heat and drowth in the blood and humours, which communi∣cates it self from the Heart to the whole Bo∣dy, through the Veins and Arteries, and is known by a violent beating of the Pulse. The Romans put her among their Divinities, and built her a Temple. Poets banish'd the Diseases into Hell, as Virgil has done. —Primis in faucibus Orci Pallentes habitant Morbi— But the ignorant People place them among the Divinities. Clemens of Alexandria speaks thus of them. The Romans offered Sacrifices to Hercules the Fly-driver, the Fever and Fear;  Romani Herculi muscarum depulsori, & Febri at Pavori sacrificant: And St Austin says, that Felicity is received among the Divini∣ties, and joined with Priapus, Cloacina, Fear, Paleness, Fever, and many others, that can∣not be adored without Crime. Whereupon Lactantius tells us, that 'tis a strange depravation to confound these Gods and Evils together, though they pretend that some Gods are honoured for help, and others are respected lest they should do harm. FEBRUA, A Goddess who presided over women's Terms. This word is deri∣ved from the Latin word Februa, i. e. to pu∣rify, to purge FEBRUARIUS, February the second Month of the Year, under the protection of Neptune. This Month is not found in the Ca∣lendar of Romulus, the Year being then com∣posed but of ten Months only; but during the reign of Numa Pompilius, the Calendar was reformed for the first time. Numa had dis∣coursed very particularly with Pythagoras con∣cerning Astronomy, and made use of what he had learn'd of him, to make this reforma∣tion, and followed very near the order kept then by the Greeks for the distribution of time. Yet the common Years of the Greeks were but of 354 days; however, Numa made up his Year of 355 days, that it might be an odd number, out of a superstition of the Egyptians, who accounted even numbers to be fatal. Wherefore he took a day out of each of these six Months, April, June, Sextilis, September, November and December, that Romulus had made up of 30 days, that they might be but 29, leaving to the other Months the 31 days they had before. Then adding these six days to 51, which was wanting to the Year of Romu∣lus, which was 304 days, to make up his Year 355 days; he made 57 days of them, which he divided in two other Months, and placed them before the Month of March, viz. Janua∣ry of 29 days, and February of 28. He did not much matter that the number of days of this last Month was even, because it was appoint∣ed for the Sacrifices that were offered to the Infernal Gods, to whom this fatal number seem'd agreeable. He called this Month Fe∣bruarius because of the God Februus, who pre∣sided over the Purifications, or because of Juno sirnamed Februa, Februata or Februalis; for in this Month the Lupercalia were celebra∣ted in honour of her, where the Women were purified by the Priests of Pan Lycaeus, called Lupercals. And to make this more establish'd and per∣petual, Numa made use of the 45 intercalar days of the Greeks, and distributed them every two Years, and at the end of the two first Years, there was a Month of 22 days set be∣fore the Feast called Terminalia, which was kept the sixth of the Kalends of March. i. e. the 24th of February; and after the two other Years, the three and twenty remaining days were set at the same day; so that in the space of four Years, the whole intercalation of 45 days was made, and was even with that, which was practiced by the Greeks in their Olympiades. This interposed Month every two Years, was called by the Romans Mercedonius or Februarius intercalaris. See Annus. At the Calends or the first day of this Month, was kept the Feast of June Sospit who had a Temple on Mount Palatine, near the Temple of the Grand-mother of the Gods. The same day was solemniz'd the Feast of
the Wood of Refuge called Lucaria, which Romulus had instituted, that he might People his new Town. And that day they sacrificed in the Temples of Vesta and Jupiter, sirnamed the Thunderera, to whom a Sheep of two years old was sacrificed in the Capitol. This day there were also Sacrifices offered to the dumb Goddess, or the Goddess of Si∣lence. See Muta Dea. There was still upon this day another Ce∣remony observed, called Charistia, because all the Kindred of the same Family having the foregoing days perform'd the Service for the dead, made among themselves a Banquet of Charity, whereby they put an end to all Dis∣putes and Controversies that might be amongst them. As we learn from Valerius Maximus, lib. 2. c. 1. Convivium etiam solemne Majores in∣stituerunt, idque Charistiam appellaverunt, cui prae∣ter cognatos & affines nemo interponebatur, ut si quae inter necessarias personas querela esset erta, in∣ter sacra mensae tolleretur. On the 21 or the 22 was kept the Feast of the Bounds, called Terminalia, in honour of Terminus the God of Bounds. The Ceremony of this Feast was performed in the Country upon Stones used for Bounds, and were ac∣counted by them as so many Gods; they of∣fered them some Wheat Cakes, with the first Fruits of the Fields, and sacrificed no Vi∣ctims, lest they should shed Blood upon the Stones, for the Bounds must be set by a mu∣tual agreement. See Terminalia. Some Writers tell us, that on this day was celebrated the Feast of new Wine, called Vi∣nalia priora, and was different from that which was kept in August. See Vinalia. The 24th a Feast called Regifugium, or the King's Flight, was solemnized in remem∣brance of Tarquinius Superbus's Flight out of Rome. See Regifugium. The 27th was a Feast called Equiria in the Field, solemnized with a Horse-Race. The 28th the Games of the Bulls were re∣presented in remembrance of the defeat of Tarquinius by the Romans. FECIALES, A College of twenty Persons of Quality, skill'd in Affairs of State, instituted by Numa Pompilius, as Plutarch says, or by Tullus Hostilius, or Ancus Martius, as some others tell us, the Duty of their Office was to make Peace or proclaim War. The Greeks called them , i. e. Keepers of Peace. Feciales, says Festus, a faciendo, quod belli pacisque faciendae penes eos jus esset. They did not suffer them to take up arms, till there was no hope of Agreement and Peace, Primum de pace experiebantur: Where∣fore they went themselves to the Nations, who had done the wrong and injury to the Romans, and endeavoured to perswade them by Arguments to submit to Reason, and make amends for what they had wrongfully done. If they were not prevailed upon by their Arguments, they called the Gods to witness their just demands, and declared War, throw∣ing a Dart half burnt upon their ground, and some Grass, in the presence of three Antient Men, uttering withal many Imprecations a∣gainst them. The Romans durst not undertake a War contrary to the opinion of these Men, for Livy tells us, that the Consul Sulpitius consulted them about the War that he intend∣ed to declare against King Philip; Consulti Feciales à Consule Sulpitio, quod bellum indiceretur Regi Philippo. But if the Enemy yielded to their demands, they granted them peace, which they ratified by the sacrificing a Hog, which they struck with a Stone, repeating a certain form of Prayers, related by Livy, in the Treaty of Peace concluded between the Albani and Ro∣mans. The Patratus the chief of this College spoke thus: Audi, Jupiter; Audi, Pater Patrats populi Albani; Audi tu populus Albanus, ut illa pa∣lam prima postrema, ex illis tabulis cerâve recitat sunt sine dolo malo, utique ea hic hodie rectissime in∣tellecta sunt, illis legibus Populus Romanus prior non deficiet: si prior defexit publico consilio, dolo malo; in illo die, Jupiter, populum Romanum sic ferito, ut hunc ego porcum hic hodie feriam, tanto∣que magis ferito, quanto magis potes pollesque. Having pronounced these words, he struck the Hog with a Stone, and the Albani did the like on their side. FELICITAS, Felicity, a Heathen Divinity. She was the Daughter of Hercules, as Euripides and Pausanias say, and deserved Divine Honours, because she sacrificed her self for the Athenians against the Lacedemonians, according to the answer of the Oracle. Publick Felicity had many Altars and Temples at Rome, as it appears by Roman Hi∣storians, and was called Faustitas, especially in relation to private Felicity. In this sense Ho∣race speaks of her, when he says, Tutus bos etiam rur a perambulat, Nutrit rura Ceres, almaque Faustitas. St Austin speaks of this Goddess in the 4th Book de Civitate Dei, c. 18. and shews that Fe∣licity is the same with good Fortune, and that the Romans acknowledged themselves, that Felicity, Virtue and Victory were neither Gods nor Goddesses, but only Gifts of God, seeing that they demanded them of Jupiter. Wherefore if we consider what they meant by adoring Felicity, Virtue and Victory like Divinities, it is nothing else but the adoring the supream Divinity, as the dispenser of these great favours.
Felicity was represented like a Divinity sit∣ting on a Throne, holding with her right Hand Mercury's Wand, and with the left a Horn of Plenty, with this Motto Felicitas Pub∣lica, as we see in a Medal of the Empress Ju∣lia Mammea. Lucullus built her a Temple at Rome, and Julius Caesar began another, which Lepidus finished. The Ancients represented Felicity holding a Cup in her right Hand, and a Scepter in the left, as appears by the Medals of Adrian and Alexander Mammeus. But Moderns represent her under the Figure of a blindfold Lady, holding up a Sword with one hand, and a pair of even Scales with the other. FERALIA, The Feast of the dead, noted in the Calendar on the 21st of February, viz. on the 9th of the Calends of March, tho' Ovid puts it on the 17th of February, or the 13th of the Calends of March. This Feast was in∣stituted to render the last Honours to the Dead, and pacify their Ghosts called Manes. Aeneas is accounted the first Author of this Feast, and Numa the Inventer of all the Cere∣monies performed therein. This Feast was kept during eleven days in this manner. The Kinsmen and Acquaintance of the Dead went to their Graves, and turned round about them, making their Prayers; then they pre∣pared an Entertainment upon a great Stone, called Silicernium; and this Feast was com∣monly served with Honey, Wine and Milk, they spread Flowers, and burnt Frankincense and other Perfumes, according to the Quality of the deceased. Silicernium, says Donatus, coe∣na quae infertur Diis Manibus, quòd eam silentes cernant, or quòd epula, says Servius, ponerenter super nudam silicem. The Antients were perswaded that the Souls of the dead suffered no pains in Hell during the eleven days, that the subterra∣nean Gods were invoked upon their ac∣count, but were allowed to walk about their Graves, and feed upon the Feast prepared for them. During this time Marriages were forbidden, and the Temples of other Divinities shut up, because they fancied that the Ghosts were walking, and that all was then profane. This Ovid meant by these Verses. Dum tamen haec fiunt, viduae cessate puellae; Expectet puros pinea taeda dies..... Dî quoque templorum foribus celentur opertis, Thure vacent arae, stentque sine igne soci. Nunc animae tenues & corpora sancta sepulchris Errant, nunc posito pascitur Umbra cibo. This Feast having been neglected for some years, all the Graves were seen on fire, and the Souls were heard both in the Town and the Country, complaining in the night of be∣ing forsaken. Whereupon it was ordered to keep this Feast for the future with more de∣votion and exactness; and immediately the Prodigies ceased. FERETRIUS, An Epithet given to Jupiter, from the Latin word ferre, because the Spoils taken from the Enemy were brought to his Temple; or from the word ferire, be∣cause before they went to War, they prayed to that God, to enable them to beat the Ene∣mies of the Roman People. Romulus instituted this Ceremony after the defeat, of the Sa∣bins, and dedicated a Temple to Jupiter Fere∣trius. FERIAE, Holy-days, when People rest∣ed from labour, from the Verb feriari, i. e. to rest, to cease from work, for the Feriae of the Ancients were Festival-days. Now the Church marks the days of the Week, by the word Feria secunda, feria tertia, &c. tho' these days are not Holy-days, but working-days; the occasion thereof was, that the first Chri∣stians, to shew their Joy at the celebrating of Easter, were used to keep the whole Week holy, and forbear from all servile work, that they might give themselves wholly to the contemplation of the Mysteries contained therein; wherefore they called the Sunday the first Holy-day, the Monday the second Holy-day, the Tuesday the third Holy-day, and so forth; and from thence the days of every week, were afterwards called Feriae in the com∣mon Language of the Church, tho' they are not to be kept Holy. The Romans had two kinds of Feriae, the publick Feriae, common to all the People in general, and the private Feriae, which were only kept by some private Families. The publick Feriae were four-fold, Stativae unmoveable, and Holy-days Imperativae, com∣manded; Conceptivae moveable; Nundinae days for keeping Fairs. Stativae Feriae were set Holy-days mark'd in the Calendar, which always fell out upon the same day, the three chiefest thereof were A∣gonalia, Carmentalia, and Lupercalia. I shall give an account of them in their order. Conceptivae were Holy-days appointed every Year upon uncertain days, according to the Pontiffs will; such were Feriae Latinae, Paga∣nales, Sementinae, and Compitales. Imperativae, commanded, or extraordinary Holy-days, kept according as the occasions of the Commonwealth required, either to give thanks to the Gods for some extraordi∣nary Favours, or to pacific their Wrath, and pray to them to keep the People from publick misfortunes. Unto these kind of Holy-days the Processions, Games, Lectisternium, or the Bed of the Gods may be referred.
Nundinae, days for Fairs, and extraordinary Markets. Before Flavius made the Calendar publick, the unmoveable Feasts were publish'd by the Curio's, who waited the Nones of each Month upon the King of Sacrifices, to know what Holy-days were to be kept that Month, and then acquainted each Parish with the same. And this was still practiced after the publish∣ing of the Calendar. As for the Ferae concep∣tivae and imperativae, they were published in the publick places by a Herald in these words, Lavatio Deûm Matris est hodie: Jovis epulum cras est, and the like. And these Holy-days were so religiously kept, that the opinion of the Pontiff Mutius Scaevola was, says Macrobius, that the breaking of a Holy-day was unpardona∣ble, unless Men had done it out of inadver∣tency, and in this case they were acquitted by sacrificing a Hog. FERIAE LATINAE, The Latin Ho∣lyday. Some Writers say that the Consuls Sp. Cassius and Posthumius Caminius instituted these Holy-days, by a Treaty that they made with the Latius in the name of the Senate and the Roman People. But Dionysius Hallicarnasseus and almost all the Writers tell us, that Tar∣quinius Supurbus instituted them; and that ha∣ving overcome the Tuscans, he made a league with the Latins, and proposed them to build a Temple in common to Jupiter sirnamed Latia∣lis, where both Nations might meet every Year, and offer Sacrifice for their common Conservation. Wherefore they chose Mount Albanus, as the center of these Nations, to build there a Temple; and instituted a year∣ly Sacrifice, and a great Feast in common; and among their Rejoycings, they swore a mutual and eternal Friendship. Each Town of both Latins and Romans, provided a cer∣tain quantity of Meat, Wine, and Fruits for the Feast. A white Bull was sacrificed in common, and the Inhabitants of every Town carried home a piece thereof. When this Ceremony was at first instituted it held but one day, but after the Kings were expell'd out of Rome, the People demanded that another day might be added to it; afterwards the Senate added a third day, a fourth, and so on till they came to ten days. After the Expulsion of Kings, the Consuls appointed a time for the celebrating of this Feast; during which, the People left the guard of the City to a Governor called Prae∣fectus Urbis. While this Feast was celebrated on Mount Albanus, there were Chariot-Races at the Ca∣pitol, and the Conqueror was treated with a great draught of Wormwood-drink, which is very wholsom, as Pliny says, Lanorum feriis quadrigae certant in Capitolio, victorque absynthi∣um bibit; credo sanitatem praemio dari homo∣rificè. FERONIA, A Goddess of the Woods and Orchards. This Divinity took her name from the Town of Feronia, scituated at the foot of Mount Soracte in Italy, where a Wood and a Temple were consecrated to her. 'Tis said that the Town and the Wood having both taken fire, whereupon the People carry∣ing away the Statue of the Goddess, the Wood grew green again. Strabo relates, that the Men who offered her Sacrifices, walked bare-footed upon burning Coals, without burning themselves. She was honoured by freed-men as their Protectrefs, because they received in her Temple the Cap, that was the Token of their Liberty. FESTUM and FESTA, Holy-days. The Romans kept many Feasts, as it appears by their Calendar. We shall speak of them according to their Alphabetick Order. They were very careful of observing Feasts, and during that time they did forbear to work. Tibellus tells us, that the Romans abstain from working, upon the days of Expiations and Lustrations of the Fields. Quisquis adest, faveat, fruges lustramus & agros,...... Omnia sint operata Deo, non audeat ulla Lanificam pensis imposuisse manum. These words express the true end of cea∣sing from work, to employ themselves to the service of the Gods and Religious Du∣ties. 'Tis not certain, if Plghmen rested from all kind of work, during the Holy-days. Vir∣gil relates many exercises, and other small things, that Men were allowed to do in Ho∣ly-days, Quippe etiam festis quaedam exercere diebus, Fas & jura sinunt: Rivos deducere nulla Relligio vetuit; segeti praetendere sepem, Insidias avibus moliri, incendere vepres, Balantumque gregem fluvio mersare salubri: Saepè oleo tardi costas agitator aselli, Vilibus aut onerat' pomis: Georg. lib. 1. v. 270. as to make Drains to drain the water, in∣close a Field with Hedges, laying snares for Birds, set Thorns on fire, wash a Flock in the River, and load an Ass with Fruits. These works were not disagreeable to the celebrating of the Holy-days. And yet work∣ing was not left to the liberty or humours of Men's fancy, but were regulated by the Laws and Ordinances of the Pontiffs, who ruled matters of Religion.
They were so exact in keeping Holy-days, that the following day was accounted a day of bad Omen to undertake any thing. Where∣fore the Romans and the Greeks have consecra∣ted the next day after the Holy-days, to the Genij or the dead. And they were so careful of ceasing from work, that the keeping of their Holy-days was an imitation of the rest of the Sabbath, commanded by the Law of God. For the Greeks and the Romans kept some Holy-days during eight days together, in imitation of the Hebrews, and had also their eight and nine days of Devotion. For Polybius tells us, that to thank the Gods for a Victory obtain'd at Sea, the Romans ordered to forbear from all kind of work for nine days together. FIBULAE, Buckles, Clasps. This La∣tin word, generally taken, signifies All sorts of work that joins two things together. Fibula Architectonica, that which in Archi∣tecture we call a Nail, Peg, Key and Ring, and all that is made use of to join Beams to∣gether, and other parts of Buildings. In this sense Cesar makes use of this word, in the de∣scription he has made of the Bridge that he built over the River Rhine: Binis utrinque fibu∣lis ab extremâ parte distinebantur. In Anatomy Fibula is that we call a Cannel∣bone. Fibula in relation to Cloaths, means Buckles and Clasps, that keep close, or tie up some part of our Cloaths. The Greeks and Romans made use of them, and often adorned them with precious stones. Men and Women did wear them upon their Cloaths and Shoes, and used them to keep up their Hairs, aliqua fibula comam diffluentem colligans. Fibula Gymnastica or Citharaedica, used only by Musicians and Comoedians, to keep close the prepuce of Children, lest they should keep Women company, and lose their voice, as we learn of Celsus. The same thing was used to Players upon the Stage, to preserve their voice, as 'tis reported by Martial. Menophili penem tam grandis fibula vostis. An Ancient Interpreter of Juvenal ob∣serves upon this Verse of the sixth Satyr, —Nullius fibula durat Vocem vendentis praetoribus...... Fibulam dicit circellos quos tragaedi, sive comoedi in pene habent. FICULNEA VIA. The way or the Street of the Fig-tree at Rome, called Momen∣tania. FICUS, A Fig-tree. Pliny affirms, that the white Fig-tree is fortunate, but on the contrary, that which brings brownish Figs is fatal. The Fig-tree called Ruminalis, under which the Wolf suckled Remus and Romulus, was at at Rome, about the place of the Assem∣blies. FIDES, Faith. A Goddess, whom the Ancients honoured and plac'd in Heaven. Livy relates, that her Priests were cloathed with very white Linnen, to shew the candour and sincerity of Faith. She was represented by two Hands joined close together, and sometimes with two little Images holding one another by the hand. See Fidius. Dionysius Hallicarnasseus tells us, that Numa Pompilius was the first Man who built a Tem∣ple to publick Faith, and instituted Sacrifices in honour of her at publick charges. Her Priests or Flamines sacrificed to her without shedding of Blood, cloathed with white Robes, and drawn upon a Chariot, holding their right hand open. FIDIUS. The Romans and the Sabins, respected this God, as the protector of the good Faith that should reign among them. There was a Temple at Rome on Mount Quirinalis built to this God, where his Feast was kept every year upon the Nones of June. And his Image is still seen at Rome, in an ancient Marble of three Figures, which are under a kind of a Canopy. Honour stands at the right, under the figure of a middle aged Man; Truth at the left, represented like a Woman crowned with Laurel, holding Ho∣nour by the Hand; and Love is betwixt them both, under the shape of a young Child, with this Inscription Simulachrum Fidiī. FLAMINIUS, Sirnamed Quintius, the Son of T. Flaminius, whom Hannibal defeated near the Lake Trasymenes. Being Consul, he marched against the Inhabitants of Milan, and routed them. Then he made war against Philip King of Macedoniā, and vanquish'd him in two pitch'd Battles, and by this defeat re∣stored Liberty to all the Cities of Greece, that King Philip had made his Tributaries. And being ready to engage the Enemy, he recei∣ved Orders from the Senate to return to Rome, to quit his Consulate, because of some forma∣lities wanting at his Election; but he put the Packet into his Bosom, and did not open it, till after he had obtained the Victory: The Senate resented highly his contrivance, and endeavoured to deprive him of the triumphal Entry; but the People opposed them, and allowed him the Triumph. Wherefore this great General was attended in his Triumph, by a Crowd of his fellow Citizens, whom he had made free, and followed his Triumphal Chariot with Acclamations, which made the Glory of his Triumph shine the more.
Flaminius is not found among the Consuls, neither in the Calendars of Rome, nor in the Roman Chronicles. The Senate doubtless de∣prived him of that Honour, because he had not obeyed their Orders, when he was called back to Rome. FLAMEN and FLAMINES, in the plural number. Numa instituted these Priests of Jupiter, Mars and Romulus or Quirinus, to perform the Religious Ser∣vice, and called them Flamines. Varro in his Book of the Latin Tongue tells us, that the Antients had as many Flamines as Gods. At first there was but one Flamen crea∣ted, who was called Flamen Dialis, or the Priest of Jupiter; then another was allowed to Mars, called Flamen Martialis, and a third to Quirinus or Romulus, called Flamen Quirinalis. Afterwards the number of Flamines was in∣creased; but yet the first were called Majores Plamines, and were all of Patrician Families; the others were called Minores Flamines, and were of Plebeian Families. There were likewise Flamines ordained for the Emperors, after they were ranked among the Gods. The Emperor Augustus had one called Flamen Augustalis. The People assembled by Curii chose these Priests, and often left their Election to the Pontiffs. The High Priest consecrated them, and they were under his subjection, as to their Discipline. Aulus Gellius relates the Ce∣remonies observed at their Consecration. First, the will of the Gods was consulted by Augurs, about the Man who should be consecrated, then the High Priest took him up from the hands of his Kindred; and this was called capere Flaminem, as we learn from Livy. The Priests of Jupiter called Flamen Dialis, was the chief of all. And it must be observed, that all these Priests were allowed to wear the Robe edged with Purple, like great Ma∣gistrates, to keep the Ivory Chair, and to sit in the Senate. They did wear a kind of a Cap or Hat, that was particular to them. And Varro tells us, that they had the name Flamen, because they wore a little Band of Thread about their Head, Flamines dicti, quòd filo caput cinctum ha∣bebant. Servius mentions two kinds of Ornaments that the Flamines wore upon their Head, one single for conveniency in the Summer, viz. this little Band of Thread; the other was the Hat, which covered their Head, during their Functions: Verùm festis diebus, filo deposito, pilea necesse erat accipere. Scaliger, upon this Text of Varro, has de∣scribed the form of the Hat of the Flamines, and tells us, that it was called Flammeum, that the Crown thereof was in form of a Pine-Apple, with a woollen Tuft on the top of it called Apiculum, and from its brims hung woollen Bands, called Offendices, to keep it fast. When the Wife of the Flamen Dialis died, he was obliged to quit his Priesthood: uxorem si amisit Flaminio decedit. He was not allowed to ride, nor to take any Oath, nor to lye out of the Town. The paring of his Nails and Hairs were buried at the Foot of a Tree, subter arborem Siliquam ter∣râ operiantur; and was forbid to name or touch a She-Goat, a Hare, or Beans, and ne∣ver entered into any place where dead Bodies lay, and was bound to shift himself in private, lest Jupiter should see him naked. FLAMINICA, The Wife of the Fla∣men Dialis was invested with the Priest-hood, like her Husband, and was not obliged to observe the same Ceremonies that he observed himself. She was not allowed to comb her Hairs, nor to put them in order, when she went to the Ceremonies of the Argaei, cele∣brated in May, because she was then in mourn∣ing. Her chiefest Ornament was a great Scarf of purple colour, with a Fringe about it. The Woman who waited on her was cal∣led Flaminia, and the Men who attended upon her Husband Flaminii Camilli. FLAMINIUS, See before Flamen. FLAVIUS. Caius the Son of Cneus Flavius Libertinus, a Notary, was raised to the dignity of Aedilis Curulis against the Patrician's consent, which they resented so highly, that they left off their Orna∣ments, and refused to salute him in con∣tempt of his elevation. But to be revenged of them, he publish'd the Roman Law, which the Senate and Patricians had kept very se∣cret among themselves, in the Closets of the Pontiffs, and published also the Roman Ca∣lendars, and dedicated a Temple to Con∣cord. Whereupon the wrath of the Patrici∣ans was increased, for they had then no∣thing left secret to deceive the simple Peo∣ple. FLAVIANA, Viz. FAMILIA, The Flavian Family, so called, from the co∣lour of their Hairs, that were reddish. There were three Roman Emperors born of that Family, viz. Vespatianus, Titus and Domiti∣anus. FLORA, The Goddess Flora. Lactan∣tius gives a description of Flora or Flaura, as if she was a Courtezan, who left her substance to the Roman People; in consideration where∣of they ordained her extraordinary Honours, and Games called Floralia, where she was in∣tituled the Goddess of Flowers. But Varro recounts Flora among the Divinities, who
were before that time honoured by the Sabins, and were received at Rome, when the Sabins, to∣gether with their King Tatius joined them∣selves to the Romans, to make with them but one and the same body of People. Ovid de∣scribes her in his Fasti, as the Goddess of Flowers, the Wife of Zephirus, whereby he means a natural Goddess, named Flora, instead of Cloris. The Games Floralii were instituted five hundred and thirteen years after the foundation of Rome; and yet were not kept annually: but in the year five hundred and eighty, at the celebrating of these Games, Harlots danced naked, playing a thousand la∣scivious postures. FLORUS, A Governour of Judaea for the Romans, who attempted to steal away seven∣teen Talents out of the Treasury of the Tem∣ple. But the people disappointed his design, and reproached him for his Tyranny; and to make him appear scandalous, some men went from door to door begging in his name. But having been acquainted with it, to revenge that affront, he marched with all his Forces and entred Jerusalem, where his Soldiers plundered the Market, and many persons of Quality's Houses. He commanded also that many Romans of the Equestrian Or∣der, should be whipt, and nailed to the Cross, without any regard to their quality, because they were Native Jews. His barbarous deal∣ing obliged the Jews to rebel, whereupon Vespasianus destroyed their Capital City and Nation. FLORUS, An Historian, who has writ an Abridgment of the Roman History from Romulus to Trajan, and lived in his Reign. Some Criticks can't bear his way of writing, yet his Style is not altogether so much to be blamed, tho there are a great many Faults in it, being wholly Poetical and full of quib∣bles. 'Tis uncertain whether he is the Author of the Epitome of the Books of Livy. FLUONIA, An Epithet given to Juno, because she helped women in the time of their monthly courses. FONS, A Fountain. There are hot Fountains, the water whereof is as good to drink, says Vitruvius, as that which is drawn out of the Fountain of the Muses, or the Spouting-waters of Martian's Fountain. All hot Fountains have a Medicinal Virtue; for being warm'd by the Minerals, through which they run, acquire a new vertue, and are fit for other uses than common Waters are. For Sulphureous Water is good for distem∣pers of the Nerves, fortifying them, and consuming the bad humours with their heat. The waters that run through Allum-mines, cure bodies weakened with the Palsy, or some other like distemper, driving the exorbitant cold out of the Limbs by heat, restoring them to their Natural state; the bituminous waters being drunk, by purging expel distem∣pers of the internal parts of the body. At Carthage there is a Spring, on the sur∣face whereof there is Oyl swimming over, which smells like the scraping of a Lemon, the Inhabitants of the place anoint their Cat∣tle with it. Near Hieropolis in Phrygia there is a great boiling Fountain which petrifies. There are also springs of water that con∣tract bitterness by the moisture of the Earth, through which they run out, which proceeds from Mines of Sandarach, that communicates its bitterness to the waters. There was was a spring of Water at Terra∣cina, called the Fountain of Neptune, the Wa∣ter whereof was so poisonous, that it imme∣diately killed Men who drank of it. In Thes∣salia there is still a Fountain shadowed by a Tree, the blossoms whereof are of purple colour, the Flocks refuse to drink of it. In the Country of the Falisci, near the road of Naples, and a Grove standing in the middle of a Field called Cometus, comes out a Spring, wherein are found bones of Serpents, Lizards, and other venemous Beasts. There are also some Fountains of acid wa∣ters, as the Fountains of Lyncestis and Velino in Italy, Theano in Terra di Lavoro, and in ma∣ny other places, which being drank, dissolve stones in the Bladder and Reins. Besides all these Fountains there are other Springs, the Waters whereof seem to be mixt with Wine, as that of Paphlagonia, which, without any Wine mixt with it, makes Men drunk. In Arcadia, near a Town well known cal∣led Clitor, is a Cave under ground, from whence flows a spring of Water that has such a Virtue, that Men hate Wine after they have drank of its Water. Upon this Fountain there is an Epigram written in Greek Verses, giving warning to the People that the Fountain is not proper for bathing, and is an Enemy to the Vineyard, because Melampus having offer∣ed his Sacrifice, purified the Daughters of Praetus in this Fountain, to cure them of their Madness, and restored them to their former condition. In the Isle of Clio there was a spring of wa∣ter, that made those mad who drank of it. Wherefore an Epigram was set on it, to give warning that the water thereof was very plea∣sant to drink, but made the minds of Men as hard as Stone. At Suza the Capital City of the Kingdom of Persia, another small spring of water makes the Teeth fall out. And an Epigram is there written, to give notice to the people, that the water of that Fountain is very proper for
bathing, but makes the Teeth of those who drink of it shed. These two Fountains Arethusa and Hippocrene were often rehearsed by the Poets. The name of this last Fountain signifies the Horse Foun∣tain. This Horse was also called , i. e. Fountain. 'Tis well known, that the Va∣pours of the waters under-ground, ascend to the highest top of the Mountains by a conti∣nual transpiration, and there thicken into small drops of water, which meeting toge∣ther make Springs. Vossius tells us, that this motion of ascending waters, compared to a Horse, gave occasion to the Fable of Pe∣gasus. Arethusa is a Fountain in Greece, which was beloved by the River Alpheus, who follows her running under ground as far as Sicilia, where Diana receives her in the small Island of Orty∣gia. See Alpheus. FONTINALIA SACRA, The Feast of Fountains, which was solemniz'd at Rome, by crowning the Fountains with Gar∣lands of Flowers and Lamps, among the Sa∣crifices. FONTINALIS PORTA, A Gate at Rome called Capena, where Fountains and Conduits were built. FORDICIDIA or FORDICA∣LIA, A Festival observ'd the 15th of April through all the Curiae, on which they offer∣ed in sacrifice a Cow with a Calf called Forda. FORNACALIA, The Feast of O∣vens, which was commonly celebrated the 18th, in remembrance of the ancient Ovens, wherein Wheat was roasted, before the way of grinding Corn and making Bread was found out. Upon that day they sacrificed to the Goddess Fornax, to give her thanks for the good use of Ovens, invented by her. FORTUNA, Fortune, a Goddess which the Heathens esteem'd the Ruler of all Events both good and bad. For they distin∣guish'd two kinds of Fortune, one good and the other bad. The Greeks had many Temples dedicated to Fortune, recorded by Pausanias in several places of his Books, called the Fortune of the Gods , and observes that Homer has spoken well of Fortune or Tyche; and has placed her among the Nymphs, the Daugh∣ters of the Ocean; but never allowed her a great power over humane things; tho' he has in other places of his works described the Functions proper to every particular God∣dess. Pausanias has also observed, that the imagi∣nary omnipotency ascribed to Fortune, and so much extoll'd by vain Men in following Ages, did not prevail over the mind of Men, (at least of the Greeks) before the Age of Homer. Pausanias observes still in many places, that Pindarus hath often spoke of For∣tune, and ranked her at the head of the Parca. Facilè enim mihi Pindarus in suis Canticis persua∣det, tum alia multa, tum vero unam esse Parcarum Fortunam, & eam quidem potestate sororibus ante∣cellere. The common Idea of a blind and in∣constant Fortune, can't be represented by making her one of the Parcae; and yet this representation comes near to the truth, for it gives to understand, that all things are go∣vern'd by a wise and absolute power, whose actions seem sometimes casual to Men, be∣cause they can't find out the secret and invisi∣ble ways of his proceedings. Pindar prays to Fortune as the Daughter of Jupiter, who has at her command the order∣ing, motions and success in War both by Sea and Land, and presides at publick delibe∣rations. Horace places the management of all things in the hands of Jupiter, whose secret and just designs are unknown to Men; and in general all things that the vulgar ascribe to Fortune, is performed by Providence. Od. 34. l. 1. Valet ima summis Mutare, & insignem attenuat Deus, Obscura pomens. Hinc apicem rapax Fortuna cum stridore acuto Sustulit, hic posuisse gaudet. 'Tis plain by these Verses, that God and Fortune are two names that signifie the same thing; for commonly Men ascribe to For∣tune the Events that don't depend upon them, and are perform'd by a superior cause un∣known to them. The following Ode is de∣dicated to Fortune; and 'tis most certain, that under that name, he understands the su∣pream Dignity, not only because of the infi∣nite power he ascribes her, but also because he confounds Fortune with Necessity and Fate, which is quite opposite to the Idea of Fortune. Horace had doubtless read what Homer said, that at the entry of Jupiter's Palace, there are two great Vessels, out of one runs upon us all good, and of the other all evil, to shew us that God is the dispenser of all good and evil; favouring men with his good things, and punishing them, when he sends or per∣mits evil. Ancus Martius, the fourth King of the Ro∣mans, was the first Man who built a Temple at Rome to Fortune, with this Title Fortune virili, To the Viril and couragious Fortune; be∣cause Courage is not less required than good Fortune to obtain Victories Servius Tullis built her a Temple at the Capitol under the Title of Primogenia.
There was a Statue of Fortune at Athens, holding betwixt her arms Plutus the God of Riches. She is represented in Medals like a Goddess, holding with one hand a Horn of Plenty, with the other the Helm or Rudder of a Ship, set upon a Globe, to shew that she governs the World. Fortune is still repre∣sented lying or sitting, and holds under her left Arm her Horn of Plenty, and lays her right hand upon a wheel, to denote her in∣stability and inconstancy, with these words Fortunae Reduci. Apeller drew her in that po∣sture, and when he was asked the reason why he had drawn her sitting, he answered, because she had never been at rest. We have still other Emblems of Fortune; in some whereof she is represented with a Beard, Fortunae Barbata and in others carry∣ing a Branch of Laurel with her Horn of Plenty. We read in Histories, that the Fortune of Gold commonly attended the Beds of the Caesars, and that when the Emperor was dy∣ing she was carried to his Successors. There was a brazen Statue of Fortune, in a Temple built to her by Sylla at Praeneste, so well gilt over, that to express any thing that was well gilt, 'tis said that it had been gilt at Praeneste. The Ancients represented Fortune of both Sexes, Male and Female, as several other Di∣vinities. The Pagans, says St Austin, esteem'd so much the Goddess Fortune, that they have left in Writing, that the Statue that Women had consecrated by the name of feminine Fortune had spoken, and said more than one time, that they had done well to render her that Honour. There was a Temple built upon Mount Esquilinus consecrated to Fortune, St Au∣stin speaks of it in raillery, in the 4th Book of the City of God, c. 18. How can Goddess Fortune be sometimes good, and sometimes bad? May be when she is bad, she is not then a Goddess, but is changed on a sudden into a pernicious Devil; Then there must be as many several Fortunes good and bad, as there are men happy and unhappy. May be the Goddess is always good, and if it be so, she is the same thing as Felicity. Why have then Men consecrated them several Temples, Altars and Ceremonies? Because, say they, Felicity is that which Men enjoy according to their deserts, but good For∣tune befals by chance both good and bad Men, without any respect to personal Me∣rit, wherefore she is called Fortune. But how can she be good, if she befals with∣out distinction both good and bad Men? And why Men should serve her, seeing she is blind, and offers herself indifferently all Men, and leaves often those Men  serve her, to stick to those who despise her; or if they say, that she sees and loves Men who worship her, she has then regard to the deserts of Men, and does not happen out of a meer chance? what will become then of the definition of Fortune? and how can they say that she derives her name from Fors, be∣cause she is casual. The Romans gave several Names to For∣tune, and built her Temples and Aedicula, by these several Names. They called her FORTUNA LIBE∣RA, REDUX, PUBLICA, PRI∣MIGENIA, EQUESTRIS; PAR∣VA FORTUNA; FORS or FOR∣TIS FORTUNA; FORTUNA VIRILIS & FEMINEA. FORUM, This word signifies several things; viz. Market-places, and common places, where the People met upon Business, and where they pleaded; for of all the places that were at Rome, there were but three where Courts were kept. Forum signified also, a Town where Fairs are kept, as Forum Julij, the Fair of Frioul; Forum Livij, the Fair of Forly; and Forum Flaminium, the place where was kept the Fair of Fuligny; for because of the great concourse of Merchants, who came to these Fairs, they built Houses for their conveniences, and in process of time, these places became Towns. The publick places in Greece are of square figure, with double and large Piazza's round about, the Pillars whereof are close, and hold up the Architraves made of Stone or Marble, with Galleries above; but this was not pra∣cticed in Italy, because the old custom was to represent the Fights of Gladiators to the People in these places. wherefore they set up their Pillars at a larger distance one from another, that the People might see those Shews the better, and that the Shops of the Bankers, that were under the Piazza's, and the Balco∣nies that were above, might have room e∣nough for their Trade, and the Receipt of publick Revenues. There were seventeen common places or Market-places at Rome, fourteen whereof were appointed for the sale of Goods and Merchan∣dizes, called Fora Venalia. There was Forum Olitorium, the Herb-Market, where Pulses were sold; Forum Pistarium, the Market for Bread: Forum Piscarium, the Fish-Market; Forum Equarium, the Market for Horses; Forum Boarium, the Market where Oxen were sold; Forum Soarium or Suarium, the Hog-Market; Forum Cupedinarium or Cupedinis, the Market for Dainties, where the Cooks, the Pastry-Cooks, and the Confectioners kept their Shops.
Writers don't agree about the Etymology of the Name given to this place. Festus says, that this word is derived from capes or cupedia, which signifies in Antient Books, rare and dainty meat. Varro in his 4th Book of the Latin Tongue, tells us, that this place took its Name from a Roman of the Equestrian Order, named Cupes, who had a Palace in this place, which was pull'd down in punishment of his Thefts, and the place where it stood, appointed for the use of a Market. All these Market-palces were surrounded with Piazza's and Houses, with Stalls and Ta∣bles, to expose Goods and Merchandizes to sale, which were called Abaci, Plutei, Venalitij, & Operariae Mensae. The Romans called the places where mat∣ters of Judgment were pleaded and decided Fora Civilia or Judiciaria, the three chiefest whereof were, Forum Romanum, which was the most ancient and most famous of all, cal∣led Latinum & Vetus, where the Rostra was kept: Forum Julij Casaris & Forum Augusti, were two places only added to the Forum Ro∣manum, because it was not large enough to hold the number of Lawyers and Clients, says Suetonius. These three places were appointed for the Assemblies of the People, publick Spechees and Administration of Justice. There were still two places more added to these three above mentioned; one was began by Domitian, and finished by the Emperor Nerva, and was called by his Name Forum Divi Nervae, and the other was built by Trajan, cal∣led Forum Trajani. The Forum Romanum was scituated betwixt Mount Palatinus and the Capitol, and contain∣ed all that spot of ground, that extended from the Arch of Septimius Severus, to the Temple of Jupiter Stator. In Romulus's time it was only a great open place, without Buildings or any other Ornament; Tullus Hostilius was the first who inclosed it with Galleries and Shops, and afterwards this work was carried on by other Kings, Consuls and Magistrates: And in the time of the prosperity of the Common-wealth, it was one of the finest places in the World. The chiefest parts thereof were, the place called Comitium, where the people assembled for deliberations concerning publick Affairs. The Magistrates called Aediles and Praetors, ordered often Games to be represented there to divert the people. Marcellus Junior the Son of Octavia, Augustus's Sister, caused it to be covered with Linnen, the year that he was Aedile, for the conveniency of those that were at Law, ut Salubrius litigantes consisterent, says Pliny. Cato the Censor said, that this place ought to be paved with sharp Stones, that liti∣gious men growing weary of standing there, might be discouraged to go to Law. In this place of Assembly there were four stately Buildings, viz. the Palace of Paulus; the House of Opimia, where the Senate men, the House of Julia, built by Vitruvius, and the House of Porcia, erected by Portius Cato. At one corner of this place, at the foot of the Tarpeian Rock, was a great and dreadful Pri∣son built by Ancas Martius, and since enlarged by Servius Tullius, with many Dungeons, from whence it was called Tullianum. Over against that Prison stood a great Coloss of Marble, vulgarly called Marforie, in the shape of a man lying all along, representing, as some men say, the Figure of the River Nar; the first letter N having been changed by corruption of Language into an M Nardi∣forum and Marforio. Some other men tell us, that this Figure represented the River Rhine, and was a piece of Architecture, sup∣porting the Statue of Domitian on Horseback, and was laid there after he had triumphed o∣ver Germany. And some are of opinion that it was the Statue of Jupiter Panarius, the God of the Bakers, whose Statue was set up there in remembrance of the Loaves that the Sol∣diers threw down from the Capitol into the Camp of the Gauls, to shew them that they wanted no Provisions. Just by this place of Assembly was the Court called Hostilia, where the Senate assem∣bled very often. Over against this Court was the Rostra Rostrorum, which was a Pulpit set up and adorned with stems, or fore∣fronts of Ships taken from the Antiates. At the Entry of the place, or, as Tacitus says, near the Temple of Saturn, was a Pillar called Milliarium aureum, from whence they took the distance and measures of the Italian Miles. There was also a Gallery like a Bridge of Marble, built by the Emperor Caligula, to go from Mount Palatinus to the Capitol through the Forum Romanum. This Gallery was supported by fourscore huge Pillars of white Marble. FORUM JULII CAESARIS was much finer than the Forum Romanum. He contrived the design thereof, being yet a pri∣vate man, and began to set men at work about it, when he was Pro-consul of the Gauls. The adorning of this place cost him above a hun∣dred thousand great Sesterces, which is five hundred sixty two thousand five hundred pounds of our Money. This place was be∣hind the Temples of Peace and Faustina. FORUM AUGUSTI, was above the Forum Romanum. In the middle of this Forum, Augustus built the Temple of Mars, by the Title of BISULTOR, i. e. Twice Revenger, because he had helped him to re∣venge himself on the murderers of his adop∣tive Father, and to subdue the Parthians. He
built a double Gallery round about it, and set up on one side the Statues of all the Latin Kings since Aeneas, and on the other side he erected all the Statues of the Kings and Em∣perors of Rome, from its foundation to his time. FORUM Nervae, was began by Domi∣tian, and finished by Nerva. It was also na∣med Forum transitorium, because it was a passage to go to the other Fori. Alexander the Emperor set up three Statues, of the height and bigness of Colosses, both on Foot, and Horse-back, in honour of the Emperors his Ancestors, and erected brazen Pillars, whereon were engra∣ved their Atchievements, FORUM Trajani exceeded all the for∣mer; and the Gods themselves, says Ammianus Marcellinus, gazed upon it as one of the won∣ders of the World, and were amazed at it, seeing nothing but Heaven it self finer, and nothing else that came so near to it: Singula∣rem sub omni coelo structuram, etiam Numinum as∣sensione mirabilem. Apollodorus a skilful Archi∣tect, built it by Trajan's Order. In the mid∣dle of this place, was a Pillar a hundred and twenty eight foot high, and Men ascend to it by one hundred eighty five Steps, which were enlightned with forty five Windows. Round about this Pillar were ingraven the Atchieve∣ments of this Emperor, and the Victories he had obtained over the Daci. 'Tis the general opinion, that the Senate consecrated this Pil∣lar to him, while he was at War against the Parthians, and that he never saw it himself; but dying of a bloody-flux at Seleucia a City in Syria, his Ashes were brought to Rome, and set up in a golden Pilaster on the top of the Pillar, which is adorned with several repre∣sentations of Horses and military Standards gilded over, with these words written upon them, EX MANUBIIS. This Forum was scituated between that of Nerva and the Capitol. FRIGIDARIUM, A place in the Baths to cool the People. FRONTINUS, An Historian, who was Overseer of the Waters and Aqueducts, in the time of the Emperor Nerva. FRUMENTATORES & FRU∣MENTARIJ. Those who bought Corn in the Provinces, both for Cities or Armies, or received and gathered the Corn, that some Provinces furnish'd the Commonwealth with. These words signifie also Purveyors for the Armies, who destributed a certain quantity of Corn every day to each Soldier, in the like manner as the Ammunition Bread is now de∣stributed in the Armies to the Soldiers. FUGALIA, Feasts instituted in re∣membrance of the Liberty restored to the Commonwealth, after the Kings were expell'd out of Rome. These Feasts were kept in Fe∣bruary, the same day that King Tarquinius u∣perbus fled away to Porsenna. FULGUR, Lightning, a gross and sulphurous Exhalation, set on fire by the clashing of the Clouds together, and coming out with vio∣lence makes a great noise, and has extraordi∣nary effects on the Earth. The Pagans have always armed their Gods with a Thunder-bolt, and specially Jupiter, and tell us, that Vulcan and Cyclops forged the Thunderbolts in the Caves of Mount Aetna, where they placed his Forge. The Egyptians in their Hieroglyphicks took Thunder for a power, which no Creature is able to resist. Wherefore Apelles drew Alex∣ander in the Temple of Diana of Ephesus, hold∣ing a Thunderbolt in his hand, to shew the extent of his power, which no Creature was able to withstand. The opinion of the Heathens was, that Ju∣piter never struck neither Men nor inanimate Creatures with his Thunderbolt, but to pu∣nish their Crimes: and Men struck there∣with were deprived of Sepulture, and were buried only in the same place where they were found dead, according to the Law of Numa, as Festus relates. Sei fulmine occisus est, ei justa nulla fieri operteto. They covered only their Corps with Earth, at the same place where they had been struck with the Thunderbolt, as Artemiderus tells us. It was not allowed to Sacrifice to the Gods, with Wine of a Vineyard touch'd with Thun∣derbolt, and the places that were struck with it were fatal and unfortunate, till they were purified with Sacrifices, and then these places became famous, by an Altar that was erected there. And those men; who were employed to purifie Trees smitten with Thunderbolt, are called by Festus Strufertarii, Men making a Sacrifice with dough baked upon Ashes. An old table of brass found at Rome, makes good what I say. These are the words mentioned on that Table. IIII. ID. DEC. Fratres. Arval. In Luco: Deae. Diae. Via. Campana. Apud. Lap. V. Convener. Per. C. Porc. Priscum. Mag. Et Ibi. Immolav. Quòd ab Ictu. Fulminis. Arbores Luci Sacri. D. D. Attactae Arduerint. Earumque Adolefactarum. Et in eo Luco Sacro Aliae. Sint Rep ositae.
The Tenth day of December the Fratres Ar∣valis assembled at the Grove of Juno, on the great Road of Campania, five miles from Rome, by the order of C. Portius Priscus Magnus, and there sacrificed, because some Trees of the holy Grove, dedicated to the Goddess, were struck with Thunderbolt, &c. The Romans distinguished two kinds of Thunderbolts, those of the day, which they ascribed to Jupiter, and those of the night, which were in the power of the God Summa∣nus, Dium-fulgur, says Festus, Appellabant diur∣num quod putabant Jovis, ut nocturnum Summani. There was yet fulgur provorsum, which was heard betwixt day and night, and was ascri∣bed both to Jupiter and Summanus together. The Thunder was made use of to take the Augurs, about things that were to come. Some Thunders were called by the Romans Vana and Bruta, which signified nothing at all, and made more noise than did harm; the others Fatidica, which portended good and e∣vil, joy and sorrow. Of these last some were called Consiliaria, which happened while they were advising about some affair: others Aucto∣ritativa, which happened when the business was done, to give their approbation to it, and countenance it. Others were called Monitoria, which gave warning of what should be avoid∣ed. Pestifera, which threatned some evil or danger. Deprecanea, which carried with them an appearance of danger, and yet were without danger. Familiaria, which prognosticated the evil that was to befal some Family. Publica, out of which they drew predictions for thir∣ty years; and Privata, by which they fore∣told things to come only for ten years. FUNAMBULI, Dancers on the Ropes. The Art of the Dancers on the Ropes is ve∣ry ancient. Terent makes mention of them in the Prologue to Hecyra. Capitolinus, in the life of Marcus Aurelius, says, that the Emperors Marcus Aurelius, and Lucius Verus, dress'd in magnificent Habits, were Spectators of the Games ordered for their Triumphs, and that among other marks of Marcus Aurelius's kindness, he had that re∣gard for the Dancers on the Ropes, to order that Quilts should be laid along under the Rope, because of a little Boy who dancing on the Rope fell down; and from hence comes, says he, that to this present time, viz. to the time of Dioclesian, there were Nets spread un∣der the Rope. These Games were represent∣ed while Marcus Aurelius was Emperor, in the 18th year of his Tribuneship, the 164th year of our Lord. Suetonius, in the life of Galba, relates a won∣derful thing, which shews, that not only Men but also Animals were capable of being instructed in the Art of dancing on the Ropes. The 19th year of Tiberius's Empire, whic his the 32d year of our Lord, Galba being Prae∣tor, ordered the Games and Feasts called Floralia to be kept, wherein he gave new shews to the people, viz. Elephants walking on the Rope. Afterwards, in the Reign of the Emperor Nero, in the great Games instituted for the Eternity of the Empire, as Suctonius relates, a great many persons of both Sexes shewed their Skill by several sorts of Games, and a∣mong others a Roman of the Sequestrian Or∣der, sitting on an Elephant, run per catadro∣mum, i. e. on a stretched Rope, as Casaubon interprets it. Pliny in the 8th Book, c. 2. says, that Germanicus gave publick Games of Gla∣diators, wherein Elephants performed many Feasts of Activity, throwing Swords in the Air, and fighting like Gladiators, and danced in Armour, and walked on the Rope; and in the following Chapter, Pliny speaking of the docility of these Creatures, 'Tis a strange thing, says he, that there are some so, skilful as to ascend a long stretched Rope; and what is more incredible, to descend a∣gain backward, with less trouble than they went up. And if we take it from the first ages of our Lord, Petronius, Juvenal, and Quintilian speak of dancers on the Ropes; Petronius gave this description of them. Stupea suppositis tenduntur vincula lignis, Quae super acrius praetendit crura viator, Brachia distendens, gressum per inane gubernat. Before the coming of our Lord, Horace in the 2d Book of his first Epistle, makes an al∣lusion to the Dancers on the Ropes. Messala, who lived 260 years before the coming of Christ, is the first man who has rendred the word Schoenobates by that of Funambulus in Latin, as Acron relates in his Notes upon He∣race. It must be granted, that 'tis very difficult to determine precisely the time that men dan∣ced first on the Ropes, yet 'tis to be supposed that this art came into practice a while after the Games of the Stage and Comedy, which was invented in the diversions, of the Vintage, by occasion of the Leather-bottles, upon which they leapt and danced, Saliere per utres. Shews of Dancers on the Ropes were never accounted among the publick Games, and this Trade was rather looked upon as the skill and diversion of private men, than any thing else belonging to the Stage; for we never read that they received any publick reward like Players of Comedies, nor had any rule in their Art. And yet there were some pre∣sents made to them; but these Presents were
made out of the liberality of the people, and not out of the publick rewards set for them, like those that were settled for Players. Lipsius places Shews of Dancers on the Ropes in the rank of private diversions; for tho they danced in the Chorus's of publick Games, notwithstanding their Dances were not an es∣sential part of these Games, till the Emperor Carinus's time. The Cyzicenians had a singular skill in dan∣cing on the Ropes, as says an anonymous wri∣ter of Geography, who lived in the time of Canstans and Constantius, whose Manuscript is kept in the French Kings Library. This Ma∣nuscript informs us, that the Cyzicenians and their neighbours had so great a skill in leap∣ing and dancing, even on the Ropes, that they exceeded in that art all other Nations, and accounted themselves to be the first In∣venters and Masters thereof The Greeks had Dancers on the Ropes from the first institution of Scenic Plays, which were invented about the time of Icarius, the Son of Erigonus, or of Dimysius sirnamed Liber Pater, and first introduced into Athens by Theseus. The Dancers on the Ropes appeared first at Rome during the Consulate of Sulpitius Peticus and L. Stelon, the first Introducers of Plays in Rome, acted for Licinius the first time in the Isle of the River Tiber, and then represented on the Stage by the orders of the two Censors, Messala and Cassius. The Greeks called the Dancers on the Ropes by these several Names, Schoenobates, Acrobates, Orebates, and Neurobates, as we read in the first Book of Bullenger de Theatra, who tells us that there were four kinds of them. In the first rank he places those who vaulted round about the Ropes, like a Wheel about its Axle-tree, and hung themselves by the Feet or the Neck. Nicephorus Gregoras says, that he saw in his time at Constantinople, some of these Dancers tumbling about a Rope. The second kind of these Dancers were those who let themselves slide downward a∣long a Rope lying upon their Breasts, hold∣ing their Arms and Legs stretched out. Of these the Manilius Nicetas, and Vopiscus speak in the life of Carinus, saying, Neurobatem, qui ve∣lut in ventis cothurnatus ferretur, exhibuit. In the third order of these Dancers menti∣oned by the same Manilius, were ranked those who run on a Rope, being stretcht horizan∣tally slanting. The fourth kind were those who did not only walk on a bent Rope, but also leapt and played many such tricks, as a Dancer might do on firm ground at the sound of a Flute; and of these speaks Symposius, when he relates the Dances of the Funambuli. FUNDA. A Sling, an Instrument of Ropes to fling Stones with a greater violence. In former ages they tied Slings to the Balista. The Inhabitants of the Baleares Islands were formerly excellent men at Slinging. Vegetius ascribes to them the invention of the Sling, though others say that the Phaenicians found it out. Florus and Strabo tells us, that there were three kinds of Slings, longer or shorter, and that they made use of them according to the distance that they were from the Enemy. FUNDITORES, The Slingers, men who slung Stones with a Sling. The Slin∣gers were part of the Roman Militia. FUNEBRIS ORATIO, A Fune∣ral Oration. The Roman custom was to have Funeral Speeches at the burying of the great men of Rome, spoken from the Rostra in the Forum Romanum, where the Funeral Parade stood. The man chosen to make the Speech published the Praises of the Dead, and began with the greatness of his Ancestors, the an∣cientness of his Family, the sweetness of his Manners, his Liberality, and the Services he had rendered to the Commonwealth, both in time of Peace and of War. The Children or the Relations performed often this duty, or the Senate appointed some Eloquent Orator to perform the same. Augustus being but twelve years old made a publick Speech to praise his Grandmother, and being Emperor he made another to praise Germanicus his Ne∣phew. Tiberius, says Suetonius, made a Speech at nine years of age in honour of his Father, and few years after he was raised to the Im∣perial Dignity, he pronounced a Funeral, Speech in praise of his Son. Caligula having not yet put on the Toga Viriliis, made a pub∣lick discourse in commendation of his Grand-mother then dead, and Nero made also an O∣ration to praise the Emperor Claudius his Pre∣decessor. Valerius Publicola, was the first man who made a Funeral Speech at Rome; for Polybius relates, that Junius Brutus his Colleague in the Consulship, having been killed at the Battle against the Toscans, he ordered his Corps to be brought on a Bed in the publick place, and he went up into the Rofira, and set forth in a discourse to the people, the Atchievements of that great man. We read in Alexander ab Alexandro, and in Plutarch, that this custom was practised, and that Quintus Fabius Maximus spoke the Funeral Oration of Scipio, and of his own Children. We learn of Livy, that this honour was al∣so granted to the Roman Matrons after their death, because they had formally offered to part with their Necklaces and Jewels in a∣time that Money was scarce, and in ac∣knowledgment of their Piety, it was order∣ed,
that Funeral Speeches in their commen∣darian should be allowed to them. Popilia was the first Roman Lady who re∣ceived that honour, and Crassus her Son made her Funeral Oration. Suetonius reports, that Julius Caesar being then Quaestor, pronounced a publick discourse of praise in the place cal∣led Rostra, in honour of his Aunt Julia, and Cornelia his Wife. FUNERATICUM, The Funeral charges, which amounted sometimes to ex∣cessive summs of Money. Nero spent for the Funerals of Poppea more Cinnamon and Cassia, than Arabia was able to produce in a whole year; and Suetonius says, that the Fune∣rals of Nero came to a hundred thousand Se∣sterces, which according to the supputation of Mursius amounts to seven hundred and fifty thousand pounds. FUNICULUS, An ancient measure of the Aegyptians, being a distance or the space of a place containing sixty furlongs in length, which are about seven thousand five hundred paces, or 6 miles and a quarter of English measure. FUNUS, Funerals, Obsequies, Burial Ceremonies. The eighth day after the death being over, a publick Cryer gave notice to the people of the time of the Funerals in these words. N. QUIRIS LETHO DATUS EST: ADEXEQUIAS QUIBUS EST COMMODUMIRE, JAM TEM∣PUS EST: OLLUS EX AEDI∣BUS EFFERTUR. Such a Citizen is dead; those who have time to go to his Fu∣nerals, 'tis time, they are ready to carry a∣way the Corps out of the House. The Funerals thus published by the pub∣lick Cryer, were called Indictivae, but this was practised but at the Funerals of the Empe∣rors or Persons of quality; and to honour them the better, they gave Games and Shews to the people, to wit, fights of Gladiators and Horse-races. Men are still thus invited in France at the Funerals of Kings, Princes, So∣veraign Courts, and other Ministers of State, by fourscore sworn Cryers, together with the Great Masters of the Ceremonies. The Ancient Romans had still other Fune∣rals, where no body was invited, called Sim∣pludiarea or Simpliludiarea funera, then the Fu∣neral Parade was only attended by Vaulters and Buffoons, called Ludii and Corvitores. Some hired Women attending the Fune∣rals, named Praeficae, cryed and mourned, singing sad and mournful Songs, intermixt with the praises of the dead, and moved other Women to imitate them, and some other men called Pantomimi, counterfeiting the mo∣tions, actions, and the voice of the deceased person. Whereupon Suetomius relates a plea∣sant fancy of a Buffoon called Fao, who be∣ing invited to a Funeral, came masked with a Vizard and in a disguise, like the Emperor Vespatian, who being taxed with convetousness, and counterfeiting him according to custom, asked aloud before the Assembly, those who had the management of the Funerals, how much the charges of the Burial came to? and when he heard that it amounted to a hundred Sesterces, which is about seven hundred and fifty pounds, he cried out, that if they would give him that summ of Money, they might throw him after his death where they should think fit. The Designator, or Master of the Ceremo∣nies, having disposed all in a good order, the Funeral Parade began to march with great pomp along the great Streets and Cross-ways of Rome; then stopt in the place of the Rosira, where a Funeral Speech was made in honour of the deceased person. They carried before the Corps vessels full of Perfumes and preci∣ous Liquors, to throw into the wood-pile when the Corps was burning, to prevent its bad smell. Afterwards Warlike men march∣ed, carrying the Standards and Spoils of the Enemies, and other Trophies of Arms; as Draughts of conquer'd Cities, names of the subdued Nations, Titles of the Laws made by them, Military Presents, and other badges of Honour. They carried also the Effigies of their Ancestors, made of Wax of imbossed Work, which they kept in Niches at the en∣try of their Houses, and crowned them with Garlands of Flowers, upon certain days of the year. Then followed the Priests and Religions Orders; after them the Magistrates in moum∣ing, wearing the badges of their Magistracy, as also the badges of the offices of the dead. The Corps dressed in a habit suitable to the condition of the dead, was carried upon a Bed of State adorned with Ivory, and cover∣ed with a rich Carpet. Besides this Bed of State, there were many other Beds adord with Garlands and Crowns of Flowers, and the Images of the Ancestors of the deceased person were tied to their Beds; six thousand of these Beds were carried at the Funerals of the Dictator Silla, and six hundred at the Funeral of M. Marcellus, the Son of Octavia, Sister to Augustus, says Valeri Maximus. After this Funeral Bed, carried by the near∣est Relations of the dead, or by his affran∣chised men, then marched those appointed to mourn, by the deceased person, all dressed in long black Gowns edged with Scarlet, at∣tended by Torch-bearers and Lictors march∣ing before them.
We read in Cornelius Tacitus, that the great Magistrates of Rome carried sometimes the Funeral Bed of Emperors and Dictators; for the Bed of Sylla was carried by Senators and Vestal Virgins; that of Paulus Aemilius, by the Macedonian Ambassadors then at Rome; that of Metellus, by his seven Children, of whom two had been Consuls, and two others had obtain'd the Honour of the Triumph; and Trebius being dead in the Office called Edile, was carried to the Wood-pile on the shoulders of the Roman People, because he had sold the Corn cheap in a year of want. The mourning Men were followed by Wo∣men, bemoaning and complaining all along the way, and commonly led by the Mother, Daughter, or Wife of the deceased person, all dressed in Mourning, walking along with dishevelled Hairs, and their Face covered with a Veil; and the funeral pomp was closed by the People. In the time of the Emperors, the Girls attended the Funerals of their Fa∣thers dressed in white Gowns, the Head un∣covered, and their Hairs dishevell'd; on the contrary, the Boys had their Heads covered at the Funerals of their Fathers. Plutarch tells us for reason of this custom, that the Boys were to honour their Fathers as Gods, to whom the Romans sacrificed standing, and their Heads covered; and that the Girls should mourn for them as for mortal Men. The Funeral Parade was attended with many Torches, and by Men playing upon Musical Instruments, as Flutes, Cornets, Drums, and Clarions, sounding sad and mourn∣ful Tunes, when they destributed Largesses of Specie or Money to the People. All these Ceremonies were observed but at the Funeral Pomps of great Men of Rome; for the people were caried to the Wood-pile, without all these preparations in a Coffin, by the common Bearers or Sextons, called Ves∣pillones and Sandapilarii, and there burnt, with∣out much ceremony. Many Men ordered by their last Will, that they should be buried without Ceremonies, as M. Aemilius Lepidus, who ordered that he should be carried to the Grave on a plain Bed. Those who had performed great Acts for the service of the Common-wealth, were buried at publick Charges, as Valerius Publicola, the protector of the Roman Liberty, who had triumphed three times over the Enemies. There were also Funerals called Imaginaria, says Spartianus, i. e. Obsequies in Effigies, because the Corps of the dead was not there, but on∣ly his Effigies. Antiquity has accounted burial of the Dead so sacred and honourable, that the in∣vention of burial was attributed to one of their Gods, viz. to the God called by the Greeks Pluto, and the Latins Dis or Summanus, as we learn from Diodorus Siculus, in the sixth Book of his Antiquities, c. 15. to shew what Veneration they should have for the Funerals of the dead, which had been taught by a soveraign Divinity. Wherefore, when Numa Pompilius, a wise and prudent Legislator, reformed the Reli∣gion of the Romans, he not only received and approved of Funeral Ceremonies, as being ho∣ly and commendable, but ordered that the Pontiffs should take care of them, and teach them to those who should have occasion for the same. By the Pontifical Laws, it was not allowed to the High Priest to look upon a dead Corps, but if by chance he had seen one in his way, he was bound by the law, before he went any further, to throw some Earth upon it, or bury it. And all the Nations of the Earth have always accounted burial one of the chiefest duties of Religion, which they denied nei∣ther to Friends nor Enemies, as we learn of Historians; for Vegetius, l. 2. de Re Milit. cap. 20. tells us, that each Legion had a Purse in the hands of the Ensign-bearer, wherein each Soldier put a piece of Money, to contribute his portion towards the burial of the Soldiers of that Legion, who died in War; we see also by the Testimonies, both of Tully in the Oration for Milo, and of Cornelius Tacitus l. 1. that the Generals who were victorious, al∣lowed their Enemies to bury the Corps of their dead Soldiers, or else buried them them∣selves. We read in Valerius Maximus, l. 1. c. 6. and in Livy l. 22. that Hannibal the chief Enemy to the Romans, having defeated and killed with his own hand, near the Perusian Lake, the Consul Gaius Flaminius and fifteen thou∣sand Soldiers, ordered his Men to seek for the Corps of the Consul, which he honoura∣bly buried, and rendered the like honours to many others, mentioned by Valerius Maxi∣mus. After the death of Hanno, General of the Carthaginian Army, the Consul Lucius Cornelius made him a funeral pomp, and buried, his Corps with great honour. FURCA, A Fork. Formerly they made the vanquished pass under the Yoke, made in the form of a Gallows, otherwise cal∣led Fork, as the Sanmites made the Romans pass at Furcae Caudinae. The Slaves and other Malefactors carried their Forks or Gallows to the place of Execution, and in that condi∣tion they were so grievously whipt, that they died sometimes under the lashes; and other∣wise, they were often nailed upon the very same Cross and Gallows they had carried themselves; wherefore the Slaves were called Furcifcri, i. e. a great Rogue, who deserves
hanging for his Crimes. Justus Lipsius gives an accornt of these Matters, l. 3. de Cruce. FURIAE, The Furies. This name is derived from the fury which they inspire. The Greeks call them Erinnyes, from , discordia mentis. The opinion of Vossius is, that Fury might be derived from the Hebrew Fara, i. e. vindicta. But 'tis more likely that Erin∣nyes come from , i. e. malè facere. There were three Furies, Tisiphone, Alecto and Megera; the Etymology of these names comes from the Greek , ultio caedis; , quietis nescia; , odiosa; Tzetzes is Author of these derivations. 'Tis very likely, that at the beginning Men intended to worship Justice the revenger of Crimes, by the Name of Furies; but that Poets have still added some circumstances thereunto, proper to represent the horrid Ex∣ecutioners of this Justice. For Pausanias says, that near the Areopagus of Athens, there was a Temple consecrated to some Goddess, called Severae, , whom Hesiod calls Erin∣nyes; and that Eschilus the Poet is the first Man, who has represented them with Ser∣pents tied about them; in fine, that the Sta∣tues of these Goddesses, and all others of the subterranean Gods, which are placed in that Temple, have nothing dreadful to look on. This Historian tells us also, that the Statues of these Goddesses Severae, were set up some∣where else, with the Statues of Jupiter, Ceres, Minerva and Proserpina. And assures in some other place, that Ceres herself was called Erin∣nyes, because she was transported with fury against Neptune, when he attempted her Cha∣stity; à verbo , quod furere Arcadibus est. In fine, he speaks of the Temple of the Maniae, , who are (as he fancies) the Euminides and Furiae. And relates, that they appeared dressed in black Cloaths to Orestes, after he had murthered his Mother; but when the time of his fury was over, they shew'd themselves to him in white dresses, whereupon he built a Temple to these white Goddesses. Some Historians have observed, that the Areopagitae had the Statues of the Goddesses Se∣verae placed near their Tribunal, and that the Priests ordain'd to attend the service of these Goddesses, (Demosthenes was one of them) were chosen among the Areopagitae. Homer had mentioned the Erinnyes before He∣siod; and has represented them in one place of his Book, like the revengers of the wrong done to the poor. Virgil has described them, according to the Idea that Eschilus had of them, Continuo sontes ultrix accincta flagello Tisiphone quatit insultans, torvosque sinistrâ Intentans angues, vocat agmina saeva sororum. Horace tells us very wisely, that the Furies do not begin to torment the mind of Man after the Crime is perpetrated only, but also when the resolution is taken to commit it, and the design is executed. An tu reris cum occissâ insenuisse parente? Ac non antè malis dementem actum Furiis, quàm In matris jugulo ferrum tepefecit acutum? FURINA. The Goddess of Thieves or Robbers, otherwise called Laverna. They had consecrated a Wood to her, and institu∣ted Feasts in her honour, called Furinales. FURNALIA or FURINALIA, Feasts kept in honour of the Goddess Furius, the 25th day of July: We read in the Calen∣dar Furrinalia. FUSCINA, The Trident of Neptune, with three points. The word Fuscina signifies also an Iron Fork or a tagged Fork, such as are used to remove Dung. FUTILE, A Vessel with a wide mouth and a narrow bottom, used in ancient Sacri∣fices to hold the lustral water for the purifi∣cations. This Vessel is called Futile, because what was put into it, was easily spilt, ha∣ving but a narrow bottom to set on the ground. G. G. Is but a diminution of C, as Quintilius tells us. Wherefore they have a great affinity together, for of , we make Gubernator, and of necotium, negotium. And Quintilian records, that in the words Gains, Gneius, it was not perceived if it was a C or a G. From whence it comes that of Centum were formed quadringinta, quingenta; and of porri∣cere, a word used in sacrifices, was made por∣rigere. The common opinion is, that G was in∣vented but after the first Carthaginian War, be∣cause on the Pillar that Duillius erected then, C is always found instead of the G; MACESTRATOS, LECIO∣NES, CARTHACINENSES, PUCNANDO. Which can't be well understood, but by pronouncing the C like a K. The pronounciation of G before the E and the I, is now very much softned, for 'tis pronounced in Regis and Rege, as Regent and Regir is pronounced in the French Tongue; but in former Ages 'tis every where sounded hard, as in Rego.
They ask a question about the Letter G, whether the Romans pronounced the G before the N, as the French do in these words Agnez, Magnifique, Espagnol, &c. But in all likelihood the Romans pronounced the G not as the French do in the abovesaid words, and that the G in Agnus was pro∣nounced by them, as it is in Agger, for the other pronunciation is so particular and dif∣ferent from the common pronunciation of G, the Ancient Writers had otherwise never made use of it. And 'tis to be observed, that the G is so little pronounced in these words Agnez and the like, that it doth but denote a liquid N, as the same Letter G shews in the Italian tongue the liquid L, Figlliola, Daughter; wherefore the Spaniards write Segnor without a G, draw∣ing only a little stroke upon the N, to shew that 'tis a liquid Letter, and that it receives that pronunciation, writing thus Senor, and pronouncing Segnor. And Ramus in his French Grammar marks this liquid N in French only with a little comma over it, instead of join∣ing the G to it. Here arises still another difficulty, namely, to know if the Letter N is changed by the Greeks into T in some words, as , and , &c.  is then pronounced like an N. For it seems, says Honricus Stephanus, that 'tis an Errour of the Copists, who have made the  a little too broad in the joyning the small Letters, and have made a  of it. From whence comes that in the M S. written in ca∣pital Letters, like those he has made use of to make his Thesaurus, these whole words are found with an N, , ANKTPA, and the like. For, says he, it seems absurd to say that N was changed into , to the end that  might be pronounced like an N. Wherefore Scaliger tells us, that if we read sometimes these words with an N, then we must be sure that it is a fault of the Copists, who thought to express this pronunciation the better by that Character, which pronun∣ciation, as Vossius says, should require rather some new and particular character. The Latins had something like that in their Tongue, which Nigidius in Aulus Gallius, calls a false N, as in the words Anguis, Ancera and others. Wherefore Varro, as 'tis related by Priscian, affirms that Attius and the Ancient Writers wrote these words with a double GG, like the Greeks, Aggulus, Aggens, and the like. The Letter G among the Ancients signifi∣ed 400, and when there was a dash of a Pen over it, then it denoted forty thousand. GABALUS, A Cross or Gallows of the Ancients. GALANTHIS, The waiting Maid of Alcmena, who deliver'd her Mistriss from the Inchantments of Juno, who would not suffer her to be delivered of a Child, whom she had got by Jupiter. But Galanthis percei∣ving the Sorcery of Juno, came running to her, and said, her Mistriss was brought to bed, whereupon Juno unfastened her Charms. Notwithstanding, Juno having afterwards dis∣covered that she had been cozened, in revenge thereof changed Galanthis into a Weasel, who brings forth her young at her Mouth, where∣with she had offended in telling a Lye, to procure the lying in of Alcmena, to whom Juno bore hatred. GALATEA, The Daughter of Jupiter Celtes, wherefore she was called Celtina, and Wife to Hercules of Libya, with whom she reigned 35 years in Gaul. GALATEA, A Sea-Nymph, whom Polyphemus the Cyclops loved: she was called Galatea because of her whiteness, for  signifies Milk. GALATES, The Son of Hercules of Libya, and Galatea the Daughter of Jupiter Celtes, reigned in Gaul, in the year of the World 2274. 'Tis recorded that the Gauls and the Greeks assisted him in the Conquest of some Provinces of Asia, and that Country was called Galatia, or Gallo-Graecia, as Diodorus Siculus and Berosus tell us. GALATIA, A Country of Asia Minor, which took its Name from the Gauls, who joined with the Greeks, came to inhabit this part of the World under the command of their King Galates, in the time of Pyrrhus King of Epirus. The chiefest Cities of that Coun∣try are Ancyra and Synope. The Inhabitants thereof were accounted to be Cowards and Effeminate, like all the rest of the Nations of Asia. It was a custom among them to throw Letters into the Wood-pile where the Corps were burnt, and they fancied that they should read them in Hell. GALBA SERVIUS SULPI∣TIUS, was chosen Emperor in the room of Nero, by the Army commanded by him, being then seventy years old. He attributed his Origine to Jupiter, and Pasiphae the Wife of Minos King of Crete. He was of a brawny Countenance, a wrinkled Forehead, a bald Head, and a Hawk-nose. His Debaucheries made him Gouty, the Joints of his Feet and Hands were knotty to that degree, that he was not able to hold a Book, or to put off a Shoe. His Hawk-nose gave him the Counte∣nance of an Eagle the King of Birds. Au∣gustus observing that mark, while he was sit∣ting at Table with him, foretold that he should one time or another enjoy the Sove∣raign Command; but that he should but in a manner taste of the Empire. That will come to pass, said he, when Mules shall not be barren.
A long time after this Discouse, this pro∣digy was fulfill'd. The Historians tax him with a sordid covetousness, and a slavish sub∣mission to three Favourites, who governed, and made hast to make their Fortune under an old Prince. However, some Writers re∣late, that he was only covetous before his coming to the Imperial Government; and that as soon as he was Emperor, he was a li∣beral Prince, bestowing Largesses upon his Subjects, and granting them Priviledges. He was the first Emperor chosen by the Soldiers, tho he was not of the Family of the Caesars; and adopted Piso a young Man of great hopes, and having brought him to the Camp, he declared the choice he had made to the Army; but spoke not a word of bestowing Largesses upon the Soldiers; whereupon Otho caballed, and got both Galba and his Successor murthered, after he had reigned seven Months the tenth day of January, in the year 69, be∣ing then 73 years of Age. GALEA, A Helmet, a Head-piece, which covered the whole Face like a Mask. GALERUS, A Cap made of skin in the form of a Helmet. This Cap was for the use of Mercury and the Priests of Jupiter, cal∣led Flamenidalis, who wore a white Cap made of the skin of a white Sheep, sacrificed to Jupiter, called Albogalerus. GALIENUS, Gallen, born at Perga∣mus, Physician to M. Aurelius, and Lucius Ve∣rus. He was very famous in Physick, and brought it to a method, now followed by the greatest part of Physicians; yet many Men, who are not carried away by the multitude and prejudice of opinions, condemn and re∣ject his Method, as being unfit to cure ex∣traordinary Distempers. He was an Enemy both to Jews and Chri∣stians, blaming them for believing very hard things without any demonstration. Certainly he was a very great Man, and so excellent in his Art, that having conveyed away a very dan∣gerous defluction by letting of Blood, and cured the Falling-sickness by tying the Root of Piony about the neck, he was taxed of Magick, and forced to quit Rome, and died at Pergamus, the place where he was born. Some Writers tell us that he was then seventy years old, and o∣thers a hundred and four. It appears by two Commentaries of his own Books, that he had writ two hundred Volumes, which were burnt in the Fire of the Temple of Peace. GALLIA, See after Gallienus after∣wards. GALLICAE, A kind of Shoes, that the ancient Gauls were used to wear, like Wood or Cork Galoches, worn by the Coun∣try people of Gaul in rainy weather; the up∣per part of these Galoches was made of Lea∣ther, or Leather Straps, to keep them fast to the Feet, like the Sandals of Begging Friars. GALLIENUS PUBLIUS LI∣CINIUS IGNATIUS, The Son of Valerianus, associated by him to the Em∣pire. They reigned together about seven or eight years, till Valerianus was taken by Sapor King of Persia. During his reign, the Empire was oppressed with several Calamities, which he ascribed to the persecution of the Chri∣stians: wherefore he recall'd the Edicts made against them. This Prince was given to all kinds of Crimes. Claudius, who com∣manded the Army against the Nation call'd Daci, not being able to bear any longer with his infamous Debaucheries, caus'd him to be murthered at Milan, together with his Bro∣thers and Children, and seiz'd upon the Em∣pire. GALLIA, The Gauls. By the name of Gallia, Caesar means only the Gauls, which comprehends three kinds of People, viz. Belgi, Celti or Galli and Aquitani. This Gaul is called by Writers, who lived a little after the time of Caesar, Gallia Comata. Here we must consider all that might be understood by the name of Gaul, and observe its chiefest di∣visions and distinctions, that conduce to the understanding the Commentaries of Caesar. The name of Gaul was extended on both sides of the Alps. The Country which is be∣tween the Alps and Mount Appenninus on both sides of the River Po, is called Gallia, Cis-Al∣pina, and sometimes Gallia Togata; because in regard to the Romans it is within the Alps; Togata, because the Inhabitants there∣of, tho' they were Colonies of the Gauls be∣yond the Alps, did wear the Roman Habit, called Toga Romana. The Lands which are beyond the Alps, in regard to the Romans, and between the Alps and the Pyrennean Moun∣tains, the Mediterranean Sea, the Ocean and the River Rhine, are properly Gaul, cal∣led by Caesar and other Writers Transalpina; because it is beyond the Alps in regard to the City of Rome. This Gaul thus called, is still divided in two parts; the nearest part to Italy is called by Caesar, Provincia, and some∣times Provincia Romanorum, or Provincia Ulte∣rior, in respect to the Gauls within the Alps, call'd Provincia Citerior. The other part of the Transalpine Gaul, is called plainly by Caesar, Gallia, which he subdued to the Roman Em∣pire, and has divided himself in three parts, one inhabited by the Nation called Belgi, the other by the Aquitani, and the third by the Celti, whom the Romans called Galli. All the Writers since Caesar call this Gaul, Gallia Co∣mata, the hairy Gaul, because the Inhabi∣tants thereof wore long Hair; and the other part, which is nearer to Italy and Spain,
was called Gallia Braccata, because the Inha∣bitants thereof wore Trowses. Gaul is divided in three parts, that which is on the side of Italy is called Gallia Togata; the second, which is between Italy and Spain, is called Gallia Braccata; and the third, which is between the River Rhine and Spain, and from the Alps to the Ocean, is called Gallia Comata. Caesar divides likewise Gallia Comata into three parts, viz. Gallia Celtica, extended from the Rivers Marne and Sein, to the Rivers Rhone and Garoone, and from the Rhine to the Ocean. Gallia Belgica begins at the Frontiers of Gallia Celtica, and is extended to the Rhine, drawing towards its mouth. Gallia Aquitani∣ca or Gasconia is included between the River Garonne and the Pyrenean Hills, along the Coasts of the Ocean. The first is oppo∣site to the North; the second to the North and the East, and the third looks to the West or the North. GALLI, The Gauls. This Nation is very superstitious, and when in great dan∣gers either of War or Sickness, they sacrifice Men, or make vow to sacrifice some; which they perform by their Druides: for they think that God can't be otherwise appeased, and that one Mans Life can't be redeem'd, but by anothers laying down his for him. In some places there are Idols of Wicker of a prodigious bigness, which are fill'd up with Men, and often with Malefactors; then they set them on fire, and sometimes for want of Malefactors, they burn therein innocent Men. Of all the Gods, they especially worship Mercury, as the Inventer of Arts, and Patron of Travellers and Merchants; they have ma∣ny Statues of him among them. After Mer∣cury, the most respected by them are Apollo, Mars, Jupiter and Minerva, and they have the same opinion of them as the other Nations have; viz. That Apollo cures Distempers; Mi∣nerva presides over Manufactures; Mars is the soveraign disposer of War; and Jupiter is the Soveraign of the Gods. Before they engage the Enemy, they devote him the Spoils, and sacrifice to him all the Cattle after they have obtained the Victory: The remainder of the Booty is brought together, and consecrated in Temples and other publick places, where it lyes in heaps, and 'tis forbidden to take away any thing of it, under very severe pu∣nishment, or to conceal any part thereof after the Fight is over. They account themselves the posterity of Pluto, according to the tradition of their Druides or Priests, wherefore they reckon the time by Nights, and not by Days, as we do; and if they reckon the Months or the Years, or solemnize their Birth-day, they begin al∣ways by Night. Their Funerals are as stately as their Coun∣try can afford; they burn with the Corps of the dead, all that was most dear to him, even the Beasts, and formerly the Slaves them∣selves, and their freed Men. Their Chil∣dren never appear in publick in the presence of their Fathers, till they are fit to bear Arms. And when they marry they are obliged to bring to the Commonalty an equivolent of their Wives Portion, which is kept with the Revenues arising by it for the Survivor. The Husband has power over the life of his Wife and Children. GALLI CYBILES, The Priests of the Goddess Cybele. They were called by that name because of a River in Phrygia, the water whereof made those who drank of it mad. These Priests were instituted to offer Sacrifices to this Goddess at the sound of Drums and Kettle-Drums, running up and down like Mad-men, holding Knives in their Hands, and cutting therewith the Flesh of their Arms and Thighs. They went begging from door to door, and were wont to carry their Goddess upon an Ass with their Cloaths. The chief of them was called Archigallus. GALLUS VIBIUS TREBONI∣ANUS, An Emperor who succeeded De∣cius, and was chosen by the Soldiers, about the year of Rome 251. He chose his Son Vo∣lusianus for his Colleague to the Empire. The Soldiers murthered them both at Terny in Italy, in the year 254, having reigned then two years. GALLUS CAESAR was the Son of Julius Constantius, Brother to Constantine the Great, and of Galla, and Brother to Julian the Apostate. He was carefully brought up and instructed in the Holy Scripture, and took Orders with his Brother, both of them per∣forming the Office of Priest in the Church. The Emperor Constantius chose Gallus his Co∣zen Caesar, in the year 351, the fifteenth day of May, and gave him his Sister Constantina for Wife, then Annibalianus's Widow, and suppressed the superstitious worship of the Oracle of Apollo near Antioch, called Daphnae, and placed the Bones of the Martyr Babylas in the room thereof. But Constantius jealous of him, caused his head to be cut off, three years after he had made him Caesar. GALLUS, A young man, Confident of Mars's Love with Venus. Mars having one day commanded him to keep Centry at the door of his Mistriss, lest Vulcan her Husband should surprize them together; this young man fell asleep, and both Venus and Mars were surpriz'd by the Sun lying together, who presently ac∣quainted her Husband with the same; but
Vulcan having some time before hung imper∣ceptible Nets about his Bed, they were both caught therein. And Mars to take his revenge of the young-man, turned him into a Cock. This Fable is thus reported by Lucian in his Dream. Mars had a fine Boy, confidant of his Love; and when he went to Bed to Venus, he left him at the Door to awake him before day light: the pretty Lad being fallen asleep, the Sun discovered the whole Mystery, and Vulcan caught the two Lovers in his Nets; whereupon Mars out of revenge, turned this young-man into a Cock, who keeps still the Crest of the Head-piece, and the Spurs he had on when he was changed: and since, his posterity, to repair him in his Honour, proclaim the coming of the day. GANIMEDES. The Son of Tros King of Troy. Jupiter being transformed into an Eagle, took him away into Heaven for his Beauty, and made him his Cup-bearer instead of Hebe and Vulcan, and delivered him to Mercury, to make him drink Immortality, and teach him how to present the Cup. GEHENNA, Rack, Torment. Hieronymus relates the true Origine of this word, when he tells us, there was an Idol of Baal near Je∣rusalem, in the Valley called Tophet, which signifies a Drum, Tympanum, lest the People should hear the cries of the Children that were thrown into the fire, when they sacri∣ficed them unto the Idol. This Valley was also called Ge-ben-Ennon, and by abreviation Geenhon, from Ge, which signifies a Valley, and Ennon, which comes from Naham, that signifies to groan. Some are of opinion that it was Moloch the God of the Ammonites, to whom they sacrificed their own Children. Wherefore Hell, the place of eternal fire, is called Gehenna. The Ancient Writers did not make use of this word, and it was first used in the Gospel. GEMELLI, A Constellation, and one of the twelve Signs of the Zodiack, called Castor and Pollux the Sons of Laeda. GEMONIAE Scalae, or GEMONIJ Gradus, A Gibbet or Gallows. Vossius upon the Verb gemo tells us, that there was a Well at Rome with Stairs to go down, wherein they did cast the Bodies of Malefactors, hav∣ing dragged them to that place with a Hook. According to the opinion of Suetonius, they are rather Gallows, where they hanged for a while the Corps of the Malefactors, after they had drawn them with a Hook, from the place of Execution to these Gallows; and then drawing them again with a Hook, they cast them into the Tiber; Tandem apud Gemoni∣as minutissimis ictibus excarnificatus atque confectus est, & inde unco tractus in Tiberim. This Histo∣rian seems to intimate that they were tied, there, before they were dead. These Gal∣lows stood in the fourteenth Ward of the City. GENETHLIUS, An Epithet given to Jupiter, because Poets represent him presi∣ding over the Generation and Nativities of Children. GENIUS, A Divinity, whom ancient Phllosophers esteemed to be the Son of God, and the Father of Men. They allowed a Ge∣nius or Intelligence to each Province, Town and Person, who took care of the Affairs of this World. They allowed also Genius's to Forests, Fountains, Trees, Eloquence, Sciences, and Joy, and it appears by several Medals, particularly one of Nero, GENIO AUGUSTI, GENIO SENATUS, GENIO P. ROMANI, GENIO EXERCITUUM, Upon these Medals the figure of God Genius is represented veiled at the middle of the Body, holding with one hand a Horn of Plenty, and with the other a Cup for the Sacrifice; and before the Sta∣tue there was an Altar, and a Fire thereon. Which agrees with the description that Am∣mianus Marcellinus has given us of the same, in the 25th Book of the Emperor Julianus's Deeds. Censorinus in his Book intituled de Die Natali, says, that as soon as Men are born, they are put under the tuition of God Genius; and Euclid tells us, that Men have two Genins's, one good and the other bad. Plutarch relates in the life of Brutus, that he saw by night in a Dream a Fantome, by the light of a Lamp that was in his Chamber, and having asked him who he was, he answer'd him, that he was his bad Genius. Each person offered Sacrifice every year to his Genius, and particularly upon Birth-days, with leven and salted Dough; and some∣times with a Pig two months old, and scattered Flowers and sprinkled Wine to him: and the Sacrifice being over, they made a great Feast for their Friends, and thus the Comedi∣ans was called Genio indulgere, or Genio volupe facere. In the beginning it was not permitted to swear by the Genius of the Prince; but after∣wards the most solemn Oaths, were those that were sworn by the Genius of the Empe∣ror; and Suetonius assures, that Caligula put many to death, because they refused to swear by his Genius. Apuleius has writ a Treatise of the Genius or evil Spirit of Socrates. The name of Ge∣nius among some who call themselves Chri∣stians, is given to the good Angels attending Men or States.
The Pagans rank'd Venus, Priapus, and Genius among the number of the Gods, who are intrusted with the care of Men's Genera∣tion. By these three Divinities, the Heathens un∣derstood nothing else but the fecundity of na∣ture, that brings forth every day so many living Creatures; as Festus says, Genius est Deo∣rum filius & parens hominum, ex quo homines gignuntur; & propterea Genius meus nominatur, quia me genuit; the Genius is the Son of the Gods and the Father of Men, and my Geni∣us is called Genius, because he has begotten me. This worship was rendered to Nature, not only because of the celestial Intelligence, who presides over our Generation; but also, because of the fecundity of the Stars and Elements, giving Being to so many Crea∣tures. Censorinus affirms, that there was no bloody Sacrifice offered to Genius; wherefore Persi∣us says, funde merum Genio; for Men would not shed Blood upon their birth-day. He is called Genius, because he is the God, who is intrusted with the care of Men as soon as they are born. And this Author tells us still, that this Genius never leaves Men, from the first instant of their life to the last; and has a very great Authority over them; and that some Men confounded him with the God Lar, and admitted two Genius's, in Houses where Husband and Wife lived toge∣ther: Eundem esse Genium & Larem multi veteres memoriae prodiderunt; hunc in not maximam, quini∣mo omnem habere potestatem creditum est. Non nulli binos Genios, in its duntaxat domibus quae essent maritae, colendos putaverunt. The Tabula Caebetis says, that Genius directs those who come into the World the way they should observe; that many forget the Directions; but that yet he gives them warn∣ing, that they are not to mind the Goods of Fortune, which might be taken away from them: Monet Genius id Fortuna esse ingenium, ut & quae dederit, eripiat; and tells them still, that Men, who don't hearken to his precepts, come to a bad end. GERMANIA. See after GERMA∣NICUS. GERMANICUS, The Son of Dru∣sus, and Nephew to the Emperor Tiberius. He married Agrippina, the Grand-Daughter of Augustus, and had six Children by her, viz. three Sons and three Daughters, Nero, Drusus, Caligula, Agrippina, Drusilla and Livia. In the time he commanded six Legions in Germany, he refused the Empire that the Legions offer∣ed him after the death of Augustus. He took the sirname of Germanicus, because he had sub∣dued Germany, and triumphed over the Ger∣mans; at last he died in Syrla, being poisoned by Piso's order, and was lamented by all the Inhabitants of Syria and Neighbouring Pro∣vinces thereof. A Hero, says Tacitus, wor∣thy of respect, both for his discourse and pre∣sence, whose Fortune was without Envy, his Reputation without blemish, and his Ma∣jestick Countenance without arrogance; his Funeral Pomp, tho' without splendor and great show, was yet Illustrious, only by the commemoration of his Virtues, and celebra∣tion of his Glory. Some more nicely observing his Life, his Age, his Gate, and the Circumstances of his Death, have compared him to Alexander the Great. Both fine Men, of good meen and great birth, who died something more than thirty years old, by a Conspiracy of their own Men in a foreign Country. Before his Corps was reduced to Ashes, it was exposed in the publick place of Antioch, which was appointed for his Burial. The Senate ordain∣ed great Honours to his Memory; viz. That his Name should be solemnized in the Salian Hymn; that in all the places, where the Priests of Augustus should meet, they should set him an Ivory Chair, and a Crown of Oak upon it; that a Statue of Ivory should be carried for him, at the opening of the Circian Games; that no body should be chosen Au∣gur or Pontiff in his room, but that a Tri∣umphal Arch should be erected to his Memo∣ry at Rome, Mount Amanus in Syria, and on the Banks of the River Rhine, and that his Atchievements should be engraven upon them, with this Inscription, That he Died for the Commonwealth; That a Monument should be fet up for him in the City of Antioch, where his Corps was burnt, and a Tribunal at Epi∣daphne, where he was dead. They ordered also his Picture, drawn in a golden Shield of an extraordinary bigness, should be set up amongst the Orators. The Squadron of the Youth was called by Equestrian Order, the Squadron of Germanicus; and they ordered, that at the Ides of July, his Effigies should be carried in State at the muster of the Equestri∣an Order. GERMANIA, Germany: Some Wri∣ters say that the word of Germany is but of late, and comes from those Men who went first into the Gauls, and were called Tungri or Germani, says Tacitus; or from the German word Gaar-Mannen, which signifies Germany. V. Alemannia. GERMANI, The Germans. See Ale∣manni. GERYON, King of Spain, represent∣ed by Poets with three Bodies, because he reigned over three Kingdoms, and had fed some Oxen he loved very much, having a
Dog with three Heads, and a Dragon with seven to look after them. Hercules by the Command of Earisteus slew him, and deliver∣ed his Body to be devoured by his own Oxen, as Diomedes was before eaten by his own Horses. GIGANTES, The Giants, the Sons of the Earth, begot, according to the Fable, of the Blood that came out of the Genital parts of Goelus, that Saturn cut off; for the Earth, to be revenged of Jupiter, who had struck down the Titans, brought forth Mon∣sters of a prodigious shape to attack him, and drive him out of Heaven. To this purpose they met in Thessalia, in the Fields called Phle∣graei, and there heaping up Mountains upon Mountains, they scaled and battered Heaven with great pieces of Rocks. Among others there was Enceladus, Briareus and Egcon, with a hundred Hands flinging Rocks, which they took out of the Sea, against Jupiter; yet a cer∣tain Typhaeus was very famous, exceeding all these Monsters in bigness and strength; for he reached with his Head to the top of Hea∣ven, and could extend his Hands from one end of the World to the other; he was half Man and half Serpent, and blew Fire and Flame out of his Mouth in a dreadful man∣ner; and frighted so much the Gods, who were come to the relief of Jupiter, that they fled away into Egypt, and transform'd them∣selves into several kinds of Trees, or dis∣guised themselves under the form of several Beasts. But Jupiter pursued them so vigo∣rously with his Thunderbolts, that he came off with Honour, and crushed them under the weight of Mountains, shutting them up therein, and punishing them in Hell with se∣veral Torments. This is the Fable, here is the true Story. The Fable of the Giants, who heaped up Mountains one upon another, to raise them∣selves to Heaven, there to fight the Gods, is most commonly applied to those Men, who after the Flood built the Tower of Babel. But holy Scripture speaks of the Giants a long time before the Deluge, Gen. c. 6. There were Giants on the Earth in those days. And in another place 'tis spoken of the pro∣digious stature of the Giants, or rather of those Men, whom the Scripture calls Giants even after the Flood; For the Israelites having seen some of them, described them thus; All the People whom we saw in the land, are Men of great Stature, and there we saw Giants, the Sons of Anak, which are of the Race of the Giants, and we appeared to them like Grashoppers, and so we were in comparison of them: And to shew us the extraordinary height and shape of the Giants, Moses tells us in Deuteronomy, that an Iron Bed of these Giants was nine Cubits long, and four Cubits broad, according to the natural length of a Man's Cubit, which is a Foot and a half: Only Og King of Bashan remained of the Race of the Giants: his Bedsted was of Iron, it is in Rabbah of the Children of Ammon, being nine Cubits long, and four Cubits broad, according to a Mans Cubit. According to this description that the Scrip∣ture gives us of these Giants, they might be about fourteen foot high. Solinus relates, that tho the common opinion is, that the Stature of a Man can't be above seven foot high, and that Hercules did not exceed it, yet in the Reign of Augustus, Pusio and Secundilla were more than ten foot high: and in the Emperor Claudius's time, the Corps of Gabbara was brought from Arabia, and was near ten foot high: and that the Corps of Orestes being found after his death, was seven Cubits long. The Giants before the Deluge, were be∣gotten by the Children of God, and Daugh∣ters of Men; and the Hebrew Text makes use of the word Nephilim, to express the Giants, which comes from Nephal, i. e. to fall. The Giants after the Deluge are also called by the same name, because of their likeness to the former; however, they are called by a particular name, which may be observed in the Books of Numbers and Deuteronomy, where they are called the Sons of Enacim: Palastine was their Country. The learned Bochart observes, that from the Hebrew word Enacim or Anacim, the Greeks have formed their words , which originally signified Men of Gigantick Stature. Pausanias relates, that the Body of the Hero Asterius the Son of Anax, who was the Son of the Earth, was found in the Isle Aste∣ria near Miletum; and that his Corps was ten Cubits in length. This Stature of ten Cubits agrees with that mentioned in the Scripture. The word Anax is the same with Enac or Anac; for it is well known that the change of Vow∣els is frequent, even in the same Tongue. In fine, if Anac or Enac was the Son of the Earth, it was common to call the Giants the Children of the Earth. And Ovid tells us, that they were so called, because they came out of the Earth, moistened with the blood of their Fathers, whom a just revenge had destroyed. The Septuagints Translation has given the name of Giant to Nimrod, who first reigned at Babylon. The Hebrew Text signifies only Po∣tens venator, Gibbor Tsaid; but the same word Gibbarim is used, to signifie the Giants cal∣led also Nephilim. Wherefore the Scripture says, that Nimrod was the first Giant, because he was at the head of the rebellion of the
Giants after the Deluge, who were combined together for the building of the Tower of Babel. The Greeks have sometimes called the Gi∣ants by the name of Titans, which shews that they had this History, and the Fables con∣tained in it, from the Scripture and out of Palestine; for the word Tit signifies dirt in He∣brew; and they tell us, that the Giants were formed out of the Dirt or Earth. Where∣fore these three words Titanes, Gigantes, , have the same signification, and signifie the Children of the Earth. Diodorns Siculus, unfolding the Theology of those who Inhabit the Coasts of the Atlantick Sea, says, that ac∣cording to their opinion, the Titans were the Children of Uranus and Titaea, who gave them her Name, and called herself the Earth: Gommune Titanum nomen à Titaeâ matre usurpa∣bant: Titaea autem post mortem in Deos relata, Telluris nomen accipit. These Giants were Chil∣dren of Heaven and Earth, and their name of Titans came either from the Earth or Dirt, called by the Hebrews Tit. And these Giants being born before the Deluge, the Pagans, who had but an imperfect knowledge of their History, did not know their true Geneology, wherefore they made them Children of Ura∣nus and Titea, i. e. of Heaven and Earth. Diodorus Siculus tells us also, that Phrygia, Macedonia and Italy had their Giants, be∣cause of the Fires that are burning in those Countries. The occasion seem'd very fair to the contrivers of Fables, to say, that in all these places, the Giants were still burning in those Flames, that Thunder, to revenge Heaven, had kindled there to punish their Crimes. Justin speaking of the Tartesians of Spain, shews there the place where the Titans engaged the Gods. Pausanias confirms this opinion, speaking of Arcadia, and of a place where the Fire comes out of the Earth, and tells us that the Arcaaians affirm'd, that the Giants had en∣gaged the Gods in that very place: where∣fore, they offered there an Anniversary Sa∣crifice to Thunder and Storms. Then this Historian examining the opi∣nion of Homer and Hesiod upon the subject of Giants, says, that Homer has not mentioned the Giants in his Illiads, but only in his Odysses, where he represents the Nation called Lestrygones like Giants, attacking the Fleet of Ulysses. Hesiod in his Theogonia speaking of the Chaos, and producing out of it not only all the Bo∣dies of the Universe, both Beasts and Men, but even Gods themselves, then he mentions the Children of Heaven and Earth. Virgil in the first Book of his Georgicks, imi∣tates Hesiod, holding the fifth day of the Moon fatal, because upon that day the Earth brought forth the Giants. He has also imita∣ted him, when he has ascribed to each of these Giants an hundred Hands, an hundred Shields, and fifty Mouths to blow out tor∣rents of Fire. In another place he represents the violent efforts and motions of Enceladus, who lies buried alive under Mount Aetna. Horace has left us a very fine description of the war and defeat of the Giants; and Clau∣dian says, that the shakings and Flames of Mount Aetna, are glorious and eternal proofs of the triumphal Power and Justice of God over the Giants. Aetna Giganteos nunquam tacitura triumphos, Enceladi bustum. Bochart and Vossius are of opinion, that the Giant Og, recorded in Scripture, whom I have mentioned before, is Typhon or Typhaeus, de∣scribed by the Poets, the Hebrew word Og, and the Greek  having the same signification, i. e. to burn: And Virgil affirms, that Ty∣phon was struck with Thunder in Syria. —Durumque cubile Inarime, Jovis imperiis imposta Typhaeo. Aeneid. lib. 9. Virgil follows Homer's opinion, who says, that Typhaeus was struck with Thunder in Sy∣ria, called in the Scripture Aram, and by profane Writers Aramaea. These are Homer's words, , in Aremis, ubi dicunt Typhaei esse cubilia. GLADIATORES, The Gladiators, who fought in the Circian Games, and at the Funerals of the great Men of Rome, one a∣gainst the other, even to the loss of their Lives, to give this cruel Diversion to the People, or to pacifie the Ghosts of their Kindred. The origine of these bloody Fights, came from the Ancient Inhabitants of Asia, who fancied that they very much honoured their Relations, by spilling humane blood with a brutish diversion. This superstition grew so great among the Trojans, that Women cut themselves to get our some blood, to sprinkle upon the Graves or the Wood-pile of the Dead. Junius Brutus, was the first Man a∣mong the Romans, who performed these bar∣barous Duties to his Father; and we learn from Tacitus, that Tiberius to honour the me∣mory of his Ancestors, ordered two Fights of Gladiators, one in the great publick place, and the other in the Amphitheater. Those who made a trade of that brutish fu∣ry, were always esteem'd of no worth; for besides, that these Fights began at first by Slaves, who were miserably wretched, and left
to their ill destiny; those Men who were taught that Art and were brought to it, ne∣ver got any reputation by it; and to their great shame, Malefactors were brought a∣mong them, as Victims devoted to the di∣version of the People, and sacrificed to their Madness, as to the fury of Wild-Beasts. But tho the Infamy was equal, yet the for∣tune was very different; for the Slaves made by War had no hopes left them. Malefactors were still used worse, for they were expos'd to the wild Beasts, and sometimes tied to posts to feed the Lions, and to secure their punishments against the hazards of a vigorous defence. Men brought up and chosen for Gladiators, because of their good meen and strength, were not only well used, but also well taught in the Science of Defence, and nothing was spared to keep them in good health and strength, to contribute the better to the diversion of the people. Pliny tells us, that they were fed with Barly-Bread, wherefore they were called in jest Hordiarij, and that their Drink was Water with Ashes mixt with it; but this is not pro∣bable. There were many Families of these Gladiators. Some were called Sequatores, Re∣tearii, Threces, Myrmillones, Hoplomachi, Samnites, Essedarii, Andabatae, Dimachaeri, Meridiani, Fis∣cales, Postulatitij. The first were armed with a Sword and a Club, in the end whereof was Lead. The second carried a Net and a Trident, and endeavoured to enclose their Antagonist with it. The third had a kind of a Hanger or Scy∣metar, and were called by the name of their Country. The fourth, called Mermillones instead of Mermidones, were the Heroes of Achilles, whom the Romans accounted to be Gauls, wearing a Fish on the top of their Helmet. The Gla∣diator Retiarius or Net-bearer pursuing him, cried out, non te peto Galle, sed piscem peto. The fifth were armed all over, as the Greek word signifies. The sixth had their name from their hatred to the Samnites, who armed the Gladiators ac∣cording to their fashion. The seventh fought riding in Chariots, and were called Essedarii. The eighth fought on Horseback and blind∣fold, and took their name from their way of Fighting. The ninth fought holding two Swords in their hands, from whence they are called Di∣macheri, a Greek word, which signifies two Swords. The tenth were those who had been ex∣pos'd to wild Beasts, and having got clear of them, were obliged to kill one another to di∣vert the People. The eleventh had their name from Fiscus the Exchequer, because they were maintained at the publick charges. The twelfth were the most valiant of all, and appointed for the Emperor's diversion, wherefore the people beg often that they might be ordered to fight. All these Gladiators did their best to kill their Adversary, or to dye valiantly, and bravely defended their life. After they had well acquitted themselves of their duty, they obtained of the Emperors, and those who gave the Games, either their discharge or freedom, or some considerable reward. The discharge granted unto them, was on∣ly a dispensation from fighting or serving, otherwise but willingly or out of compli∣ance; and for a Token thereof, they gave them a Switch called Rudis; Rudae dmo∣bantur. They gave them also a kind of a Hat cal∣led Pileatie, for a badge of their freedom granted to them. Constantius, and after him the Emperors Ar∣cadius and Honorius forbad these Fights. GLAUCUS Ponticus, a Fisherman of the Town of Anthedon, who having once caught abundance of Fish, and laid them on the Bank, perceiving that these Fishes having touch'd a kind of Herb that was upon the shore, received new strength, and leapd again into the Sea; which Glaucus perceiving, tasted of the Herb himself, and presently leapt into the Sea after them, where he was transform∣ed into a Triton, and became one of the Sea Gods. Pausanias calls Glaucus the Genius of the Sea. Paliphatus relates this otherwise, and says that Glaucus was a Fisherman, and an excel∣lent Diver, who to get the name of being a God, threw himself often in sight of all the people, from the top of a great Rock into the Sea, and appeared further off; then at last stole himself quite from the sight of Men, and retired on some remote shore, from whence he came again some days after, and perswaded the people that he had conversed with the Gods of the Sea, and related extra∣ordinary things of them. But in fine, being lost in the Waters of the Sea, the People per∣swaded themselves he was become a God. Some say that he was turned into a Fish, other into a Sea Monster, and some others affirm, like Philostratus in his description of Glaucus Ponticus, that he was half Man, and half Fish. Hyginus records, that Glaucus was much lo∣ved by Circe, but he despised her, and yet he fell in love with Scylla. Whereupon Ciru transported with jealousy, turned Scylla into a
Monster, having poisoned the waters where she was used to bath herself, as Homer has describ'd it in the twelfth Book of his Odysses. There was also another of that name, who was Grandson to Bellerophon, and came to the Trojan's relief, and shew'd a great folly in his conduct, having exchang'd his Golden Ar∣mour for that of Diomedes, which were of Brass. From whence 'tis said in a proverbial way, to shew an inequal change, 'tis the ex∣change of Glaucus and Diomedes. GNOMONICE, The Art of making Sun dials, so called from the Greek word , which signifies to shew, because the Gnomon is a stile or a Needle, which by its shadow shews the Hours, the elevation of the Sun, and the Sign wherein he is. GOMER, The Father of the Italians and Gauls, under several names of Gallus and Ogyges, and was the eldest Son of Japhet. The Babylonians took him for the Grandfather of Ninus, though he was but his Grand-Unkle. Some are of opinion that he is Saturn. He came into Italy in the year 1879, à mundo condito, the 2539 of the Julian period, and 2175 years before the birth of our Lord, and populated the Islands of the Mediterranean Sea, Greece, Italy and Gallia. He taught Religion to his people, as he had receiv'd it of Japhet and Noah. GORDIANUS, and his Son were both chosen Emperors in Africa, and the Se∣nate approved of their Election, but they did not enjoy long that honour; for the Father was too old to be serviceable to the Com∣monwealth, being then fourscore years of age; and though his Son was but forty six years old, yet he was not able to defend the Empire against Capellianus Prefect of Mauri∣tania. Gordianus was the Richest and the most magnificent of the Romans. During his Quae∣storship he order'd Games of vast charges to be represented every month to the people. He had a Park well stock'd with all kinds of fallow Dear, procured from all parts of the World, and appointed a publick hunting day, where every Man carried away the Game he had kill'd. Gordianus junior, Grandson to Gordianus who died in Africa, was raised to the Empire at sixteen years of age. He gave the Office of Prefect of the Praetory to Philip a Man of low extraction, who soon forgot his Benefactor's kindness; for he caused him to be murthered on the Frontiers of Persia, where he pursued Sapor, who had invaded Syria. GORGONES. Hesiod in his Theogonia, and Hyginus say, that the Gorgones were three Sisters, Daughters to Phocus a Sea-God, who had all three but one eye, serving them all by turns. They had great Wings, and their Head attired with Adders, their Teeth were like the Tusks of Wild-Boar's, coming out of their mouth, and were armed with sharp and crooked Claws. They were named Stenyo, i. e. strong, mighty; Medusa, i. e. care of the State; and Euryale, i. e. having command upon the at Sea. Perseus being covered with the shield of Minerva cut off Medusa's head, which was placed in the shield of Minerva, the sight whereof is mortal, and turns into stones those who look at it, as it befel Atlas. Fulgentius relates after Theocritus an ancient Historiographer, that King Phorcus left three very rich Daughters; that Medusa the eldest and most powerful was called Gorgon, because she applyed herself very much to manure the ground; that a Serpents head was ascri∣bed to her, because of her prudence; and that Perseus attack'd her with his Fleet, (from whence Poets represent him wing∣ed) seized upon her Dominion and kill'd her; and took away her Head, viz. her Strength and Riches, which he made use of to subdue the Kingdom of Atlas, whom he put to flight; and having forced him to re∣tire into the Mountains, from whence it is said he was metamorphos'd into a Mountain. GRACCHUS, A Sirname of the Sempronian Family, the off-spring of so many Illustrious Romans who supported the People against the Nobility; as Tiberius Gracchus, who got the Agrarian Law to be received, and distributed to the Romans the Riches that King Attalus had left him by his last Will; and Caius Gracchus, who added to the Senate three hundred Men of the Equestrian Order, to ad∣minister Justice. GRAECIA, &c. See after Gratiae. GRATIAE. The Graces in the time of the Pagans were three fabulous Goddesses represented young and naked, attending Ve∣nus, called Aglaia, Thalia and Euphrosine, Daugh∣ters of Jupiter, and Mercury's Companions. They were also named Charites. GRAECIA, Greece, so called from King Graecus, who succeeded Cecrops, who com∣manded only in Attica, which was one of the fine Countries of Europe, called Hellas. Ancient Writers have severally set the bounds of this Country; yet 'tis commonly agreed, that it is bounded by the Ionian Sea at the West, by Libya at the South, the Aege∣an Sea or Archipelagus at the East, and at the Mountains which divide it from Thracia, up∣per Mysia and Dalmatia. Greece contains four great Provinces; viz. Macedonia, Epirus, Achaia, Peloponnesus, toge∣ther with all the Islands of the Ionlan Sea. They also join to it that part of Italy, which
was formerly called Great Greece, now Cala∣bria superiour. This Country exceeded all the Countries of Europe, for its temperature, good air, and plenty of all kinds of Fruits. The most famous Cities of Greece were Athens, Lacedemonia, Delphos, Argos, Mycene, Corinth. There were those Mountains, so famous in the Writings of the Poets, viz. Athos, Olym∣pus, Pelion, Parnassus, Helicon, Cytheron. Greece is esteemed the Mother of Arts and Sciences, that her Inhabitants had learnt of the Assyrians and Chaldaeans. She was conquered by Cyrus, and afterwards by the other Kings of Parsia. After the death of Perseus the last King of Greece, the Romans subdued that Country. GRAECI, The Greeks, the Inhabitants of Greece, who are differently named by Wri∣ters Achaij, Argivi, Danai, Dolopes, Helleni, Io∣nij, Mermidones, Pelasgi, according to the Cities they inhabited, and their several Facti∣ons. Eusebius affirms, that Hellen the Son of Deu∣calion, repopulated this Country after the De∣luge, that happened in the time of Moses, about the year 3680. à mundo condito. They very much improved Arts and Sciences, that they learned of Eumolpus and Orphaeus, the Assyrians and Phaenicians. The Greeks increased the num∣ber of Gods, and shared the Empire and Ad∣ministration of the World, appointing seve∣ral Gods for Corn and Vines, to Plants and Flowers; which gave occasion for all the chimerical divisions of Gods, relating imagi∣nary particulars of them, and giving them names, without any other ground, but their own vanity and presumption. The Phaenicians having disguised the true Histories of the Bible, and composed their Fables of it, the Greeks also appropriated the Phaenicians Fables to Greece. Pliny affirms, that Cadmus, about the year 2520 à mundo condito, brought from Phaenicia sixteen Letters into Greece; viz. A, B, C, D E, F, G, H, I, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, V, to which Palamedes added four, during the Trojan War, O, Z, φ, X. GRAECOSTASIS, A, Palace at Rome, adjoining to Mount Palatine, where the foreign Prince's Ambassadors were lodg∣ed. This Palace took its name from Greece, because the Greeks were the most considerable of all the Strangers; the House of the Am∣bassadours. GRATIAE See above, before Graecia. GUTTUS, A little Vessel used in Sa∣crifices, to pour Wine by drops GYGES, A Lydian, who killed his Ma∣ster by a Ring that made him invisible, by turning the stone within towards himself, for then he could see all, and was seen of none, Ovid mentions another Gyges, a Giant who had a hundred hands, Son to Heaven and Earth, and Brother to Briareus. Centimanumque Gygen, semibovemque virum. 4. Trist. GYNAECONITIS, An Apartment for the Women in Greece. GYMNICI LUDI. Exercises of the Greeks. In these Games, there was in the first place the Race, which has been of old, and the chief of all Exercises; secondly, leaping; thirdly, Discus or Quoits, made of Stone, Iron or Brass, cut in a round figure, and of a great weight, the Gamesters who threw it highest or furthest carried the Prize; the fourth kind of Game was wrestling, wherein two Wrest∣lers, having their Bodies stark naked, and anointed all over with Oyl, took hold one on another, each of them making all his efforts to throw his Adversary on the ground; the fifth sort of Game was boxing, these Gamesters had their Fists covered with Lea∣ther Straps, with pieces of Lead or Iron fast∣ned to it, called Cestus. Lucian speaks of these Games in the Dialogue of the bodily Exer∣cises, where he introduces Anacharsis discour∣sing thus with Solen. Anacharsis. What mean these young fellows, thus to collar and foyl themselves, and wallow in the mire like Swine, and strive to throttle and hinder one anothers breathing? they oyled and shaved one another pretty peaceably at first, but on a sudden stooping with their Heads, they butted each other like Rams: Then the one hoisting his Adversary aloft into the air, hurls him again upon the ground, with a violent squelsh, and falling upon him, he hindered him from rising, pressing his neck with his elbow, and punch∣ing him with his legs, so as I was afraid he had stifled him, though the other struck him on the shoulder, to desire him to let him go, as owning himself overcome. Me∣thinks they should be shie of fouling them∣selves thus in the dirt, after they had been steek'd; and they make me laugh to see them like so many Eels, slip out of the hands of their Antagonists. Look yonder's some doing the same in the face of the Sun, with this difference only, that it's in the Sun they rowl, like Cocks before they come to the skirmish, that their Adversary may have the better hold, and his hands not slip upon the Oyl or the Sweat. O see you others also fighting in the Dirt, and kicking and fisting, without endeavouring (like the former) to throw one another. The one spits out of his Teeth with sand and blood, from a blow he receiv'd in his
Chaps, and yet that Officer attir'd in pur∣ple, who sets President, as I suppose, at these Exercises, doth not trouble himself a∣bout parting them. These others make the Dust fly, by kicking up their Heels in the air, like those who dispute for the prize of running. Solon. This here is the place of Exercises, and the Temple of Apollo Lycius, whose Statue you see upon that Column, in the posture of a weary Man, leaning upon his Elbow, having his Head supported up∣on his right hand, and holding his Bow in the left. Those whom you see wallowing in the mire, or crawling in the dirt, are skirmishing at a match of Wrestling, or at Fisticuffs in the Ring or Lists. There are still other Exercises, as Leaping, Quoits, and Fencing, and in all such Games the conqueror is crowned. These Games were play'd four times every year; viz. at Olympia in the Province of Elis, wherefore they were called Olympick Games, in honour of Jupiter Olympius; in the Isthmus of Corinth, called Isthmian Games, in honour of Neptune; in the Nemean Forest, cal∣led Nemean Games, in honour of Hercules; and the Pythean Games, in honour of Apollo, be∣cause he had kill'd the Serpent Pytho. The Masters of these Games were call'd Gymnastae. I shall speak severally of these Games, ac∣cording to their Alphabetick Order. GYMNO SOPHISTAE. Gymno∣sophists, a Sect of Indian Philosophers, who ador'd the Sun, and were called by this name, because they went naked. H. H is the eighth Letter of the Alphabet. Grammarians dispute whether the H should be in the number of Letters or not; because, say they, 'tis but an aspiration. Tho' H be but an aspiration, yet 'tis a true Letter, because all Characters invented by Men to distinguish our Pronunciation, ought to be accounted a true Letter, especial∣ly when 'tis set down in the Alphabet among the other Letters, as H is: And there is no reason to fancy that H is not a true Letter, because 'tis but an aspiration, since in the Oriential Languages, there are three or four Letters, which they call Guttural Letters, which are of no other use, but only to ex∣press the several aspirations. H supplies in Latin, all that which is deno∣ted by the Greeks with sharp tones, and aspi∣rated Consonants: And it serves for two ge∣neral uses; the first is before the Vowels be∣ginning the Syllables, as in the word honor; and the second is after the Consonant, as in the word Thronus. Doubtless the H appear'd plainly in the Roman pronunciation, as 'tis perceiv'd in the French tongue, in the words that are meerly French, as Hardiesse, Hauteur, &c. As for the H after the Consonants, Tully in his Book de Oratore affirms, that the ancient Writers made no use of it, but only before the Vowels, which inclin'd him to pro∣nounce Pulcros, Triumpos, Cartaginem. But con∣cealing his opinion, he conferm'd himself to the custom of the people in his pronunciati∣on, and that yet they pronounced always Sepulcra, Lacrimae, without H, because it did not offend the Ears. Quintillian tells us, that often ancient Wri∣ters put no H before the Vowels, writing ircus; but that in his time they were come to another excess, pronouncing Chorona, Prae∣chones. However, the Language must be considered as it was in its purity. Wherefore, as this H after the Consonants was only introduced in the Latin Language, but to supply the aspirated Letters of the Greeks, it ought to be used but after four Consonants, viz. C, P, T, R. The Latins have taken their H from the Greek , as the Greeks had it of the Phaeni∣cians, and the Phaenicians of the Syrians, who pronounced formerly Hetha instead of Heth: which plainly shews, that we ought to pro∣nounce Eta in Greek, and not Ita. But in the beginning this H was only us'd for an aspiration, wherefore they wrote  instead of , instead of  HEKATON instead of  centum: From whence it comes, that the H formerly de∣noted one hundred in number. H was also joined with weak Consonants, instead of an aspiration; for the aspirated Consonants were found out since by Palame∣des, they using to write  instead of , and the like. The F is often written instead of the H, as Faedum instead of Haedum, Fircum instead of Hircum, Fariolum instead of Hariolum, Fostem instead of Hostem, Heminas instead of Feminas, Hebris instead of Febris. HAMADRYADES. Certain Divi∣nities of Trees and Forests, who lived and died with them, as the fabulous Antiquity tells us. Notwithstanding the respect the Pagans had for these Hamadryades, was but a kind of worship render'd to some Intelli∣gent Divinity, or some Genius whom they fancied to be present, or residing in these Trees.
HARMONIA, Harmony, the Daugh∣ter of Mars and Venus, and Wife to Cadmus, both turn'd into Serpents. HARMONIA, Harmony. A consort of Voi∣ces or Musical Instruments. The Platonists fan∣cied, that celestial Bodies made a real Har∣mony. Vitruvius speaks of the harmonical Musick of Aristoxenes, the Scholar of Aristotle, opposite to that of the Pythagoreans; because these Philosophers judged of the tones, only by reasons of Proportions, and the others were of opinion, that the ears should also have their share in that judgment, because it belonged especially to them, to regulate what concerns Musick. The same Writers give us also an account of three kinds of Songs, which the Greeks call Enarmonick, Chromatick and Diatonick: the Enarmonick singing is a way of turning the voice, and disposing the Intervals with such an art, that the melody becomes more mov∣ing: The Chromatick singing consists in keep∣ing the Intervals close by a subtle artifice, which makes the voice sweeter and softer: and the Diatonick as the most natural, makes easie Intervals, which renders it more easie than the others. HARPOCRATES, The Son of Osiris and Isis; the God of Silence, who was commonly represented holding his finger up∣on his mouth, to make a sign to hold the tongue and keep silence. Varro protests, that he will tell nothing else of this God, lest he should break silence commanded by him: The finger which he holds upon his mouth is the second finger, called by the Latius Sa∣lutaris, commonly used to command silence. And Apuleius says, Lay the Finger that is next the Thumb upon the Mouth, and hold your Tongue. Ausonius recommended Si∣lence thus, Aut tua Sigalion Aegyptius oscula signet. The Statues of Harpacrates were placed in Temples and publick places, and the Egyptian Sculpto represented him upon several preci∣ous Stones, which they ingrav'd under certain Constellations, and upon Metals, proper to receive and keep the impression of each Star, that they might use them to cure Distempers, and preserve Men from dangers. The Romans adorn'd their fingers with them, as Pliny has observ'd: 'The Romans, says he, begin al∣ready to wear in their Rings, Harpocrates and other Aegyptian Gods. M. Spon, in the seventh dissertation of the Inquiries after Antiquities, has given us se∣veral Sculptures of Harpocrates, p. 124. On one of these he is represented setting upon an Ostrich, and on the reverse thereof the Sun and Moon are ingrav'd, for Harpocrates was accounted their Son; since Osiris and Isis, the Father and Mother of Harpocrates, were esteem'd by the Egyptians, what the Son and the Moon were by other Nations. And yet we may say that the Pagans rank'd Harpocrates the God of silence among the other Gods, to silence those who should affirm, that all their Gods were but mortal Men; or else to shew us, that all the Gods whom they ador'd, were comprehended in an only one, who commanded silence. The Letters of the reverse of the Medal are fantastical Characters of Hereticks, both Basilidians and Gnosticks, who did mix the My∣steries of the Christian Religion with Pagan superstitions. In another figure Serapis and Harpocrates are represented with these Letters, Conservate me; which shews that it was a kind of a Talisman, which they wore about them, to beg of these Divinities the conservation of their Health, and their preservation from all Evils. On another stone Harpocrates is represented setting upon the Flower called Lotus, an Herb dedicated to the Sun, because its flower opens of it self at the rising of the Sun, and shuts again at his going down; The Letters Ingra∣ven on the reverse thereof, are some Basilidian Mysteries. Harpocrates is still drawn with the head of a Lion, some Birds about him, and the head of the Moon. Alexander Hales tells us, that these Birds were Angels, whom the Basilidi∣ans ascribed to celestial Globes of the Planets, and that they called Saturn, Cassiel; Jupiter, Sachiel; Mars, Samuel; the Sun and the Moon, Michael; Venus, Anahel; Mercury, Raphael. Likewise Harpocrates is figured setting on the head of an Ass, the mouth whereof is turned upwards, with these Letters on the reverse of the Medal , i. e. strong and invincible, which Epithet the Basilidians gave to their Jao, or Jehova, to pre∣serve them from dangers, and protect them against their Enemies. The same God is yet engraven with seven Greek Vowels, signifying the word Jehova. These are the representations of Harpocrates, drawn from Sculptures and Medals: But we shall describe the copies, which were taken after the old small Statues of Brass, kept in the Virtuoso's Closers. The old Statues of Harpocrates were hold∣ing their Finger upon their Mouth; but some are represented with a Horn of Plenty, and a Basket on the head, which was the common ornament of Serapis, who according to the opinion of some Writers, was the same as Osiris the Father of Harpocrates.
Others represent him with a glittering head, some have dress'd him in a Gown, which hangs down to the heels, carrying on his Head a branch of a Peach-tree, which was a Tree consecrated to Harpocrates, because the Fruit thereof resembles the Heart, and its Leaves are like the Tongue, as Plutarch has observed; whereby old Writers signified the perfect correspondency that should be be∣tween the Tongue and the Heart: Some others figure him with a particular Orna∣ment on his Head, having the badges of Har∣pocrates, Cupid and Esculapius, for he holds his Finger on his Mouth, he carries Wings, and a Quiver with Arrows, and a Serpent twist∣ed about a stick. The union of Harpocrates with Cupid, shews that Love must be secret; and the union of Harpocrates with Aesculapius gives us to understand, that a Physician must be discreet, and not discover the secrets of his Patient. The Pythagoreans made a Virtue of silence, and the Romans a Goddess, called Tacita, as 'tis related by Plutarch. HARPIAE, The Harpyes, fabulous Birds only mentioned by Poets, who describe them with the face of a Virgin, and the rest of the body a Bird, with crooked feet and hands: Virgil's description of them runs thus, in the third Book of his Aeneid. v. 213. —Quas dira Celaeno, Harpyae colunt aliae....... Tristius haud illis monstrum, nec saevior ulla Pestis & ira Deûm Stygüs sese extulit undis; Virginei volucrum vultus, foedissima ventris Proluvies: uncaeque manus, & pallida semper Ora fame. The truth of the Story is, that Phineus King of Paeonia having lost his sight, and his Sons being dead, the Harpyes his Daughters, were spending his Estate, till Zethes and Calais his Neighbours, Sons of Bordas, drove these Ladies out of the City, and re-establish'd Phineus in possession of his Estate. HASTA, signifies all kind of offensive Arms, that have a long staff or handle, as Pike, Spear, Javelin, &c. 'Twas said in the Roman Law Hastae subjicere, to signify thereby, to confiscate, or to sell by publick sale; and sub hastâ venire, to be sold by Auction; for Romulus had order'd that this Pole should be set before the place, where the confiscated Goods were sold. HASTA PURA, A Half-pike, with∣out Iron at the end, us'd for a Scepter and a badge of Authority, and not a Pike armed with Iron, used in the war. HEBDOMADA, A Week, the num∣of seven days. Four Weeks make up a Month, because of the four chief and more apparent Phasis of the changes of the Moon. And as these four changes of the Moon, are in a manner the space of seven days one from another, 'tis very likely that from thence the first Egyptians and Assyrians have taken occasi∣on to divide time by intervals of seven days, which therefore were called Weeks. As for the Hebrews, their way of reckoning the time by weeks, has a most august Origine, and the Law commanded them to forbear from all kind of work the seventh day, to imprint in their memory the great Mystery of the Creation of the World, in which God had wrought during six days, and rested the seventh, whereupon it was called the Sab∣bath-day, which in their Language signifies a day of rest. The other days took their name from that day; for the following day was called by the Jews prima Sabbati, the first day of the Sabbath; the next day, the second of the Sabbath; then the third and fourth, &c. till the sixth, called otherwise Parasceve, which signifies the day of preparation for the Sabbath. This way of reckoning by Weeks, was, pro∣perly speaking, used only by the Eastern Na∣tions, for the Greeks reckoned their days from ten to ten, or by decads, dividing each month in three parts; the first part was reckoned from the beginning of the Month, the second was the middle of the Month, and the third was the rest of the Month, from the middle to the end thereof. And thus the Romans, besides the division of the Month by Kalends, Nones and Ides, made use also of a political distribution of a series of eight days, distributed from the beginning of the year to the end thereof. The names of the days of the week used by the Primitive Christians, were founded on a more holy principle, viz. the resurrection of our Lord, which has given the name of Dominica, or the Lord's-day, to the day called the Sabbath by the Jews. And because they, to shew their joy in the celebration of the Feast of Easter, i. e. of the Resurrection, were used to keep the whole week holy, resting from all servile work, which is called in Latin Periani, therefore they called the day following immediately after the Holy Sun∣day Prima Feria; and the second day Secunda Feria; the third day Tertia Feria, and so forth; and from thence the days of all the weeks were afterwards improperly called Foriae in practice of the Church. The Origine of the names commonly gi∣ven to the days of the week, being names of Divinities ador'd by superstitious Antiquity, comes from a more remote principle: for 'tis likely that these names passed from the Assy∣rians to the Greeks, and from the Greeks to the Christians.
And we may reasonably presume that the Chaldeans, who were esteemed the first Men who addicted themselves to study Astrono∣my, have also given the name of their Gods to the Planets, or at least the same names, which they have afterwards ascribed to the Gods whom they ador'd: and that they might give more authority to that art which they profess, and by which they foretold things to come, by the observation of the Stars. They attempted to ascribe them an absolute Empire over the nature of Men, al∣lowing to each of them several Offices and Employments, to dispense good and evil; and that lest that dreadful power which they ascribed to them, should be kept in the only extent of their spheres, they had very much enlarg'd the bounds of their Dominions, sub∣mitting to them, not only the several parts of the Earth and the Elements, not only the Fortunes, Inclination and Secrets of the most close Men, overthrow of States, Plagues, Deluges, and a thousand other things of that nature; but endeavoured also to set them up for the absolute Masters of time, allowing a Planet to preside over each year, another to each month, to each week, each day, each hour, and perhaps to each moment. From thence each day of the week has took the name of the Planet ruling over it, and Monday, which is in Latin dies Luna, i. e. the day of the Moon, was so called, because the Moon presides that day; dies Martis, i. e. the day of Mars, which was under the directi∣on of Mars; dies Mercurii, ruled by Mercury; dies Jovis, under the conduct of Jupiter; dies Veneris, under the direction of Venus; dies Sa∣turni, under that of Saturn; dies Solis, ruled by the Sun. 'Tis true, that the order that the Planets follow in the week, is quite different from that which they observe in Heaven; for ac∣cording to the disposition of their Spheres, Jupiter is immediately below Saturn; Mars below Jupiter; the Sun under Mars; Venus ac∣cording to the vulgar opinion, beneath the Sun; Mercury below Venus; and in fine, the Moon the lowest of all beneath Mercury: But in the order of the week Sunday, called the day of the Sun, comes after Saturday, which is the day of Saturn, in the room of Thursday the day of Jupiter; and Monday the day of the Moon, follows the day of the Sun instead of Friday, the day of Venus; likewise instead of Saturday or the day of Saturn, which ac∣cording to the Planets order, should follow the Munday or the day of the Moon; they reckon Tuesday the day of Mars; and after Tuesday comes Wednesday the day of Mercury, instead of Thursday the day of the Sun, and so forth. Whereby it doth appear, that the disposition of the Planets in the days of the week, is very different from the order and situation of their Orbs. But the Ancients having not only commit∣ted the days, but also the hours of each day to the care of some Planet, 'tis very likely, that the day was called by the name of the Planet, that had the direction of the first hour: Wherefore Saturday or the day of Sa∣turn was thus called, because the first hour of that day was under the direction of Saturn; and as the following hours came on succes∣sively, under the power of the following Planets, the second hour was for Jupiter, who immediately followed Saturn; the third was for Mars, the fourth for the Sun, the fifth for Venus, the sixth for Mercury, and the se∣venth for the Moon, and afterwards the eighth hour return'd under the power of Saturn; and according to the same order, the same Planet Saturn had still the fifteenth and the two and twentieth hours under his direction; and by consequence the three and twentieth hour was under the command of Jupiter, and the four and twentieth, viz. the last hour of the day, was found under the direction of Mars: So that the first hour of the following day came under the dominion of the Sun, who consequently gave his name to the se∣cond day; and following always the same order to the eighth, the fifteenth and the two and twentieth hour did always belong to the Sun, the twenty third to Venus, and the last to Mercury: wherefore the first hour of the third day appertained to the Moon, called for that reason the day of the Moon, to which al∣so was referr'd the eighth, the fifteenth, and the two and twentieth hours of the same day; and therefore the twenty third hour was ascribed to Saturn, (for from the Moon we must return again to Saturn) and the last to Jupiter; from whence the first hour of the fourth day was found under the direction of Mars, (who gave also his name to the day) as also the eighth, the fifteenth and the two and twentieth; and consequently the twen∣ty third hour belonged to the Sun, the twenty fourth to Venus; and the first of the fifteenth day to Mercury; and so forth, following the same order, whereby we see the origine and the necessary series of the names given to the days of the week, and the reason why the day of the Sun comes after the day of Saturn, viz. Sunday after Saturday, the day of the Moon after the day of the Sun, or Monday after Sun∣day; the day of Mars after the day of the Moon, or Tuesday after Monday; Wednesday after Tuesday; then Thursday, Friday, and at last Sa∣turday, and so of all the rest. There is still another ingenious reason that might be given for these denominations of
days; for the names of the Planets given to the days of the week, follow one another in proportion with the musical harmony, called in Greek , which was the Origne and principle of all the good harmony of the Antients, the nature whereof consists betwixt two tones of four voices, or three intervals or sounds, different one from another; wherefore there are always two silent tones betwixt both. And 'tis likely, that the An∣cients to leave us some idea of this admirable Musick, have disposed the days of the week, which follow one another according to their musical harmony; wherefore the Planet which comes immediately after another, leaves two others behind, which are silent; viz. after Saturn comes the Sun, leaving Jupiter and Mars; and after the Sun follows the Moon, over-running Venus and Mercury; after the Moon appears Mars; after Mars, Mercury, with∣out mentioning either the Sun or Venus; after Mercury, Jupiter, without reckoning either the Moon or Saturn; next to Jupiter, Venus, leav∣ing Mars and the Sun; and the last of all next to Venus comes Saturn; and by this per∣petual revolution, we know why Sunday the day of the Sun, follows Saturday the day of Saturn, and why after Sunday comes Mon∣day, &c. HEBDOMAS, The name of an Ora∣tor mentioned by Lucian, who once a week gave a play-day to his Scholars, and play'd himself wanton tricks among the people, as School-boys do upon Holy-days. HEBE, The Daughter of Jupiter and Juno, or of Juno alone without the knowledge of a Man; for Apollo having once invited her to a Feast, the Fable tells us that she eat such a quantity of Lettice to cool her self, that she got a great Belly, and was brought to bed of Hebe, a Girl of an extraordinary beau∣ty, who was in Heaven Jupiter's Cup-bearer. After Hercules was taken up among the Gods, he married her. The Ancients took Hebe for the Goddess of Youth, and consecrated to her several Temples. The Corinthians offer'd her Sacrifices in a Grove, which served for a place of Refuge to all the Malefactors, who repaired thither; and freed men tied to the Trees, their chains and other marks of bon∣dage. This Goddess was represented by the Image of a young Girl, crowned with Flowers. HECATE, A Divinity of Hell, Wri∣ters report her birth variously. Orpheus tells us, that she is the Daughter of Jupiter and Ce∣res; others say, that she is the Daughter of Jupiter and Asteria; and Apollodorus's opinion is, that Hecate, Diana, the Moon and Pro∣serpina are all one and the same, where∣fore they call her triple Hecate, or the God∣dess with three heads, being the Moon in Hea∣ven, Diana on Earth, and Proserpina or Hecate in Hell. She was called Trivia, because her Image was set up in cross-ways, either be∣cause of the noise that was made in the night, to imitate the howling of Ceres seeking after Proserpina, or because she was the Moon in Hea∣ven, and Diana on Earth, and Proserpina or Hecate in Hell, as the Scholiast of Aristophanes reports: Hecaten coluere antiquitus in trivies, propterea quod eandem & Lunam, & Dianam, & Hecaten vocarent. Servius tells us the same thing upon this Verse of Virgil, Nocturnisque Hecaten triviis ululata per urbes. She was represented with a dreadful coun∣tenance, her Head attired with Serpents; and was called upon in Magick, they sacrificing to her Victims, the blood whereof was shed in a Ditch, digged in the ground for that purpose. HECATOMB, A Sacrifice of an hundred Oxen, from the Greek word,  i. e. a hundred. Strabo relates, that this Sa∣crifice comes from the Lacedemonians, who having an hundred Towns in their Country, sacrificed every year a hundred Oxen in ho∣nour of their Divinities; but the charges of these Sacrifices being too great, they were re∣duced to five and twenty Oxen; for they fancied by a childish cunning, that each of these Oxen having four feet, it was enough to keep up the name of Hecatombs to these Sacrifices, to keep to the number a hundred in these parts. And yet afterwards they offered in their Hecatombs other four-footed Beasts, easier to be procured than Oxen, as She-Goats and Lambs; wherefore Homer speaks in his Illiads, of Hecatombs of She-Goats and first yean'd Lambs. 'Tis also reported, that an Ancient Man, having in stormy weather made a vow to Sacrifice an hundred Oxen if he should escape the danger, and afterwards seeing that he was not able to perform his Vow, he of∣fered to the Gods, an Hecatomb of a hun∣dred small Oxen made out of Dough. Some ascribe this false Hecatomb to Pythagoras; and Diogones Laertius reports, that this Philo∣sopher having found out some new demon∣strations of Trigonometry offered an Heca∣tomb of these artificial animals, in the room of a hundred living Oxen, whom he so ex∣presly forbid to kill. HECTOR, The Son of Priamus King of Troy, and Hecuba his Wife, the most vali∣ant of all the Trojans, who so bravely defend∣ed the City of Troy against the Greeks. Homer in the xxii Book of his Illiads, relates, how
Priamus and Hecuba desir'd Hector to avoid fighting with Achilles, and yet he pursued him vigorously. Jupiter took pity of Hector, and put it to deliberation whither he should prolong his life. But Minerva was against it, seeing that he was mortal. However, Apollo stood for him. At last Jupiter put into a pair of golden Ballances, the destinies of Achilles and Hector. The fate of Hector was brought down even to Hell. Then Apollo forsook him, and Minerva took Achilles into her protection. Hector perceived that Minerva was against him, and that Jupiter and Apollo had cast him off, as being near the fatal moment of his death: Notwithstanding he behav'd himself with a very great courage, and at last having recei∣ved a mortal wound by Achilles, he foretold him before he died, that Paris and Apollo should kill him. Achilles had resolved to ex∣pose the Corps of Hector to be devoured by the Dogs; but Venus kept off the Dogs from his Body, and Apollo cover'd it with a Cloud. Wherefore he only dragg'd his Corps round about the Grave of Patroclus, and Apollo took care of it, and kept it from being torn in pieces; and complained also of the other Gods, who sufferr'd Hector to be insulted, even after his death; upon which, Jupiter mov'd with compassion, sent Thetis to Achilles, to perswade him to deliver up the Corps of Hector to his Father, which he performed for a great Summ of Money. HECUBA, The Wife of Priamus. Af∣ter the sacking of Troy, Ulisses took Hecuba for his share of the Booty; but having seen Polyxena her Daughter sacrificed on the Tomb of Achilles, and provok'd by so many misfor∣tunes, and especially the death of her Son Po∣lydorus, barbarously murthered by Polemnester, his Son-in-law, she fell upon him in rage, and tore out his eyes, then endeavouring to escape from the hands of her pursurer, she was turn'd into a Bitch. Ovid the 13th Book of his Metamorphoses. HELENA, Helen, the Daughter of Ju∣piter and Tyndarus King of Lacedemonia and Leda, and Sister to Castor and Pollux. Lucian speaks thus of her in the judgment of Paris. Venus. She is the Daughter of that fair one, of whom Jupiter being enamour'd, turned himself into a Swan to enjoy her. You may well imagine that she is not black, be∣ing come of a Swan, not fat or bulky, be∣ing produced out of an Egg-shell. If you had seen her dance stark naked, after the manner of her Country, you had been charmed with her agreeable motion, and the gracefulness of her person. Wars have already been made for the love of her; for she was stole by Theseus, when but ten years old. Since, she is augmented in Beauty, as well as in Age, and has attracted to her the eyes of all Greece. She has been courted by a thousand Lovers; but Meni∣laus was preferred before all his Rivals: Nevertheless I will give her you, if you are so inclined. For thou shalt go into Greece, under pretence of seeing the Country, and as soon as thou art arrived at Lacedemon, He∣lena will see thee; leave the rest to my care and management And the same Lucian in the praise of Beau∣ty, speaks thus of her: Men hold it in such great esteem, that Theseus, who was one of the greatest Heroes, did not think he could be happy with all his Virtue, unless he possessed Hellen, and stole her away, be∣fore she was at an Age fit for Marriage, without having regard to the puissance of her Father, or the danger he ran by this at∣tempt. That same Hellen being since re∣turned to her Father's House in Theseus's ab∣sence, all the Grecian Princes fell in love with her; and for fear this Love might be fatal to their Country, they all vowed to∣gether, to serve him who should be prefer∣red, and hence employed all their Forces, to put that fair one into Menelaus's hands. Paris himself preferred her before all the Grandeurs, and Advantages promised him by Pallas and Juno: And the Trojaus seeing all Greece pouring upon their backs, and at liberty of avoiding of that War, by restoring Hellen, yet resolved to keep her, at the very peril of their lives, and the ruine of their Country. Dion Prusianus says, that he was told by the Egyptian Priests, that Helena the Daughter of Tyndarus, the fairest young Lady of all Greece, was courted by the young Grecian Princes, and that the fame of her Beauty went as far as Phrygia; but Paris Alexander Son to King Priamus, one of her Lovers, having been pre∣ferred to all the other Princes, for the sake of his Beauty, and the magnificence of his Equipage, married her, and presently brought her to Troy. Menelaus and the other Grecian Princes provoked by this choice, raised a powerful Army under the command of Aga∣memnon, and sat down before Troy. But Achil∣les was killed in this War, and the Greeks forc'd to make a Peace with the Trojans, by the mediation of Ulysses; and to repair the damage they had done before Troy, they of∣fer'd a wooden Horse gilt over to Minerva, and returned into Greece without Hellen, whom Hector, after the death of Paris gave in marriage to Deiphobus; but a while after she was murthered by Orestes the Son of Aga∣memnon. Herodatus reports, that after Menelaus was deceased, Nicostratus and Megapenthus, two La∣cedemonian
Lords drove Helena out of the City, and the Kingdom of Sparta; and she retired to Rhodes, where she was kindly receiv'd by Poypbo, then Widow of Tlepolemus King of that Island, who was kill'd by Sarpedon at the siege of Troy. As first Polypo entertain'd her very honourably; but in her absence her Maid of Honour hanged her upon a Tree. Pausanias calls this Queen Poliho native of Argos, and says, that her Maids being dressed like Furies hanged Helena by the order of their Mistriss, while she was bathing herself. Menesius speaking of the Island of Spatara re∣lates, that Helena there granted her first fa∣vours to Paris, and that on the banks of the firm Land opposite to it, this fortunate Lover after this agreeable conquest, built a Temple to Venus, for a Monument of the transports of his Joy, and in acknowledgement of Venus's kindness, to whom he gave the attribute of Migonitis, and called his Territory Migonion, from a word that signified the Amorous My∣stery that passed between them; and that Menelaus the unfortunate Husband of this Princess, eighteen years after she was stoln away, came to visit this Temple, the Territory whereof had been witness of his Misfortune, and the infidelity of his Wife; but he did not destroy it, but only set upon both sides thereof the Statue of Venus, and the Images of two other Goddesses, viz. Thetis and the God∣dess Praxidica, i. e. the Goddess of Punish∣ments, to shew that he would not pass by that Affront unpunished. But, says the same Author, he had not the good fortune to see himself revenged of Helena, for she out-lived him; however, Menelaus revenged himself on Priamus the Father of the Ravisher, and ut∣terly destroyed his Kingdom. As for Helena, she made a very tragical end of her life, for having retired herself to Rhodes, near Prolixo her Kinswoman, there she was hanged to a Tree by her orders. HELENUS, The Son of Priamus, and a very experienc'd South-sayer, whom the Greeks spared in the sacking of Troy. He had married Andromache, whom he divorc'd, tak∣ing for his second Wife Hermione, the Daugh∣ter of Menelaus, and Wife to Orestes, and then retired into Chaonia, and there built a City after the Draught of the City of Troy, where Aene∣as landed. Thus Virgil speaks of it: Being imbark'd, they sail'd along the Coasts of several Islands, and among others, along the Isle where Helenus the Son of Priamus reigned, with Andromache the Wife of Hector. There they landed, and Helenus foretold them from Apollo, that before they should arrive in Italy, they should go ashore in Sicily, and that Aeneas should descend to Hell. HELEPOLIS, An Engine, used for∣merly to batter Towns, invented by Demi∣trius. This Engine was a wooden Tower, cover'd with a contexture of Hair and fresh Hides. HELIADES, The Daughters of the Sun and Clymene, and Sisters to Phaeton: who being very much concern'd for the loss of Phaeton their Brother, whom Jupiter had struck with his Thunder, were turn'd into Poplar-trees, out of compassion of the Gods, and their tears changed into Amber, as the Fable tells us. HELICE, or Calisto, the Daughter of Lycaon King of Arcadia, whom Diana changed into a She-Bear; because, being one of her Attendants, she let herself be corrupted by Jupiter; but taking pitty of her, he turned her into a Constellation, called the great Bear. HELICON, A Mountain in Baeotia, near Mount Parnassus in Phocis, both dedicated to Apollo and the Muses, called by the name of this Mountain Heliconides. HELIOGABALUS, called Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, a natural Son to the Empe∣ror Caracalla. He was elected Emperor by the Army, in the room of Macrinus. Histo∣rians commonly call him Heliogabalus, and yet in many Medals he is named Heligabalus, because before his election to the Empire, he was a Priest of the Sun in Phaenicia, where the Sun is called after that Name. When he came to Rome he brought his God along with him, and ordered the people to worship him exclusive of all other Gods; and Lampridius tells us, that he sacrific'd to him humane Victims, both Boys and Girls. He was vi∣cious to a superlative degree, and his pro∣fuseness and effeminacy were beyond bounds, for he was served at Table with two and twenty Courses of Meat, with all sorts of Fowls and Rarities unknown at Rome, and fetched from the most remote Provinces. He burned Balm in his Lamps, and kept sweet waters in his Vaults. He privately married a Vestal Virgin, called Aquilia Se∣vera, that he might beget a Celestial Poste∣rity, being himself the Priest of the Sun. His Lewdness and Debauchery grew to such an excess, that the description thereof in Hi∣story makes the Reader blush. The Soldiers murthered him and his Mother in the Camp, and their Bodies were dragg'd along the Streets of Rome, and thrown into a Kennel, and then into the Tiber; wherefore he was called Heliogabalus Tiberinus. He had established a Senate of Women, to decide differences arising amongst Ladies. HELLE, The Daughter of Nephele, and the first Wife of Athamas King of Thebes,
whom Ino his second Wife attempted to de∣stroy, whereupon he fled away with her Bro∣ther Phryxus, riding on a Ram, whose Fleece was of Gold; but crossing over the Sea, she fell into that Sea, which was called after her name Hellespontus. HEMINA. , say the Ancient Glosses. Hemine, i. e. half a pint English Mea∣sure; these two words are reciprocal, and the Antient Lexicon has translated  by the word Hemina. Festus the Grammarian tells us the reason thereof. Hemine, says he, is so called from the Greek  dimidium, because 'tis the half of the Sextarius. This is confirmed by Aulus Gellius, who says, that if an Hemine is pour'd out of a Sextarius, half a Sextarius was poured out, and not that a Sextarius was divided by the half, dimidium, non dimidiatum Sextarium.The Hemine was then the half of a Roman Sextarius. The Ro∣man Hemine, says Garaut the Commissioner of the Mint, is the same measure, with that which is called at Paris, Dimisetier, holding eight ounces of Liquor. Fernelius tells us the same. Hemine was also a measure of Wheat, holding about four Bushels of Paris mea∣sure. Apuleius tells us also, that Cotyla and Hemi∣ne were synonymous among the Ancients, and both taken for the half Sextarius: Hemine, says he, is the half of a Sextarius, wherefore the Greeks call it Cotyle, i. e. incision or di∣vision, because, it divided the Sextarius in two. The Antients often confounded these two words, and sometimes called Hemine the Ita∣lian Cotyle; and Cotyle the Hermine of the Greeks, because Hemine was the half of the Sextarius of Italy, as the Cotyle was likewise the half Sextarius of the Greeks. They kept also the Originals of the Mea∣sures in the Temples, and had recourse to them, to verify the other Measures used a∣mongst the People; and in this sense the Ho∣ly Scripture speaks of the Weights of the Sanctuary, which were the Rules for other Weights. Varro reports, that the Ballance used to weight the Coin, was kept in the Temple of Saturn. We read in Fannius's Writings, that the Amphora containing eight Congia, i. e. forty eight Sextarii, was dedicated by the Ancient Romans to Jupiter upon the Tarpeian Mount, where stood the Capitol. Quam ne violara liceret, Sacravere Jovi, Tarpeio in monte, Quirites. And the Emperor Vispationus having repair'd the Capitol after the Civil Wars of Vitellius, he placed therein again the Original Mea∣sures. The Congium did hold ten Pounds, viz. a hundred and twenty Roman Ounces; which were about three Quarts English Measure. HERACLIDAE, or the Posterity of Hercules, who being driven out of Greece by Euristeus, retired to Athens, and fled for refuge to the Altars. Demophon Prince of Athens, would not permit any Man to force out from of their shelter; however, being afraid that Euristcus should make war against him, he consulted the Oracle, who told him that he should sacrifice a Virgin to Ceres, to secure himself the Victory, but Demophon refus'd to offer his own Daughter or any other Virgin in sacrifice; whereupon Macaria, who was of Hercules's Family, voluntarily submitted herself to the Oracle, and was sacrific'd. The Athenians incourag'd by this sacrifice went to meet the Enemy, resolv'd to defend valiantly the sanctity of their Osylum, and the liberty of the Heraclidae. Joalus, who was Hercules's fel∣low Traveller, and had manag'd the whole Negotiation for the liberty of the Heraclida, as his own, was at last rewarded by the Gods, who restor'd him to his former strength, and granted him a perpetual youth. HERACLITUS, A Philosopher, who always wept at the Miseries of the World and mortal Men, saying that their condition was very sad, nothing being dura∣ble here below, but all things obnoxious to a perpetual change; asserting withal that all the pleasures that Men enjoy'd are nothing else but grief, their knowledge ignorance, their grandeur meanness, and their strength infirmity. HERCULES, There were several of that Name. But Hercules of Tyrus, and Hercu∣les of Egypt, were the most ancient of all those called by that name. Sanchon Ciathon, who has written the pedi∣gree of the Phaenician Gods, has recorded Her∣cules amongst them, and tells us that he was the Son of Demaron, and was called Melchartus, which signifies the King of the City, both in Hebrew and the Phaenician Languages. We learn the same thing of Hesychius, for Melec signifies King, and Cartha a City. Herodotus seems inclined to place Hercules of Aegypt in the first rank of Antiquity; for he tells us, that he is one of the twelve first and principal Gods, and that on his account a great many Ages since, the Grecks set up for their Hercules the Son of Alcmena, and Jupiter or Amphitrion. Jesephus in his Antiquities of the Jews has preserv'd a fragment of Menander of Ephesus, who speaking of Hiram King of Tyrus, who supply'd Solomon with Timber, for the build∣ing
of the Temple of Jerusalem, assures us, that he built also himself some new Temples in Tyrus, to Hercules and Assarte, having first demolish'd the ancient Temples. Hercules of Egypt was much older, as Macrobius relates: Deus Hercules religiose quidem apud Tyron colitur, verùm sacratissimâ & augustissimâ Aegyptij eum religione venerantur. Ipse creditur & Gigan∣tes interemisse, &c. If Hercules of Egypt was living in the time of the War of the Giants, the Glory of Antiquity must be allowed to him. Salust mentions Hercules of Libya, who had founded the City of Capsa; and Orosius calls him the Phaenician Hercules. Eusebius relates a passage of Diodorus Siculus, who tells us in general, that the Greeks have ascribed to themselves the Heroes and the Gods of Egypt, and amongst others Hercules. Diodorus reports this discourse, as he heard it from the mouth of the Egyptians, and their proofs bore a great weight. For since all agree that Hercules was in the Engagement with the Giants, this Hercules can't be the Graecian Hercules, who lived but a hundred years before the siege of Troy. Hercules was armed with a massy Club, and coveted with a Lion's skin; these Arms are very ancient, before offensive or defensive Arms were found out. Hercules clear'd the Earth of many prodigious Beasts, and conse∣quently this was perform'd before the De∣luge, and in Egypt, which is well stock'd with monstrous Beasts. Diodorus mentions three Hercules's. The first and the most Ancient was in Egypt, and subdued one part of the World, and erected a Column in Africa. The second at Crete, who erected the Olympick Games. The third was the Sun of Jupiter and Alcmena, who executed what Euristhius had commanded him, and set up a Pillar on the Frontiers of Europe. But these Hercules's having been recorded one after another, all that was proper to the for∣mer was ascrib'd to the last: and their names being the same, gave occasion to ascribe to a single man all that was perform'd, by all those that were called by that name, as if they were all but one Hercules. Nominis vero & studiorum similitudo effecit-ut post obitum anti∣quorum res gestas huic soli, ac si unus per omne aevum Hercules tantùm extitisset, posteritas ascri∣beret. The same Writer in another place describes the Birth and the Works of the Grecian Hercu∣les, and brings him to discourse with the fa∣mous Astrologer Atlas, and afterwards to communicate Astrology himself to the Greeks; from hence the Greeks took occasion to say, that they had both supported Heaven. And he tells us also, that after his death, he was honour'd first like a Hero, then like a God, to whom the Athenians and all other Na∣tions after their Example sacrificed. But what he says of the passage of Hercules through Gaul, seems to be a Fable of the Greeks. And we might say the like of Hercules's Travels in Italy, were they not related by so many Writers. There is more certainty in what he tells us of the magnificent Temple of Hercules of Tyrus, built by the Phaenicians in the Isle of Gades in Spain. Wherefore 'tis a common opinion, that the Pillars of Hercules on the Limits of Europe, were rather set up by the Phaenicians in remembrance of their Hercules, or by their Hercules himself, than by the Gre∣cian Hercules. As to the Indian Hercules men∣tioned also by Diodorus, 'tis more likely that he was the Hercules of Egypt, who extended his Victories further than any other of that name, viz. in the Eastern Provinces, called East-Indies remote from Egypt. Strabo doth not speak with judgment of the Pillars of Hercules. For he tells us, that some Authors thought, that which was called the Columns of Hercules, was the Banks of the straight of Gibralter; others the Isle of Gades; others two Mountains; and some o∣thers thought that these Pillars of Hercules, were eight Columns of Brass, erected by the Phaenicians, in the Temple of Hercules of Gades, whereupon they writ the charges of the building of the Temple. Pliny says, that the Mounts Abila in Africa, and Calpe in Europe, are the Pillars of Hercules; and that the Inhabitants of those places fan∣cy, that Hercules divided these two Promon∣tories, and procur'd a free passage into the Lands, to the Sea called the Mediterranean Sea. Plutarch speaking of the Hercules of the Greeks in the life of Theseus, say many things, which might be as justly applied to the o∣ther Hercules's. For he observes that in these ages of ignorance, many Men of extraordina∣ry strength and valour, such as were Hercules and Theseus, proposed to themselves in their expeditions to free the world of many Mon∣sters of Iniquity, who infested Mankind, and to bring all wild Nations to a due civi∣lity, politeness and Religion. Tully proposes Hercides for the most perfect model of Vertue, who expos'd himself to all kind of dangers, and bore all possible Evils for the good of Mankind. Dionysius Halicarnasseus represents the Grecian Hercules like a vertuous Hero, who subdued all the Earth, out of a strong passion to re-establish every where peace, con∣cord and justice; and Aelianus says, that an Oracle assur'd Hercules that he should be rank'd in the number of Gods, for a reward of doing good to all Men.
Pausanias affirms, that the Temple which Hercules (as some said) had built for himself, was more ancient than the Hercules of Greece; and that it was well known, that the Inha∣bitants of Creete had another Hercules, as well as the Tyrians and those of Erythraea in Ionia. We may think that the Hercules of the Erythrae∣ans, and that of the Arabians and Assyrians is the same; for the ancient Erythraeans were Idumaeans or Arabians. And we know that the Red-Sea was called either Erythraeum in Greek, or Idumaeuns in the Phaenician tongue, because the word Edom signifies red. In fine, the Hercules of Egypt was not unknown to this Author, for he says that the Hercules of Greece not be∣ing able to prevail with the Priests of Delphus, stole away the holy Tripos, and that then she cried out, that it was plain that he was the Grecian Hercules, and not the Egyptian: Nam & ante Aegyptius Hercules Delphos venerat Pausanias brings in another place an instance, how these several Hercules in series of time were confounded in one Man; and says, that the Thasians who were come from Phaeni∣cia into Greece, at first ador'd there Hercules of Tyre, but being mixt at last with the Greeks, they worshipp'd Hercules of Greece. Arrian assures us, that there were formerly three Hercules's, The Tyrian Hercules is much older than the Hercules of the Greeks; but that of Egypt is still more ancient; and that the Hercules, who was reverenc'd at Tartassus in Spain, where Hercules's Pillars stood also, was the Tyrian Hercules, because that City was built by the Tyrians; and the Sacrifices there offer'd, were offer'd after the Tyrian way. They ascribe a Dog to Hercules of Tyrus, and to this Dog is referr'd the invention of purple colour, the blood whereof makes this admirable colour. Poets feign'd that Hercules was conceiv'd during three nights, without the interruption of day, to imitate the pro∣longation of the day obtained by Josbua to utterly rout the Enemies of the people of God. We read in Lycophron's Cassandra, that Her∣cules was devoured by a Sea-Dog, named Carcharias, whom Neptune had sent against him. And the Scholiast of Lycophron tells us, that this great Fish being ready to swal∣low Hesions the Daughter of Laomedon, Her∣cules advanced, and threw himself armed in∣to the mouth of the Monster, and having tore his Intrails, he got out of his belly, ha∣ving lost nothing but his Hair, and that from hence Hercules was called ; because he was three nights in the belly of that Monster. Thphiloct mentions this Fable, and applies it to Jonas swallow'd by a Whale. HERCULES the GRECIAN was the Son of Jupiter and Alcmena the wife of Amphitrio, being yet in the Cradle he choa∣ed two Serpents, which Juno out of jealousy against his Mother, had sent to destroy him. They relate twelve Prodigies extraordinary, called the twelve Labours of Hercules. Euristheus the Son of Helenus King of Myce having a mind to be rid of Hercules, sent him first to stop the incursions of the Lion of the Nemean Forest, who was fallen from the Hea∣ven of the Moon, and destroyed all the Country: Hercules pursued him, and having driven him into a Den, he seiz'd upon him, and tore his Mouth with his own hands, and ever after wore the skin of that Lion. After this Expedition he was sent to the Lake of Lerna near Argos, to force the Hydra, a dreadful Serpent with seven Heads, and having cut off one Head thereof, two arose in the place, wherefore Hercules cut off her seven heads at once. Then he marched against a fierce Wild-Boar, inhabiting Mount Erymanthus in Arcadia, who spoiled all the Fields. He took him alive, and brought him upon his shoulders to Eristheus, who was almost frighted to death at the sight thereof. He also caught running the Hind of Mena∣lus's Hills, the Feet whereof were of Brass, and his Horns of Gold, after he had pursu'd her a whole year. He likewise drove away the Birds of Sty∣phalus's Lake, that were so numerous, and of so prodigious a bigness, that they stopt the light with their wings, and took up Men to devour them. He engag'd the Amazons inhabiting Scythia, near the Hircanean Sea, and took their Queen Hypolita prisoner, whom Theseus married. He cleansed the Stables of Augias King of Elis, where a thousand Oxen were kept, the Dung whereof infected the air: and to com∣pass this work, he turned the course of the River Alpheus, and convey'd the Waters thereof through the Stables, which carried away all the Dung. He seiz'd upon a Bull casting out fire and flames, that Neptune had sent into Greece, to revenge some affront he had received from the Greeks. He took Diomedes King of Thrace, and gave him to be eaten by his own Man-eating Horses, to punish him for his cruelty towards Strangers, whom likewise he deliver'd up to be devoured by his Horses, and made Geryon, who had three Bodies, suffer the same punish∣ment, because his Oxen devoured Travellers. He brought to Euristeus, the golden Apples out of the Garden of the Hesperides, and kill'd the dreadful Dragon that guarded them. He went to Hell, and brought thence with him the Dog Cerberus, and delivered
Theseus, who was gone thither to keep com∣pany with Pirithous his Friend; and this was the last of his Exploits. Many other performances both of Justice and Courage are still ascribed to Hercules; for he kill'd Busiris the Son of Neptune, who us'd to cut the Throats of Travellers; and killed Cacus a three-headed Man, the Son of Vulcan, a famous Robber, who infested Mount Aven∣tinus, and the Country round about with his Robberies; and passing by Mount Caucasus, he delivered Prometheus whom Jupiter had order'd to be tied thereon, and kill'd the Eagle who was devouring his Liver, and smother'd in his Arms Anteus the Son of the Earth. In the latter end of his life he was much given to Women, and Omphale Queen of Lydia made him spin, and beat him with her Distaff, and after all his great Atchievements, he put an end to his Life on Mouut Oeta; for having put on the Garment of Nessus the Centaur, which Dejanira his Wife had sent him by Lycas; the malignity of Nessus's blood, which was a strong Poyson, put him into so violent a rage, that he cast himself into a burning pile of wood, and there was consumed. HERCULES the LIBYAN, or HORUS. Several Illustrious Men went by the name of Hercules; yet amongst them there were three very famous, two whereof signaliz'd themselves in Italy, viz. Hercules the Libyan and Hercules of Greece, the Son of Alome∣na and Jupiter, whom we have lately mention'd. Horus or Hercules the Libyan, the Son of Osiris and Isis, as Berusus and Natalis Comes tells us, applied himself to deliver Men from oppression and injustice. To that purpose he went into Libya, where he put Antaeus to death; from Lybia he passed over into Spain, where he killed Geryon the Tyrant, and from Spain he came into Italy, where he reigned thirty years. Herodotus reports, that he was the last of the Gods, and says that he reigned twelve hundred years; wherefore Diodorus Si∣culus tells us, that the Egyptians reckon'd their years by the course of the Moon, and that their years are like our months. HERCULES GALLICUS, or OGMIUS. The Gauls draw him with a white Beard, bald, wrinkled and tawny like old Marriners, or rather like Charon himself, or Japetus, who is reckon'd the most ancient of Men. In short, to see him, you would take him for any thing rather than Hercules, tho he wears the same Ensign, viz. a Lion's skin, a Massy-Club, with a Bow bent in his left hand, and a Quiver at his back. I thought at first, says Lucian, they did it out of mockery, or out of revenge for the in∣cursions he made into their Country, in his Expedition of Spain. But I have not yet told you of the greatest mystery of the Pi∣cture; which is, that he held enchain'd by the ears, an infinite number of People, who are ty'd to his Tongue, by small twists or wires of Gold, as by so many chains, and follow him willingly, without strug∣gling or hanging back, insomuch that a Man would say they delighted in Captivi∣ty. As I was wondering with some Indig∣nation at this spectacle, a Doctor of that Country, who spoke very good Greek, told me he would unriddle me the mystery that was contained under that Aenigma, and be∣gun in the manner following. We do not with the Greeks believe, that Mercury is the Symbol or rather the God of Eloquence, as he is stil'd, but rather Hercules, who is much more powerful; and our opinion is, that he affected all that we admire, not by the strength of his Arm, but by that of his Rea∣son. Wherefore we paint him under the figure of an old Man, because Reason is not accomplish'd until that Age. This God holds all Mankind tied by the Ears, which is the effects of Ratiocination, and his Tongue to which they are fasten'd, is the Instrument of their Captivity. His Darts are the force of his Reasons, being feather'd, because that words are wing'd, as Homer calls them. Many Temples and Altars were erected to Hercules the Gaulish at Tyrus, in Spain, and at Rome, and one of these Altars was called Ara∣maxima, because of the great quantity of Stones employed in the building thereof, whereon they took solemn Oaths, and offered the tenth part of the Booty. And a Merchant whom Hercules had rescued from the Hands of Pirates, built him a Temple of a round figure, under the Title of Deo Herculi Invicto. 'Tis reported that neither Flies nor Dogs en∣tered into this Temple, because he had dri∣ven away Myagros the God of Flies, and had left his Massy-Club at the entrance of this Temple. Hercules was represented stark naked, except the Lion's skin, which cover'd his Body, or twisted about his Arm, and holding with one hand his Massy-Club. He is yet expressed by a figure holding three Golden Apples in his right hand, and his Club in the left. And a great brass Fi∣gure of Hercules holding an Apple in his hand, was lately found at Rome, in the Mar∣ket for Oxen. The Poplar-tree was dedicated to him, as Virgil says, Populus Alcidae gratissima; and Phae∣drus, populus Herculi; wherefore his Figure is yet visible on a Greek Medal, crowned with Branches of Poplar-tree, and a Lion's skin about his neck.
The Emperor Commodus slighted the sirname of his Family, and instead of Commodus, Son to Marcus Aurelius, took the name of Hercules the Son of Jupiter; and leaving off the Impe∣rial Badges, he put on a Lion's skin and wore a Massy-Club, the badges of Hercules, and appeared publickly in this dress: And yet not contented with it, he order'd that Coins of Gold, Silver and Brass, should be stamp'd with his Effigies on one side crown'd with a Lion's skin; and on the other side a Massy-Club, a Bow, a Quiver and Arrows, with this Inscription Herculi Romano Invicto, and when he wrote to the Senate he stiled him∣self Romanus Hercules, and had the Massy-Club and the Lion's skin carried before him, in his Travels. HERES, An Heir, one who succeeds to Lands or Estate, either by right of Fami∣ly or by a last Will. The Roman Laws esta∣blished three kinds of Heirs. The necessary Heirs, were the Slaves made Heirs by their Masters who freed them, and are called ne∣cessary, because being appointed by their Masters, they were forced to accept of his Will, and were not allowed to quit the In∣heritance, tho' it was very much incumber'd with Debts, and subject to great charges. The other kind of Heirs called Sui and Neces∣sarij, were the Children who were in the power of the deceased Person in the time of his death, and were called necessarij, because willing or unwilling they are Heirs; and Sui, because they are the Testator's own and proper Domesticks, and the owners of the Lands and Estates of their Parents. The third kind of Heirs were Strangers, viz. those who were neither Children nor Slaves to the deceased person; and these were vo∣luntary Heirs, for they were free to accept or quit what was left them. As for the former, who were the Slaves of the Testator, they are freed and Heirs by the only benefit of the law, without any o∣ther act of acceptation, and are not admitted to refuse the Will: On the contrary, they are bound to pay all the Debts, even out of the Estate or Goods, that they had purchas'd since they had obtain'd their freedom, un∣less the Praetor granted them a benefit of se∣paration. And the Children, who were under the deceased person's authority in the time of his death, they were like Slaves, as to the necessity of accepting the Inheritance, being necessary Heirs to their Parents; and after the death of their Father, the Inheritance was rather a continuation of Patrimony, than a new purchase. The third kind of Heirs, called Strangers, who were neither Slaves nor Children to the dead Person, were free to accept or quit the Inheritance, which was performed by a deed in law. In the text of the Roman Law, there was three several ways of purchasing or ac∣cepting of an Inheritance, viz. Aditio Heredi∣tatis, which was a solemn Deed performed before the Magistrate; Gestio pro Herede, Deeds of owners, as to fell Estates, receive Rents and Debts, and gather Fruits. This manner of accepting an Inheritance, is severally ex∣press'd in the Roman Law; for in the person of strange Heirs, 'tis called gestio pro herede; but in the person of Children, 'tis called im∣mixtio; and the third way, is a single and plain will of accepting or refusing. There were also three contrary ways to quit an Inheritance, viz. Repudiatio, which is a Deed in Law, performed in the presence of the Magistrate; Abstentio, which was for the Children; and the last was only a single Will, when a man declared that he was un∣willing to be Heir. Formerly they allowed an hundred days for claiming an Inheritance. HERES Ex asse, an Heir or sole Le∣gate. See As. HERMAPHRODITUS. An Her∣maphrodite, one that is both Man and Wo∣man, called by the Greeks Androgyne. Poets tell us that Hermaphroditus was the Son of Mer∣cury and Venus, and that meeting in a Foun∣tain with the Goddess Salmacis, she fell in love with him; and while she was embra∣cing him, she found herself fastned to him by an indissolvable tye, both Bodies making but one with both sexes. This word comes from the Greek , Mercurius and , Venus, i. e. composed of Mercury and Venus both Male and Female. Monsieur Spon in his curious inquiries after Antiquity, has shewn us two precious stones, whereon the Fable of Hermaphroditus is en∣graven. The first is a Cornelian, where he is represented in the Bath, ready to embrace his dear Nymph Salmacis, and becoming but one body with her, that yet keeps both Sexes. On the second he is already turned in the like manner that he is represented at Rome, by Marble and Brass Statues. By this Figure the Ancients represented a mix'd Deity, com∣posed of Mercury and Venus, called by the Greeks , to join Eloquence with Pleasure; or to shew that Venus was of both Sexes; for Calvus a Poet, calls Venus a God. Polentemque Deum venerem. And Virgil in the second Book of his Aenids.
Discedo, ac ducente Deo flammam inter & hostes, Expedior. Levinus speaking of this Divinity, ascribes her both Sexes. Aristophanes calls her  in the Neuter Gender, and Hesy∣chius  in the Masculine. And in the Isle of Cyprus near Amathus, she is re∣presented by a Statue, with a Beard like a Man. HERMES, A Sir-name given to Mer∣cury. The Hermae were Statues of Mercury commonly made of Marble; and yet some∣times of brass, without either Arms or Feet, set up by the Greeks and the Romans in cross ways. Servius in his Commentary on the eighth Book of the Aeneids of Virgil, tells us the Origine of the word Hermes, and says, that Shepherds found Mercury, called Hermes, asleep on a Mountain, and cut off his hands; whereupon he was afterwards called Cyllenius, as well as the Mountain where this Act was perform'd; because  signifies, that which has no Arm, or which is maied of some Member; and from hence, says he, some Statues which have no Arms, are called Her∣mae. But this Etymology, says Mr. Spon, taken from the Epithet Cyllenius, given to Mercury, is contrary to what ancient Writers report, for they derive this word from the place were he was born, called Cyllene, a Town in Arcadia, or a Mountain of the same name. Wherefore Pausanias in the De∣scription of Greece, l. 8. says, that Mount Cyllene is the most famous of Arcadia; and that on the top thereof, a Temple was built to Mercury Cyllenius, and that the name of the Mountain, and the Sirname of Cyllenius given to Mercury, comes from Cyllenus the Son of Elatus, a Hero of that Country: And this Etymology comes nearer to the truth, than that related by Servius. Suidas, morally explains this manner of making Statues of Mercury without Arms. The Hermae, says he, were Statues of Stone, erected by the Athenians at the Porches of their Temples, or entrance of their Houses: For Mercury being esteemed the God of Speech and Truth, was represented with square and cubical Statues, because square Figures can't be set but upright, like Truth that never changes. The Hermae were first found out and used at Athens, wherefore Suidas tells us, that they were peculiar to that City. Aeschines in his Oration against Ctesiphon, mentions the porch of the Hermae, which was in his Time at A∣thens, where among others there were three very remarkable Hermae set up in honour to the Athenians, who had routed the Persians, near the River Stymon. The Inscriptions of these Hermae were Encomiums of the Athenians valour; nevertheless, out of a wise policy, the names of the Athenian Generals were not mention'd in these Inscriptions; lest this Na∣tion, jealous of their liberty, should raise the ambition of these Great Men, and give them occasion to aspire to the Soveraign Power. The chiefest Hermae of Athens, were the Hipparchians, which Hipparchus the Son of Pi∣sistratas Tyrant of Athens, had erected in the City, the Suburbs and the Villages of Attica, with ingraven moral Instructions and Sen∣tences, to incourage Men to vertue, as 'tis related by several Authors. Cornelius Nepos in the life of Alcibiades, tells us, that one night the Hermae then at Athens were all cast to the ground, only one excepted, that stood at the door of the Orator Andocides, who says in his speech of the Mysteries, that it was dedi∣cated by the Tribe Egeida. The Hermae were also set up in cross ways and great Roads, because Mercury the messen∣ger of the Gods presided over the high ways. Wherefore he was sirnamed both Trivius from the word trivium, i. e. a cross way; and Via∣cus, from the word via, i. e. way, in an In∣scription of Gruter. Tully, a great loer of Antiquity, being in∣form'd by the Letters of his Friend Atticus then an Athens, that he had found some Her∣mae; writes thus to him, in the seventh Let∣ter of the first Book. Your Hermae of Mar∣ble of Mount Rentilicus, with their head of brass, rejoyce me before hand; wherefore you will oblige me very much to send them to me, with the Statues and other curiosi∣ties that you can find at Athens, of your own liking and approbation. The Women honour'd much the Hermae, and adorned them with Flowers, that they might obtain of them a happy fecundity, as we see in a basso relievo of Boissard's Antiquities. HERM-ATHENAE, Were Statues set upon square feet like the Hermae; but repre∣sented Mercury and Minerva, this word being compounded of Hermae and Athenae, which signifies these two Divinities. Pomponius At∣ticus having found at Athens one of these rare Statues, writes to his Friend Tully, that he would send it to him to adorn his Library. And Tully answers him thus, Epist. 3. l. 1. What you write of the Herm-Athenae is very acceptable to me, and I have appointed an honourable place for them in my Academy, whereof it shall be the Ornament; seeing that Mercury is the general protector of all Academies, and Minerva presides particu∣larly over mine. Wherefore you can't ob∣lige me more sensibly, then to procure
me these kind of Rarities to adorn this place. 'Tis no wonder to see Mercury and Minerva joyned together in this Statue; for it was usual to keep Holy-days and offer Sacrifices that were common to them both, because one presided over Eloquence, and the other the Sciences; and that Eloquence without Erudition is but a meer sound; and Learn∣ing without Eloquence, but an unprofitable Treasure. Therefore the Athenians, who were the most Learned, most Eloquent and most Valiant Men in the world, did wisely to erect and dedicate this figure of Hermathcna. This Hermathena is the reverse of a Medal dedicated to Adrian, who boasted of his Learning and Eloquence. HERM-ANUBIS, is represented two several ways; for in some Figures 'tis represented with the Head of a Sparrow∣hawk, and in others with the head of a Dog. This strange Idol mention'd by Plutarch, was a Divinity of the Egyptians, representing Mer∣cury and Anubis; the Caduceum which he holds in his hand being the common badge of Mercury, and the head of a Sparrow-hawk the Symbol of Anubis, because Anubis was a great Hunter; wherefore he is also express'd with the head of a Dog, and Ovid calls him La∣trator Anubis. HERM-HERACLES, is a Deity represented like the Hermae, with the Lion's skin and the Massy-Club of Hercules, the Greeks call him Heracles; which has a rela∣tion to the custom of the Antient Greeks, who erected the Statues of Mercury and Hercules in the Academies, because both presided over the Exercises of Youth, viz. Wrestling, Running, Boxing, and other Combats of Champions. The union of Mercury with Hercules, shew'd that Strength must be back'd with Eloquence, and that Eloquence had the art of overcoming Monsters. Mercury was often express'd at Athens, by a square figure of an unpolish'd Stone, where∣on they set up the head of any other God whatsoever. The origine of this custom was, that in former times the Statues of Mercury were placed upon square Bases, to shew the solidity of the works of Art, and especially of Eloquence, invented by him. Wherefore in series of time, these square Bases were taken for his representation, tho' there were no Statues whatsoever set upon 'em, because these bases were peculiar to him. But afterwards to honour the other Gods Statues, they plac'd them upon these bases, to shew that they were famous only by Mer∣cury, who chief business was to carry their Errands, and execute their Orders. And the whole figure of these two Gods joined toge∣ther, was called by the name of the Deity, whose figure was set upon the Basis; where∣fore Herm-Heracles was the figure of Hercules, placed upon the representation of Mercury. HERM-EROS, is a Statue of Brass, representing a God made up of Mercury and Cupid, called by the Greeks Eros. This God is expressed by the figure of a young Boy, holding the Caducaeum and the Purse, the two Badges of Mercury. The Ancients doubtless intimated by this Emblem, that Eloquence and Money were two necessary things to a Lover. Pliny speaking of fine Carver's work, mentions the Hermaerotae of one Tauriscus; and the word Hemero's, was often used by the Ro∣mans and the Greeks for a sirname; as we may see by the Inscription of an Epitaph found at Rome. HFRMEROTI AUG. LIB. PRAEPOSITO TABULAR. RATIONIS CASTRENSIS. FRATRI INDULGENTISSIM. AMPLIATUS AUG. LIB. FECIT. To the Memory of Hermeros, Infranchised by the Emperor, Overseer of the Secretaries of the Camp; Ampliatus Freed-man of the Emperor, has dedicated this Monument to his very good Brother. HERM-HARPOCRATES, The Figure of Mercury and Harpocrates, with wings at his heels like Mercury, and holding his Finger upon his Mouth like Harpocrates, the God of silence among the Aegyptians, to shew that sometimes silence is eloquent, especial∣ly amongst Lovers, who often express them∣selves better with their eyes, than by word of Mouth. HERMA-MITHRA. Her Figure is represented upon a Medal, that Mr. Spon has brought from the Isle of Maltha, the Head whereof is a Woman with a Veil: On the Reverse are three small Figures; the mid∣dle one is a Statue drawn half way, with a Mitre on, and set upon a Term, the Inscrip∣tion whereof consists only in three Punid Characters. The Head cover'd with a Veil represents Juno, the Mitred head Mercury and Apollo joined together. HERMOGENES was very famous in the art of Orarory. At fifteen years of age he taught Rhetorick with general applause; and at four and twenty he forgot all that he knew before: wherefore it was said of him, that in his youth he was a perfect Man, and in his old age a Child. After his death his Corps was opened, and his Heart was found hairy, and of an extraordinary bigness.
HERODOTUS, A Greek Historian, of a rare and singular merit, who considering with himself which way he might become famous, he thought fit to present himself at the Olympick Games, where all the Greeks were assembled, and there he recited his Hi∣story with so much applause, that his Books were called by the name of Muses; and when he was passing by they cried out every where, There is the Man, who has so deservedly sung our Victories, and celebrated the Advantages that we have obtain'd over the Barbarians. His Wri∣tings were admired for the elegancy of the Discourse, the grace of the Sentences, and and the polite stile of the Ionick Dialect. HEROPHILUS, He lived in the seventh Age. Pliny tells us, that he oppos'd the Principles of Erasistratus, and grounded the difference of Diseases on the Rules of Musick. HEROS, A Hero was in former ages a great and illustrious Person; and although he was of a mortal Race, was yet esteemed by the People a partaker of Immortality, and after his death was put amongst the Gods. Lucian defines a Hero, by one who is neither God nor Man, but both together. St Austin in the tenth Book de Civitate Dei, says, that 'tis very likely that Juno had a Child called by that name; because, according to the opinion of the Ancients, vertuous persons after their death inhabit the vast space of the Air, which were Juno's Dominion, according to the Fable. Isidorus says, that the Heroes were called by that name, as if one said Aereos or Aeres, persons rais'd by merit, and worthy of Heaven. Plo derives that word from the Greek , amor; because, says he, the Heroes came by the conjunction of a God with a mortal Woman, or of a mortal Man with a Goddess. The Heroes were Men, who by their Eloquence moved the People which way they pleased, giving them an aversion against Vice, and leading them by their discourses and examples into the way of Vertue. HESIODUS of a single Shepherd be∣came a great Poet, by chewing some Laurel leaves upon Mount Helicon. Lucian has left us a little Dialogue between Hefiod and him∣self, wherein he jeers him, because he bragg'd of his Commerce with the Muses Lucian. Your Verses. Hesiod, sufficiently evince you a great Poet, for all you write is noble and lofty, and we easily perceive you have received a branch of L'aurel from the Muses's hands. But you having said, that this divine Present would teach things pass'd and the future; I would fain know, why having descanted on the one, you have told us-nothing of the other; for you have sung the Geneology of the Gods, beginning from the Heaven and Earth, the Chaos and Love; you have afterwards set down the precepts of Astrology for Sailors and Hus∣bandmen; you have treated of rural Life, of Women's Vertues, and other such like mat∣ters; but you have not bolted so much as one word of futurity, which had better manifest∣ed your inspiration, and redounded more to the advantage of Men. Is it that you im∣pos'd upon us? or are you willing to con∣ceal your secret? or else are not your Pro∣phecies transmitted down to us? for there is no likelihood that the Muses should keep but that part of their promise, and neglect to teach you futurity, which was the main thing. Hesiod. It is easie to answer you, that hav∣ing said nothing but by the inspiration of the Muses, 'tis to them to give you an ac∣count of their Actions; but if you desire to know something of my Calling, I will tell you what I know of Agriculture. As the Gods reveal themselves to whom they please, so they reveal only what they please, and have not taught me the least of what you desire to know. Moreover, an Historical Truth is not expected from Poets, nor a reason asked them of all their Fictions; be∣sides, they are us'd to add many things, for the filling up the measure of their Verses, or to cause the more admiration; or if you should retrench them of this liberty, you would curb their Genius. But without taking notice of the beauty of invention and expression, which are the principal Ta∣lents, you make it your business to cavil at the words, as you would do with those of a contract, which is the sign of a carping quirking Wit. I forbear to mention, that you will find in my Poem intituled The Works and Days, several Predictions, which I bestow on those, who are good and bad Husbandmen. Hesiod was killed by some Locrians, and then thrown into the Sea; but his body was got off and buried near the Nemean Temple. Some Writers tell us, that he lived in the time of Homer; others say that he was before him; and some others report, that he lived after him. HESIONE, The Daughter of Laome∣don, whom he exposed upon the Rocks of the Sea, to pacisie the anger of Neptune and Apollo, whom he had not paid their wages, for having help'd him to build the Trojan Walls. Hercules offered himself to deliver Hesione, up∣on condition that he should give him the Fairy Horses begot of divine Seed; but hav∣ing broke his word with him, Hercules be∣sieged him in his own Dominions, and took
him prisoner with his Son, and stole away his Daughter Hesione, whom he married to Telamon King of Salomina. HESPERUS, The Son of Japetus and Brother to Atlas, who came to settle in Italy, called after his Name Hesperia. Being one day on Mount Atlas contemplating the Stars, the Fable tells us, that on a sudden he vanish∣ed away, and was turned into a Star, called Lucifer in the morning, and Hesper or Vesper in the evening. HESPERIDES, The Daughters of Hesperus, who by Juno's order kept a Garden or Orchard bearing golden Apples, which Hercules took away, having kill'd the Dra∣gon, which stood at the entry in defence thereof. HESPERIA, Italy was thus called from Hesperus the Son of Japetus. This name was common both to Italy and Spain, because of the Star Hesper, which appears at our West. Notwithstanding Spain is called Hesperta ulti∣ma, because 'tis more western than Italy. HETRURIA, A Country in Italy, now called Tuscany; formerly famous for Augures, and Divinations or Southsayings. HIEROPHANTAE, Athenian Priests, Overseers of Sacrifices and holy things. Hie∣ronymus affirms, that they used Hemlock to keep themselves chast. HIEROGLYPHI, Mysterious Fi∣gures, wherewith the Egyptians kept their Po∣licy an Ethick secret; for they communicated the secrets of Nature, and the particulars of their History and Morality, only to the Priests of the Sun, and those Men who were to succeed to the Crown or publick Ministry, and yet this was performed in a cabalistick manner. The wisest Men of Greece went to consult them, and inform themselves of those things that they could not learn, nei∣ther by tradition nor books, and even Moses himself was instructed in all their Sciences. There are also Hieroglyphi in the Theology of the Pagans, Jews and Christians, because they are only Images and representations of divine, holy and supernatural things, as the Symbols are Images of sensible and natural things. HIEROPHANTAE. See before, after Hesperia. HIPPOCENTAURI, Which Poets and Painters have represented like Monsters, half Men and half Horses. Lucretius denied that there ever were any; however, Plutarch re∣lates in the Feast of the seven Wise-men, that a Shepherd brought a Child in a Basket, who was foaled by a Mare, and had the upper parts of Men, and the lower parts like a Horse: Many were amaz'd at it, and thought fit to make an expiation for that Prodigy. But Thales, the wisest Man of them all, an∣swered, that the best way to prevent the like mischief, was to let the Women look after the Mares. Pliny also assures us, that he has seen a Hippo∣centaur, who was brought from Egypt to Rome, imbalm'd with honey, according to the fa∣shion of that time. Phlegon of Trallis relates the same story. St Hieronymus has described the Hippocentaur, whom St Anthony met in the Wilderness, when he was seeking for St Paul the Hermit: Conspicit hominum equo mixtum, cui opinio Poeta∣rum Hippocentauro vocabulum indidit; St Anthony having made the sign of the Cross, asked the Monster where about the holy Solitary Paul inhabited; the Monster presently shew'd him the way with his hand, and immediately run away. Some Nations of Thessaly inhabiting near Mount Pelion, called Hippocentauri, have given occasion to this Fable; for being the first Men who knew the art of riding on Horseback, their Neighbours fancied that the Man and the Horse were but one body. HIPPOCRATES, Born in the Isle of Cos, was Disciple to Pythagoras, and esteem'd the Prince of Physick; he restored again that Science, which had been very much neglected since Aesculapius. We have many fine Treatises of Physick and Aphorisms of his own Writings. The Greeks decreed him the same Honours with Hercules all over their Country. He died the hundred and fourth year of his Age, and all the time of his Life, he enjoy'd a perfect and vigorous Health. HIPPOCRATIA, Holy-days kept in honour of Neptune. Dionysius Halicarnasscus reports, that the Romans erected a Temple to Neptune the Horseman, and instituted him a Festival, called by the Arcadians Hippocratia, and by the Romans Consualia. During that day Horses and Mules were kept from work∣ing, and led along the Streets of Rom magnificently harnessed, and adorn'd with Garlands of Flowers. HIPPOCRENE, Otherwise Aga∣nippe, a Fountain near Mount Helicon, dedi∣cated to the Muses, which sprung out of a Rock, struck with the hoof of Pegasus. HIPPODAMIA, She being mar∣riageble, her Father Oenomaus King of Elis, who saw her so fair, fell in love with her like the other Princes of Greece; and that he might keep her for himself, he made a very wicked proposal; For his Chariot be∣ing the lightest, and his Horses the swiftest of all the Country; under pretence of seek∣ing for a Husband worthy of his Daughter, he propos'd her for a prize, to him who should overcome him at the Race, but upon condi∣tion,
that all those whom he should van∣quish should suffer death. And he would have his Daughter ride in the Chariot with her Lovers, that her Beauty might surprize them, and divert their thoughts from mak∣ing haste. And by this cunning device, he overcame and killed thirteen of these Princes. At last, the Gods provoked with the vile action of this infatuated Father, granted im∣mortal Horses to Pelops, who run the four∣teenth Race, was victorious, and possessed the beautiful Lady. Some others say, that Oenomaus being acquainted, that Pelops (who courted his Daughter) should be one time or another the cause of his death, refused to marry her to him, but upon condition that he should overcome him at a Race: Pelops accepted the Challenge, having first bribed the Coachman of Oenomaus, that his Chariot might break in the middle of the Race. Whereupon Oenomaus being overcome, kill'd himself, leaving his Daughter Hippodamia and his Kingdom to Pelops, who gave his name to the whole Country of Peloponnessus. There was also one Briseis the Daughter of Briseis, who was called Hippodamia, whom Agamemnon stole away from Achilles. That name was also given to the Wife of Perithous, whom the Centaurs attempt∣ed to steal away, the day of her Wed∣ding; but Hercules secured her, and killed them. HIPPODROMUS, An Hippodrome, a place for Races, or exercising Horses. HIPPOLYTE, Queen of the Ama∣zons and Theseus's Wife, of whom he begot Hippolytus, thus called after his Mother's name: Theseus afterwards married Phaedra, Minos's Daughter, who fell in love with Hip∣polytus her Son-in-law; but having refused to consent to her amorous desires, the accu∣sed him to Theseus of having attempted her Chastity. Theseus gave credit to her scanda∣lous report, and banish'd Hippolytus out of his presence, and desired Neptune to revenge his Crime. Whereupon Hippolytus, to avoid his Fathers wrath, fled away riding in a Chariot; but meeting a Sea-Monster on the shore, his Horses were so frighted by it, that they threw him down to the ground, and drew him among the Rocks, where he miserably perished. Phaedra, sensibly mov'd with his loss, and pressed by the remoise of her Conscience, discover'd the whole truth to her Husband, and kill'd herself out of despair; but after∣wards Aesculaptus touch'd with compassion, re∣stor'd Hippolytus to life, and called him Vir∣bins, as being a Man a second time. Diodorus Siculus reports what is commonly said of Hippolytus, as one part of the true Hi∣story of Theseus. Pausanias adds the tradition of some Inhabitants of Italy, and especially of Aricia, who say, that Hippolytus was resto∣red to life again, or recovered his health by the care of Aesculaplus; and not enduring to think of a reconciliation with his Father, came into Italy, where he founded a little Government at Aricia, and there dedicated a Temple to Diana. Pausanias tells us also, that the custom in his time was, that the Priest appointed for the service of that Tem∣ple, was always a Man, who in a Duel or single Combat had kill'd the Priest, to whom he succeeded; but that none but fugitive Slaves undertook the Combat. The same Author assures a little after, that Diomedes was the first Man who dedicated a Grove, a Temple and a Statue to Hippolytus, and sa∣crificed to him; and that the Inhabitants of Troezen affirmed, that Hippolytus was not drawn with Horses, but the Gods had honour'd him with a place among the Stars, and turn∣ed him into a Constellation, called by the name of a Carter. Ovid calls him Vibius af∣ter his Apotheosis. Euripides has written a Tragedy of Hippoly∣tus, wherein he relates his History. Theseus an Athenian Prince, who begot Hippolytus of one the Amazons, and after her death married Phaedra, Daughter to Mi∣nos King of Crete, absented himself from Athens. Venus resolv'd the ruine of Hippoly∣tus, because he was very chast, and incited Phaedra to love him. Whereupon Phaedra discover'd her love to her Nurse, who was also her Confidant. The Nurse made ma∣ny attempts upon Hippolytus, to perswade him to yield to Phaedra's love, yet he con∣tinued inflexible. Wherefore out of shame and despair Phaedra hang'd herself, having first tied some Letters to her Cloaths, wherein she charg'd Hippolytus with the Crime, she was herself only guilty of; Theseus, too credulous, banish'd Hippolytus, and besought Neptune to destroy him, in performance of one of the three promises, this God had pass'd his word to grant him. Neptune heard his request, and was the ruin of Hippolytus. But Diana appear'd to Theseus, and discover'd to him the innocence of Hippolytus, ordaining withal, that he should be honoured like a God. HIPPOMANES, A famous poy∣son of the Ancients, which is one of the Compositions in amorous Philters. Authors don't agree about what it is. Pliny says, that 'tis a black Flesh-Kernel in the Forehead of a Colt newly foaled, which the Mare eats up as soon as she has foal'd. Servius and Columella report, that 'tis
the venembus issue of a Mare, when she is fit to be covered. HIPPONA, A Divinity honour'd by Grooms in Stables, where her figure is kept. This Goddess was call'd upon on account of Horses. HIPPOTAMUS, A River-Horse, living principally in the Rivers Nile, Indus, and other great Rivers mentioned by Pliny. This Creature has a Cloven-foot like an Ox; the Back, the Mane and the Tail of a Horse, and neighs like him. His Teeth are like the Teeth of a Wild-Boar, but not quite so sharp; the skin of his back when 'tis dry resists all kind of Arms. Scaurus in the time of his Office of Edile, brought the first alive to Rome. HISTRIO, A Stage-player or Buf∣foon. This word is only us'd to signifie the merry Actors in the old Comedies of Plautus and Terence; and they are so called, says Festus, from Istria, because the first Farcers came from that Country. Plutarch tells us, that the Romans having sent for many Dancers out of Tuscany, there was one amongst them, who excell'd above others, call'd Hister, who left his name to all those of his profession. And we may also add, that those whom the Romans call'd Ludios, were called Histriones by the Tuscans. HOMERUS, Homer. Velleius Patercu∣lus reports, that Homer was the wittiest Man that ever was born, and that he deserved the Name of Poet by excellency; that as he ne∣ver had imitated any one that was before him, so after him none had been able to match him; and in fine, that he and Archi∣lochus were the only Men who had begun a great work, and had carried it to its per∣fection. Homer has left us two incomparable Works, one of the Trojan War, intituled Iliads; and the other of the long and dange∣rous Voyages of Ulysses, under the Title of Odysses, each of them divided into four and twenty Books. Alexander the Great order'd them to be laid up in a Case, inlaid with precious Stones, he got amongst the Spoils of Darius King of Persia. Yet 'tis uncertain where Homer was born, and many Cities of Greece ascribe to themselves the honour of his birth. Lucian speaks thus on this account. 'Tis neither known what Homer was, nor what he did, nor his Country, nor his ex∣traction, nor the time wherein he lived; otherwise there would not be so much dis∣pute, as there is on this subject; nor would the people doubt whether Colophon was his Country, or Chio, or Smyrna, or Cumae, or Thebes, or a hundred other Cities; nor whe∣ther his Father is Maeonis the River of Lydia, or some Man of that Name, and his Mo∣ther Menalepis, or some Nymph of the Drya∣des, and whether he lived in or since the time of the Hero's. For 'tis neither known, whether he is more ancient than Hesiod, un∣der the name of Melesigena, or whether poor or blind, as is the common rumour. The same Lucian, in the description of the Island of the Blessed, says again: When I had been two or three days in that Coun∣try, I accosted Homer, and desired him to tell me where he was born, because it was one of the greatest Questions amongst the Grammarians, he told me, they had so per∣plex'd him upon that subject, that he him∣self knew nothing of the matter, but that he believed he was of Babylon, and there call'd Tigranes; as Homer amongst the Greeks, being deliver'd to them for an Hostage. I then ask'd him whether he made those Verses, which are disallowed and damn'd as none of his. He told me he did, which made me laugh at the impertinence of those that will needs deny them. I also enquir'd why he had begun his Poem with anger, and he said it was done without design, and that he did not write his Odysses before his Illiads, as several held. As for his pretend∣ed blindness, I did not speak to him on it, because I plainly saw the contrary. Tatian, one of the most ancient Apologists of the Christian Religion, reports that Homer was before all Poets, Philosophers and Greek Historians, and is the most ancient of pro∣fane Writers. However, he affirms that Mo∣ses is more ancient than Homer himself. Tertullian has observ'd that the Pagans did not deny, that the Books of Moses were extant many ages before the States and Cities of Greece, before their Temples and Gods, and also before the beginning of Greek Letters. In fine, he says, that Moses liv'd five hundred years before Homer's time; and the other Prophets who came a long while after Moses, were yet more ancient than all the Wise men, Law-givers and Philosophers of Greece. And by consequence the Holy Scripture is with∣out comparison much older than Homer; and as the Poesy of Homer, who liv'd so many ages before all the Philosophers, Historians and Greek Writers, was a pattern to them, so in the like manner Homer has follow'd the truths of the holy Scripture, as they were then spread abroad in the World. Aelian assures us, that Ptolomeus Philopator King of Egypt, having built a Temple to Homer, he set up therein his Figure upon a Throne, with the representation of all the Cities that pretended to the honour of his birth; and that Galaton drew the picture of Homer with a Torrent coming out of his Mouth, at which all Poets were drawing water.
We learn from Plutarch, that Alexander had always the Illiads of Homer under his Pillow with his Dagger, and laid it up in a little Casket of an extraordinary value, that was found amongst the Spoils of Darius. Horace has written in one of his Epistles, an Encomium on the Illiads and Odysses of Homer, and declares at first, that neither Chrysippus nor Crantor, who excell'd amongst the Stoicks and Academick Philosophers, and had set down the most perfect rules, of Morals, had never so well conceiv'd nor so happily ex∣plain'd the nature and the laws of honest and profitable, virtue and vice, as Homer himself had done in his Illiads, Trojani belli scripto∣rem, &c. Horace gives reason for what he did, saying, that the Illiads represented won∣derful well the passions, and the fatal conse∣quences of the foolish conduct of many Kings and Nations. Cur ita crediderim, nisi quid te detinet, audi. In the City of Troy, Antenor pretended that Helena should be restor'd, and Paris oppos'd him, and sacrificed his own Country to his brutish passion. In the Grecian Army Achilles and Agamemnon fell out; one follows the passion of his Love, and the other the tran∣sports of his Anger: Nestor endeavours to bring them to an Agreement, but to no pur∣pose. On the contrary, the Odysses represents in the person of Ulysses, a perfect model of Wisdom and Virtue, when after he had took revenge of the unchastness of Paris upon the City of Troy, he runs for a long while so ma∣ny dangers at Sea, overcomes Storms and Adversities, and resists the Inchantments of Mermaids and Circe, viz. Voluptuousness, which stupifies those who give themselves over to it: On the other side, the Noble∣men of Ithaca, who pretended to marry Pe∣nelope, shew us the effeminate life and the fa∣tal end of voluptuous Men; for at last they washed with their own blood the wrong they had done to Ulysses during his absence, and the infamous debaucheries they had com∣mitted in his Palace. Of all the great Men of Antiquity, none had so great honours perform'd to them as Homer: For, besides the Statues erected to him, and Medals stampt with his Effigies, they erected also Temples and Altars to his honour, where they offer'd him Sacrifices. And a Sect of Christians, call'd Carpocratians, ador'd and burnt Frankincense to Homer's Image, in the like manner as they did to the Images of our Lord and St Paul, as St Austin and St John Damascen, and the Book ascrib'd to the Emperor Charles the Great tells us. We have still many ancient Monuments of the divine honours that were perform'd to this great Poet, and amongst others a ve∣ry ancient Marble, which was found in the Territory of Terrentium. M. Cuper tells us, that Archelaus of Priene, who made that work, as it appears by the Inscription thereof, endea∣voured to express thereby the Apotheosis of Homer. He is represented by this figure set∣ting on the top of Mount Olympus, holding a Scepter in his right hand, crown'd with a Diadem, and an Eagle by him. There were eleven Images of Women round about Homer, representing the nine Muses, and his Illiads and Odysses set in the rank of the nine Muses. Behind him are the Figures of Time and Harmony, setting a Crown on his head. Not far off is an Altar, and near it on one side is represented the Fable, and on the other the History; and further off are set in order Poesie, Tragedy, Comedy, Vertue, Memo∣ry, Faith and Wisdom. The Singers, who formerly sung the Po∣ems of Homer, were dress'd in red cloaths when they sung the Illiads, and in blue Cloaths when they sung the Odysses, and some wrapp'd up the Illiads in a red Parchment, and the Odysses in a blue one. Tully, l. 3. de Orat. says, that Pisistratus Ty∣rant of Athens, was the first who set the Illiads and Odysses in the order we now have them. Apollinarius wrote a Poem in imitation of the Illiads of Homer, containing the whole History of the Old Testament to the Reign of Saul; and divided also his work in four and twenty Books, according to the four and twenty Greek Letters. Besides this Poem, he wrote Comedies like those of Menander, Tra∣gedies in imitation of Euripides, and Lyrick as Verses fine as those of Pindar. Pythagoras being come down into Hell, saw the Soul of Hesiod tied with chains to a Brass Pillar, and that of Homer hung to a Tree, both expos'd to the biting of Serpents, in punishment of what they had writ of the Gods. Strabo tells us, that of all the editions of Homer, that which is call'd è Narthecio is the most correct and most esteem'd, being the work of Calisthenes and Anaxarchus. Aristotle gave this Edition to Alexander, and it was called after that name, because Alexander kept it in the rich and precious Box of Darius. HONOR, Honour, a Divinity always represented with Vertue; wherefore no man could get into the Temple of Honour, but by passing first through the Temple of Ver∣tue, whereby the Ancients represented to us that Honour proceeds from Vertue; and to that purpose M. Marcellus built two square
Temples join'd together, one to Vertue and the other to Honour, because true Honour arises from solid Vertue. These two Divi∣nities are represented on the Medals of Vitel∣lius, by two engraven figures; one of them stands on the right side half naked, holding an Half-pike with one hand, and a Horn of Plenty with the other, and a Helmet under her right foot: the other figure is on the left side, and has a Helmet on, holding a Scepter with her right hand, and a Dart with the left, treading with its right foot upon a Tortoise, with this Inscription, Honos & Virtutes. HORAE, The Hours. Poets tell us, that they are the Daughters of Jupiter and Themis; and Homer calls them the Door-keep∣ers of Heaven; that's the Fable, the Truth is, The Hours that divide the Day in four and twenty parts, were during five hundred years unknown to the Romans. For till the first Punick War, they reckon'd the day by the rising and setting of the Sun; then they added Noon; and in fine, they found out the division of the civil day into four and twenty hours. However, there are two kinds of hours; for some are equal, and others unequal. E∣qual hours are those that are always in the same state, as the hours we make use of, each of them making the twenty fourth part of the natural day. They are to the number of four and twenty, whereof twelve are for the day, and twelve for the night. Unequal hours are longer in Summer, and shorter in Winter, in regard to the day; or on the contrary as to the night. When I speak of unequal hours, one must not think that one of these hours are longer than the other; but only in respect to the several Seasons, those of the Summer being longer than those of the Winter, in regard to the day; and as for the night, those of the Winter are longer than those of the Summer. And di∣viding this way the artificial day in twelve equal parts, the sixth hour will fall at noon, and the third will be the middle of the fore∣going time, from the rising of the Sun to noon; as the ninth hour is the middle of the following time, from noon to Sun-setting; and thus of the others. The Romans divided the hours of the day in to four, viz. Prima, Tertia, Sexta, Nona. Prima began at six a Clock, Tertia at nine, Sexta at twelve, and Nona at three of the Clock in the Afternoon. Wherefore the Canonical hours were called Prima, Tertia, Sexta, Nona, us'd by the Church to honour the sacred Myste∣ries perform'd at these Hours. Likewise, the Romans divided the twelve hours of the night into four Watches, call'd Vigiliae, a Latin word taken from Military Dis∣cipline, wherefore Pliny calls them Castreases. Vegetius tells us why there are four Vigiliae in the night, and why each Watch was of three hours. It was not possible, says he, that a Soldier should keep Centry a whole night, wherefore it was divided into four Vigiliae, and at each of these Vigiliae they reliev'd the Centries, and set fresh ones in their rooms. Now we must consider how the Romans reckon'd their hours. Prima began at six a Clock, and comprehended three hours. And if one ask'd how they reckon'd the seventh and the eighth hours; we answer that they were distinguish'd amongst themselves, and had their peculiar name, viz. prima, secunda, tertia, quarta, quinta, sexta, septima, octava, nona, decima, as Martial tells us. Prima salutantes, atque altera continet hora, Exercet raucos tertia causidicos: In quintam varios extendit Roma labores, Sexta quies lassis, septima finis erit: Sufficit in nonam nitidis octava palaestris, Imperat extructos frangere nona toros: Hora Libellorum decima est, Eupheme, meorum, Temperat ambrosias cùm tua cura dapes. The twelve hours of the day in the Equi∣nox, are here set down according to their order. The first hour of the day was from six to seven; the second, from seven to eight; the third, called Tertia, happen'd at nine a Clock. And by these words Inquintam exten∣dit, was comprehended the fourth and the fifth hour, viz. eleven a Clock in the morn∣ing; Sexta befel always at noon; the seventh hour, was from noon to one a Clock; the eighth, from one to two; the ninth, was from two to three; and the tenth, was from theee to four; and the rest was extended to the first Watch of the Night, which be∣gan at five and six of the Clock in the Even∣ing inclusively. The hours of the night were reckon'd in the like manner as those of the day; at the sixth hour was mid-night. The Romans explain'd also the several times of the night in other undetermin'd terms. For when the Sun was setting, they call'd that time Solis occasus; from the Sun-setting to dark night, Vesper or Vespera, from the Evening-star. The beginning of the night was called Crepusculum, after that they lighted the Lamps, and that time was called Prima fax, Prima lumina; when they went to bed, Concubitum, or Concubia nox; the time of the first sleep, Nox intempestia, or silentium. The middle of the night was called Media nox; then Gallicinium, the Cocks crowing; then Conticini∣um, when the Cock had done crowing: After
that came Diluculum the dawning of the day; and at last Aurora, and Solis ortus. HORATIUS, Horace. There were many of this name. HORACE, called COCLES, or one ey'd. A Roman Captain, who sustain'd the efforts of the Enemy, attempting by force of Arms to restore King Tarquinius in∣to Rome, till the Sublician Bridge was broke, and then cast himself into the Tiber, and thus escap'd the Enemies fury. The Consul Pub∣licola erected him a Statue in the Temple of Vulcan. HORACE, Sirnamed Flaccus, Native of Venusian a Town in Apulia, a Lyrick Poet, and intimate Friend of Maecenas, a great Lo∣ver of Learned Men. He has left us four Books of admirable Odes, wherefore the Ro∣mans have no occasion to envy the Greeks Pindar; besides a Book of Epods, two Satyrs, and several Epistles, with a learned Treatise of the Art of Poetry, which have made him famous to posterity. He died the 57th year of his age, and 746 after the foundation of Rome. There were also three Brothers of that name, who fought for the Roman Liberty, with three Brothers call'd Curiatii, of the City of Alba, the Inhabitants whereof pre∣tended to the Soveraign Power. Two of the Horace's lost their Lives in the fight; but the third who remain'd alive, himself kill'd the three Guriatii, and thus the Inhabitants of Alba became Subjects to the Romans. Horace came victorious to Rome, and was receiv'd with the Acclamations of the people; but he blasted his Victory by the death of his Sister, who was to marry one of the Curiatii, not being able to bear the reproachful words of an angry Maid for the death of her Lover. HORMUS, A kind of Dance of Girls and Boys, where the Boy leads the Dance with Masculine and Warlike Postures, and the Girl followed him with soft and mo∣dest steps, to represent an Harmony of two Vertues, Power and Temperance. HOROLOGIUM, A Clock, an En∣gine that moves of it self, or has the princi∣ple of its motion in it self, used to measure Time, and shew the hours of the day and night. At first the Romans had no certain Rule for the time of their Employments, they mea∣sur'd it only by the Course of the Sun. Pliny reports, that in the Laws of the twelve Ta∣bles, that were collected in the Year 301, there was nothing mention'd concerning time, but only the rising and the setting of the Sun, and Noon. Papyrius Cursor set up a Sun-Dial at the Temple of Quirinus, but it did not prove right. Thirty years afterwards, the Consul M. Valerius Messola, as Varro relates, after the taking of Catana in Sicily in the Year 477, during the first Punick War, brought from thence to Rome a Dial, which he fasten'd to a Pillar near the Rostra; but the Lines there∣of not being drawn according to the degrees of the latitude of the pole, it did not prove exact, yet they made use of it during the space of eleven years, when Martius Philippus, Censor with L. Paulus, set up another more true. The Greeks were also a long time without either Clocks or Sun-Dials. Anaximenes Mili∣sius, Anaximander's Scholar, was the first In∣venter of Sun-Dials amongst the Greeks. Pli∣ny says, that Thales shew'd the use thereof to the Lacedemonians. The Greeks called them , and the Romans Solaria. But how exact so ever these Dials were, yet in the night or in cloudy weather they were of no use. Wherefore Scipio Nasica, the Colleague of Lanatus, to prevent this inconveniency, found out the Clepsydra or Water-Clock,  i. e. to steal Water, because it pass'd so insensibly, that it seem'd to steal upon the sight. Pierius in the sixth Book of his Hierogly∣phicks says, that the invention of the Clepsy∣dra, was found in the Town of Achanta, be∣yond the River Nile, where three hundred and sixty Priests were every day pouring water out of the Nile into a Vessel, out of which they let the water drop by little and little to measure the hours of the day. And tho' the word Horologium commonly signifies Clocks that go by Weights, and have Wheels, and a Ballance with a Bell; yet those that are made with Wheels, and fit to carry about, called Watches, and those cal∣led Sciotherick Dials, or Sun-Dials, which shews the hour by the shadow of a Needle elevated upon different surfaces, falling up∣on lines dispos'd in order by Gnonomicks, may be called also by the name of Horolo∣gia, as well as the Clepsydra's, and Clocks with Wheels and Bells. Vituvius speaks of many kinds of Sun-Dials. The Hemicyclus or the half Circle, is a Dial hewn into a square, and cut to incline like the Equinox; Berosus a Chaldean was the in∣venter thereof. The Hemisphere Dial was found out by Aristarchus Samius. The Dials call'd Scaphia, were hewn in a round Figure, having an ele∣vated Needle in the middle. The Discus of Aristarchus was an horizontal Dial, the sides whereof were somewhat rais'd, to prevent the inconveniency, found in the
Dials that had their Needle upright and per∣pendicularly elevated upon the Horizon; for their sides thus rais'd up, keep the shadow from extending it self too far off. The Spider invented by Eudoxus, is the same as the Anaphoric Horologium. Some say that Apollonius has found out the Plinthus or Dial-post, which was set in the Circus Fla∣minius. Scopas Syracusanus made the Dial cal∣led , used for places menti∣oned in History. Parmenion was the in∣ventor of the universal Dial, fit for all Cli∣mats. Theodosius and Andreas Patrocles invented the Pelecynon, which is a Dial made in the figure of a Hatchet, where the opposite lines, that shew the Constellations and the Months, are close towards the middle, and stretched towards the sides, which make the form of a Hatchet with two edges. Dionysidorus found the Cone; Apollonius, the Quiver, which are vertical Dials, opposite to the East and West, and being broad and obliquely set, repre∣sent a Quiver. There were yet many other kinds of Sun-Dials invented, as the Gonarcus, Engonatus, An∣tiboreus. These are not mentioned, neither in Greek nor Latin Authors The Gonarcus and Engonatus seem deriv'd from the Greek, and signifie Dials made upon several surfaces, some whereof being horizontal, others ver∣tical, and some others oblique, make many Angles; wherefore these angular Dials are called by the word , i. e. Angle or Knee. The Antiboreus is an Equinoxial Dial, turn'd towards the North. An Hour-Glass, us'd to measure time by the running of sand, is made with two small Glasses join'd together by the ends; one of them is full of very small sand, which runs through a little hole of a thin plate of Brass, which is at the joining of both Glasses. Clepsidrae or Water-Clocks, were com∣monly us'd by the Ancients in Winter, and were of several kinds, as we may see in Vitruvius. They had this common, that the Water did drop insensibly through a little hole from one Vessel into another, wherein raising by little and little, it rais'd up a piece of Cork, which shew'd the hours several ways. The Ancients had still a third kind of Clock, called Clocks for the Night, invented by Plato. It was a Clock which gave to un∣derstand by hearing, what the eyes were not able to perceive in the dark of the night; and this Engine was composed of many Flutes. Eginard, Secretary to Charles the Great, speaks of a Clock made after the like man∣ner, which was sent to this Emperor by the King of Persia, and tells us that it was a Clep∣sydra, which dropping from time to time brass balls, into a Bason of the same Metal, struck the hours. The Clocks with Wheels and striking were unknown to the Romans. Ctasibius the Son of a Barber of Alexandria, gave occasion, to the finding out of striking Clocks. The common opinion is, that one Pacificus Arch-Deacon of Verona was the inventer thereof. HOROSCOPUS, the Horoscope, the Degree of the Ascendant, or the Star ascend∣ing above the horizon, at the moment you intend to predict any thing, as what weather it will be, what may be the fortune of a Man, who is coming into the World. They give also the name of Horoscope to the figure containing the twelve Houses, wherein they observe the disposition of Heaven and Stars at a certain moment, to predict Men's for∣tune. HORTA, otherwise called ANGE∣RONA and STIMULA. A Divini∣ty of the Ancients, who inclined Men to well doing; Plutarch says, that her Temple was always open. HORTENSIUS called QUIN∣TUS, was a famous Roman Orator, en∣dow'd with an admirable Eloquence, and a very singular and graceful way of speaking. He was rais'd to the High-Priest's dignity; Tully has made his Encomium in his Works. His Daughter called after his name Hortensia, was also very eloquent, and pleaded the cause of the Roman Matrons with such force of Eloquence, that half of the Tax, that the Trium viri had laid upon them, was remitted. HORTUS, A Garden. The Romans under the name of a Garden, did not only mean a piece of Ground planted with Trees and Flowers, but also Country Houses, with an extent of Ground divided into Gardens, Parks, Meadows and Vineyards. In this sense ancient Writers speak of the fine Gar∣dens of Caesar, Salust and Maecenas, which were built in and out of Rome, with great Magnificence, in regard to both Structures and Gardens. The Gardens of the Romans were princi∣pally adorn'd with several Walks, Trees, Beds of Flowers, Orchards, Water-works, and other Ornaments. They had also other Gardens, called Pen∣siles, hung up and carried upon Wheels, which were planted with Fruit-trees, Vines, Melons, and Cucumbers; and they remov'd them from one place to another, according to the weather. Those Gardens were cover∣ed with Ising-Glasses, and the Sun darting his Beams upon the Glasses, made the Fruit∣ripen
naturally, as we learn by this Epigram of Martial. l. 8. Ep. 4. Pallida ne Cilicum timeant pomaria brumam; Mordeat & tenerum fortior aura nemus: Hibernis objecta notis specularia puros Admittunt soles & sine fece diem. We may read also upon this subject, the 68th Epigram of the same Book, where he compares the Vines that Entellus kept in Win∣tor, as green and full of Grapes as in Au∣tumn, with the Apple-trees that Alcinous King of the Phaeaces, preserv'd by the art of Ising-Glass. Pliny reports, that Tiberius kept also his Fruits and Cucumbers by the same Art: Nullo quippe die contigit ei, pensiles corum hortos premoventibus in soles rotis olitoribus. rursusque hi∣bernis diebus intra specularium, &c. They raised likewise Gardens on the top of their Houses, in imitation of the Gardens of Babylon, built by a King of Babylon and Sy∣ria called Cyrus, to please the humour of a Persian Courtezan, whom he loved. This Garden was of a square figure, and born up with Pillars rais'd one upon another, and founded upon beams of stone sixteen foot long, and six foot broad, whereupon was laid the first Bed made with Reeds, joined and cemented together with a kind of a li∣quid Bitumen taken out of a Lake, the pro∣perty whereof was to unite so strongly the parts cemented therewith, that it was impos∣sible to separate one from another. There was another Pavement of Brick laid upon the first; and in fine, a third of Tiles and Lead; and upon these Beds they laid the Earth. HORUS, The Son of Isis, in whose name the Sun was ador'd by the Egyptians. Some Writers report, that he was King of Assyria and a great Philosopher, who divided the Seasons of the Year, the Days and the Hours, which were called after his Name Horae. Some are of opinion that Harpocrates is al∣so the same Divinity with the Sun and Horus; and this conformity appears by his Birth, seeing he is the Son of Isis, famous among the Egyptians. M. Tristan mistakes, when he says, that his Mother made him immortal by suckling him; and that for this reason they were used in the pomp of Isis, to carry a small golden Vessel full of Milk, to make Libations. 'Tis true that Mercury became immortal, because Juno suckl'd him; but Diodorus Sicu∣lus affirms only, that Isis render'd her Son immortal, by vertue of an Unguent she had found out. This conformity is yet evi∣denc'd, by the several symbols of these Di∣vinities. For they dedicate the same Plant to both of them, and they are represented with the same Animals and the same Atten∣dance. Sometimes the Sun is express'd by the figure of a Soldier, because he was call'd by that name in the Mysteries, and those who were initiated were also called by that very name: And the Sun and the Moon, in∣stead of riding in a Chariot like other Gods, had a Ship, because Men fancied that the Sea afforded them their Food. Harpocrates carried over his head Fruit en∣compass'd with some open leaves, like leaves of Cliver, because it was the custom to crown therewith the Egyptian Divinities; be∣sides that Herb opens of itself at Sun-rising, and shuts of itself at Sun-setting. This God holds a Finger upon his Mouth, to shew the silence religiously observed by the Pagans in their Mysteries. The Wings of Harpocrates are another Ar∣gument, to prove that he is the Sun; for this Star is commonly represented with Wings, to shew the swiftness of his Course. The figure of Harpocrates is armed with a Quiver, which agrees with the Sun, darting Beams upon the Earth like so many Arrows. This Effigies carries on its arm a small Vessel, to shew that humidity, join'd to the heat of the Sun, is the cause of all Productions. At the left foot of Harpocrates there are re∣presentations of Geese, because the natural heat of these Creatures represents the heat of the Sun, and he carries a Massy-Club twisted about with a Serpent, because this Animal is in a singular manner dedicated to the Sun. At his right foot is the figure of a Hare, which was also consecrated to the Sun, be∣cause of his fecundity and swiftness. 'Tis reported, that Hares never shut their eyes night nor day, which is an emblem of the Sun, which never ceases to afford light to some part of the World. The Ancients were used to ascribe a Ra∣ven and a Swan to the Sun, to represent his light by the whiteness of the Swan, and his darkness by the black feathers of the Ra∣ven. And this Harpocrates was covered on one side, and naked on the other, because when the Sun gives light to our Hemisphere, the other is covered with darkness. HOSTIA, A Victim sacrificed to a Deity. The Aruspicina of the Antients was performed by looking into the Intrails of the Victims. The word Hostia comes ab hostibus, because they sacrificed Victims, either before they engag'd the Enemy, to beg the favour of the Gods; or after they had obtain'd the Victory, to give them thanks.
Writers give two different significations of these words Hostia and Victima. Isidorus l. 6. c. 18. says, that the Animal that the Emperor or the General of the Army sacri∣ficed before he engag'd the Enemy, to render the Gods favourable to him, was properly called Hostia, deriving that word from Hostis, Enemy, and from Hostire, to strike the Ene∣my. Hostiae apud veteres dicebantur sacrificia quae fiebant antequam ad hostem pergerent; victi∣mae vero sacrificia quae post victoriam devictis ho∣stibus immolabantur. And to confirm this opi∣nion, he brings in the Authority of Festus, who says that Hostia dicta est ab hostire to strike, as if by that Hostia, they had begg'd the fa∣vour of the Gods, to beat and overcome the Enemy. The word Victim comes from the Sacri∣fice offered by the Emperor to the Gods, af∣ter a Victory obtained over the Enemy, à victis & profligatis hostibus. Ovid gives us this Etymology in the first Book of his Fasti v. 335. Victima quae cecidit dextra victrice vocatur; Hostibus à victis, Hostia nomen habet. Aulus Gellius tells us, that Hostiae might be indifferently sacrificed by every Priest, but that the Victim was only sacrificed by the vanquisher of the Enemy. Isidorus reports also l. 5. c. 13. that the Victim was offered for great Sacrifices, and taken out of the great Cattle; but Hostia was sacrificed for the least, and taken out of a Herd of Sheep. To this custom Horace alludes, Ode 17. l. 2. where he exhorts Maecenas to perform his vow for the recovery of his health, and offer Victims, while on his part he will sa∣crifice a Lamb. Reddere victimas, Aedemque votivam memento; Nos humilem feriemus agnam. What difference soever might be between these two words, they were often confound∣ed, and promiscuously taken one for another by ancient Writers. Two kinds of Hostiae were offered to the Gods; some to know their will by looking into the Intrails and Inwards of the Sacri∣fices; in other Sacrifices, they contented themselves to offer the life of the Victim, wherefore these Sacrifices were called anima∣les Hostiae. As we learn of Trebatius, l. 1. de Relig. apud Macrob. l. 3. c. 25. Hostiarum duo genera fuisse docet, alterum in quo voluntas Dei per exta disquirebatur, alterum quo sola anima Deo sacrabatur, unde & animales Hostias voca∣bant Aruspices. Virgil speaks of these Sacrifices in his Aeneid. Pecudumque reclusis Pectoribus inhians spirantia consulit exta. l. 4. v. 64 And the same Virgil, l. 5. v. 483. Hanc tibi Eryx meliorem animam pro morte Daretis, Persolvo. The Ancients had many kinds of Hostia; called Hostiae urae, Praecidaneae, Bidentes, Injuges Eximiae, Succidaneae, Ambarvales, Amburbiales, Caneares, Prodigae, Piaculares, Ambegnae, Har∣vigae, Harugae Optata, Maxima, Medialis. HOSTIAE PURAE, Were Lambs and Pigs ten days old, as Festus reports, l. 1. Agnus dicitur à graeco  quod significat Castum, eo quod sit hostia pura & immolationi apta: And Varro. l. 11. De Re Rust. Porci à partu decim die habentur puri, ab eo appellantur in Antiquis sacris, tum quod ad sacrificium idonti dicuntur. HOSTIAE PRAECIDANEAE; Thus called from prae and caedo, i. e. to sacri∣fice or kill before, because they were sacri∣ficed the eve of the solemn Feast, as Aulus Gellius relates; Praecidanea quae ante sacrificis solemnia pridie mactabatur: And Praecidanes Porca, a Sow offered in sacrifice to Ceres by way of expiation before the Harvest, by those who had not exactly perform'd the Fu∣nerals of a deceased person of their Family, or purified the House where some body was dead, according to the usual custom. As Festus assures, Porca etiam praecidanea quam im∣molare soliti antequam novam frugem inciderunt. This is confirm'd by Aulus Gellius, Porca etiam praecidanea appellata, quam piaculi gratiâ ante fruges novas fieri ceptas immolari Cereri mos fuit, si qui familiam funestam aut non purgaverant, act alitur eam rem quam oportuerat, procuraverant. Varro tells us, in the Book of the Life of the Roman People, that no Family was puri∣fied but by offering of that sacrifice, which the Heir was oblig'd to offer to Tellus and Ceres, Quod humatus non fit, heredi porca praecida∣nea suscipienda Telluri & Cereri, aliter familia pura non est. HOSTIA BIDENS, A Sacrifice of two Years old, at which age they were commonly sacrificed, having then two teeth higher than the six others. Wherefore Bidentes is the same thing as Biennes, and is used not only for Sheep, but also for Hogs and Oxen; with this restriction, that Bidentes alone is to be understood only of Sheep; and when 'tis applied to signifie other Ani∣mals, the Substantive is added to it, as we may observe by what Pomponius says: Mars, tibi voveo facturum si unquam redierit, bi∣denti verre.
HOSTIAE INJUGES, Were those that were never under the yoke, nor tamed. Virgil calls them, Et intactâ totidem cervice juvencae. HOSTIAE EXIMIAE, The finest Victims of a Herd, separated from the rest, and appointed for the Sacrifice, as Donatus says: Eximia pecora dicuntur quae à grege excepta sunt ut uberiijs pascantur, sed propriè eximii sunt porci majores qui ad sacrificandum excepti liberiijs pascantur. Etenim boves qui ad hoc electi sunt egregii vel eximii dicuntur, & oves lectae. As Virgil observes, Mactant lectas de more bidentes. Virg. 4. Aeneid. v. 57.And in another place: Quatuor eximiot prae∣stanti corpore tauros. 4. Georg. v. 537. HOSTIAE SUCCIDANEAE, thus called from the Verb Succedo, or rather of sub caedo, i. e. to kill afterwards, Victims successively sacrificed after others, i. e. a re∣iteration of Sacrifice, when the first was not of good Omen, or some essential ceremony was omitted. Paulus Emilius preparing him∣self to engage Perses King of Macedonia, sa∣crificed twenty Bulls one after another to Hercules, before he got a lucky Victim; at last the one and twentieth promis'd him the Victory, provided he should only stand in a posture of defence: Si primis hostiis litatum non erat, aliae post easdem ductae hostiae caedeban∣tur: quae quasi prioribus jam caesis luendi piaculi gratia subdebantur & succidebantur, ob id Succi∣dantae nominatae. Aul. Gel. l. 4. c. 6. AMBARVALES HOSTIAE, Victims sacrificed after they had led them round about their Fields, in a procession made for the preservation of the Fruits of the Earth: Ambarvalis hostia, says Festus, est quae rei divinae causâ circum arva ducitur ab tis qui pro frugibus faciunt. AMBURBIALES HOSTIAE, Victims led round about the limits of the City of Rome, says the same Festus. HOSTIAE CANEARES, or CAVIARES, Victims offer'd in Sacri∣fice every fifth Year, for the College of the Pontiffs, viz. they offer'd the part of the Tail called Caviar. It seems that this Sacri∣fice is the same, or at least very like that which was offer'd in the Month of October to Mars, in the Field called by his name, where a Horses Tail was cut off, and carried into the Temple called Regia. HOSTIAE PRODIGIAE, They were so called, because they were wholly consumed by Fire, and nothing remain'd thereof for the Priests. HOSTIAE PIACULARES; Victims offered to make expiation for a Crime, or some ill Action. HOSTIAE AMBEGNAE, or AMBIEGNAE, Cows that had calved two Heifers, or Sheep that had brought forth two Lambs at one Litter, offer'd in Sa∣crifice with their young ones to Juno. HOSTIAE HARVIGAE, or HA∣RUGAE, Victims offered to predict fu∣ture events, by looking into the Entrails of the Sacrifices. HOSTIAE MEDIALIS; Black Victims offered at Noon time. HOSTILIUS TULLUS, The Son of Tullus Hostilius, Native of the City of Medulia, a Colony of the Sabins, who came to settle themselves at Rome, after Romulus had took Medulia. He married Hersilia, who made peace betwixt the Romans and the Cures. Of this Marriage came Hostilius, who was King of the Romans after Numa. The people preferr'd him to the Sons of Numa, and set him upon the Throne, tho' he was but Nu∣ma's Son-in-law. He built Mount Coelianus, and made war with the Inhabitants of Alba, and it was brought to an end by the famous Combat of the three Horace's on the Roman side, and three Curiatii on those of Alba, which remain'd subject to the Romans, by the victory obtain'd by one of the Horatii. HOSTILIUS MANCINUS, Besieged Numantia; but having despised the Augurs, he went one day out of his Camp, which the Inhabitants of Numantia taking ad∣vantage of, made a sally out of the Town, possess'd themselves of his Camp, and forc'd him to accept of a shameful peace, which the Romans refus'd to ratify; and sent him back to Numantia with his hands tied behind him. HYACINTHUS, The Son of A∣miclus, beloved of Apollo; but this God being at play with him at Coits, Zephyrus jealous of their Love bore away the Coit, and there∣with broke his head, whereupon he died. Apollo to comfort himself for his loss, out of his Blood that was spilt produc'd a Flower, which was called after his name Hyacinthus. HYADES, The Daughters of Atlas and Aethra, who nurs'd and brought up Bacchus, and in reward thereof, were transported in∣to Heaven, and turned into seven Stars, made famous by the Poets. These Stars bring rainy weather, and are placed in the head of the Constellation Taurus. At their rising, if the Sun or Moon meet opposite to them, they certainly bring rain Where∣fore Virgil calls them,
Pluviasque Hyadas. HYDRA, A fabulous Monster, repre∣sented by Poets with many Heads, growing again as soon as they were cut off. Hercules overcame this Monster in the Lake of Lerna, and slew her; and to prevent the growing of her Heads, he applied fire to the place as he cut them off. HYDRAULIS, A Science teaching how to make Water-Conduits, and Water∣works, and for other uses. Heron describes many Water-Engines, called Hydraulicae Ma∣chinae. The word Hydraulicus signifies sound∣ing water, because when Organs were first found out, Bellows were not yet in use, wherefore they made use of falling waters, to get wind into the Organs and to make them sound. Athenaeus says, that Ctesiblus was the inventer of this Engine, or at least brought it to perfection; for the invention thereof is due to Plato, who found out the Noctur∣nal Clock or Clepsydra, that caus'd Flutes to play, and give notice of the time of the Night. HYDROMANTIA, A South∣saying performed by way of water, wherein the Images of the Gods were seen. Varro tells us, that this kind of divination was found out by Perses, and that Numa Pompilius, and after him Pythagoras the Philosopher made use of it, and that thereby Spirits are also conjur'd up by spilling blood, and this performance was called by the Greeks Necromantia. These kinds of South-sayings were rigorously forbid by the Laws of all Nations, even before the coming of our Lord. However, by this means, Numa learned the Mysteries that he instituted; and because he used water to perform his Hydromantia, it was said that he married the Nymph Egeria, as Varro tells us. HYLAS, The Son of Theodamus, belo∣ved of Hercules for his Beauty. Being fallen by misfortune into a Fountain where he was drawing water, he was drowned; where∣upon Poets feigned that Hylas was ravished by the Nymphs enamoured with his beauty. Hercules run through all Mysia to seek for him. The People of Prusa instituted a Feast to him, at which they ran through the Forest and Mountains, crying Hylas, Hylas. HYMEN or HYMENAEUS, A fabulous Divinity of the Pagans, presiding over Marriages. This God was called upon in the Wedding-Songs. Poets call him fair Hymenaeus. HYMNUS, A Hymn or Ode, sung in honour of Divinities. These Hymns were commonly compos'd of three kinds of Stan∣za's, one whereof was call'd Strophe, which they sung walking from the East to the West; the other was named Antistrophe, walking on the contrary from the West to the East; and then standing before the Altar they sung the Epode, which was the third Stanza. The Greek Poets have written many Hymns, in praise of the false Gods of the Pagans. HYPERION, The Son of Heaven, and Brother to Saturn, and one of the Titans, esteemed by the Ancients the Father of the Sun and the Moon, he is often taken for the Sun by the Poets. HYPERMNESTRA, One of the fifty Daughters of Danaus King of Egypt, the only one of all, who the first Wedding∣night spared the Life of Lyncaeus her Hus∣band; for all her other Sisters murther'd their Husbands, the Brothers of Lyncaeus, and Sons to Aegyptus, Danaus's Brother. HYPOCAUSTUM, A Stove un∣der ground, used to warm the Baths both of the ancient Greeks and Romans. I. I, The third Vowel, and the ninth Letter of the Alphabet, was accounted by the Ancients a numeral Letter, signifying one hundred. This Letter was the only Vowel that was not mark'd over with the stroke of a Pen, to shew that it was long, as Scaurus himself testi∣fies. Notwithstanding, to denote its quanti∣ty, it was drawn in length a Letter bigger than the rest. PIso, VIvus, AedIlis. Where∣fore of all the Letters, the I was called long by Senecdoche. And from thence comes that Stamphilus in Plautus's Aularium, being resolv'd to hang himself, says that he should make a long Let∣ter of his Body. Lipsius explains it thus, and this explanation seems more likely than that of Lambinus, who understands of it all kind of great Letters. Lipsius says expresly, that the I was double, to make it long as the other Vowels; and 'tis the opinion of the most Learned, tho' many Instances to the contrary might be found, per∣haps out of corruption, as Divl Augusti in an Inscription in the time of Augustus. Wherefore as the I by its length only was equivolent to a real ii, i. e. that they should be mark'd in the Discourse, as Manu∣bjs instead of Manubiis; Djs Manibus instead of Diis Manibus. And from thence come the
contractions that are common and allowed to Poets. Dî instead of Dij; urbem Patavî instead of Patavij. But the Ancients noted also the quantity of this Letter by the Dipthong e, as Victori∣nus says, and it was the same thing to write Divl or Divei, the I long, and the ei having the same pronunciation, or very like the same. And this is testified by Priscian, when he says, that this was the only way to express the I long. This pronunci∣ation of ei was become so common amongst them, that they us'd it even in short words, which shews that it was not so much perhaps to note its quantity, as a certain pronuncia∣tion more full and more pleasing. Where∣fore in old Books we find still Omneis, not only instead of Omnes in the plural number, but also instead of Omnis in the singular. Wherefore Victorinus tells us, that no way of Writing was controvers'd by the Anci∣ents but this. Lucilus and Varro made their endeavours to distinguish it, setting a Rule to write the i alone in the singular, and the ti in the plural number. However, Quintilian finds fault with this way of writing, because, says he, 'tis super∣fluous, and too troublesome to those who begin to write. From whence we may con∣clude that the pronunciation was alter'd, and that there was no difference then be∣tween the ei and the i. This Letter I is also a Consonant; and then its Character is lengthned downwards thus J. JACCHUS, One of Bacchus's names, from the Syriack word Janko or Jacco, i. e. puer lactens; and thus Bacchus was often re∣presented. And these words of Virgil, My∣stica Vannus Jacchi, may be understood of Bacchus's Cradle. Some Writers derive this word from the Greek , i. e. to make a noise by crying, to howl, as the Bacchantes did at the Orgia or Feasts of Bacchus. JANICULUM, A Mountain be∣yond the Tiber, where Janus settl'd himself and built a Fortress. There Numa plac'd his Tomb, and since Statius the Poet. The Country of Latium, where Janus was honour∣ed, and where Janiculum was built, which afterwards made a part of Rome, was called by the Ancients OEnotria tellua, i. e. the Wine's Country. JANUARIUS, January. This Month was not set down in the old Calendar of Ro∣mulus, but was brought in by Numa, who plac'd it at the Winter-Solstice, in the room where Mars was before, whom Romulus plac'd at the Vernal Equinox. This Month was named Januarius in honour of Janus, because the Romans had establish'd this God to pre∣side at all beginnings, and that the new Year began at this Month; or because Janus being represented with two Faces, to shew by that his singular prudence, which consi∣dered both the time past and the time to come, they thought fit to dedicate a Month to him, which was at the end of the Year that was past, and at the beginning of the Year to come. And though the Calends or the first day of this Month was under the protection of Juno, like other first days of the Months, yet this was in a peculiar manner consecrated to Ja∣nus, to whom they offered that day a Cake; made of new Meal, called Janualis, and of new Salt. The Frankincence and Wine pre∣sented to him were also new. This day all Workmen began their works, every one according to his Art and Trade, and the Scholars did the like; being perswa∣ded, that having thus begun the Year by working, they should be diligent and labo∣rious all the rest of that Year: As we learn of Ovid in the first Book of his Fasti, v. 165. Postea mirabar, cur non sine litibus esset Prima dies. Causam percipe, Janus ait, Tempora commissi nascentia rebus agendis, Totus ab auspicio ne foret annus iners. Quisque suas artes ob idem delibat agendo, Nec plus quàm solitum testificatur opus. The Consuls appointed for that Year, took possession on that day of their Office, and began the functions thereof, especially since the Emperors, and some time before, during the Consulship of Quintus Fulvius Nobilior, and Titus Annius Luscus, in the Year of the foun∣dation of Rome DCI: Wherefore they went up to the Capitol, attended by a great crowd of People, all dressed with new Cloaths, and there sacrificed to Jupiter Capitolinus two white Bulls, that never were under the Yoke, and spread perfumes and sweet smells in his Temple. The Priests called Flamines, together with the Consuls, made vows, while the Sacrifice was performing, for the prosperity of the Em∣pire, and the safety of the Emperors, having first taken the Oath of Allegiance, and rati∣fied all that they had done during the fore∣going Year. Likewise the other Magistrates and the People made the same Vows, and took the Oath. And Tacitus tells us in the sixteenth Book of his Annals, that Trafea was impeach∣ed, of having purposely absented himself from the Assemblies, where the Magistrates took the solemn Oath, and Vows were made for the safety of the Emperor.
Ovid in the first Book of his Fasti, observes more distinctly all these Ceremonies. Cernis odoratis ut luceat ignibus aether, Et sonet accensis spica Cilissa focis? Flamma nitore suo templorum verberat aurum, Et tremulum summa spargit in aede jubar. Vestibus intactis Tarpeias itur ad arces: Et populus festo concolor ipse suo est. Jamque novi praecunt fasces, nova purpura fulget, Et nova conspicuum pondera sentit ebur, Colla rudes operum praebent ferienda juvenes, Quos aluit campis herba Falisca suis. This day the Romans laid down all animo∣sity, and were very careful to speak no word of ill Omen, as we learn of Pliny; Cautum erat apud Romanos ne quod mali ominis verbum Calendis Januariis efferretur. Friends sent Presents that day one to ano∣ther, which were called Strenae, New Years-Gifts; and this custom was first instituted by T. Tatius King of the Sabines, after he had made his agreement with Romulus; for 'tis reported, that to shew the esteem he had for those who had serv'd him in his Quarrel with the Romans, he sent to every one of them, at the beginning of the year, a branch of Laurel, taken out of the Grove of the God∣dess Strenuae, with a Compliment wishing them a happy Year. 'Tis thus related by Symmachus in the 10th Book, Epist. 28. to the Emperors Theodosius and Arcadius: Strenuarum usus adolevit auctoritata Tatii Regis, qui verbenas folicis arboris ex Luco Strenuae anni novi auspices primus accepit. We will speak more at large of this word in its Alphabetick order. The Romans above all things took care to be merry and divert themselves this first day, being perswaded that all the rest of the year should be like that day; thus much for the first day of January, we come to the other days of this Month, and the Holy-days kept therein. The 2d day, called by the Latins postridie Calendas, or quarto Nonas, the next day after the Calends or the fourth of the Nones, was a pleading day, but accounted fatal for the War, called for that reason Dies ater, a fatal day. The 3d and the 4th were comitial days, or days of Assembly. The 5th, which was the day of the Nones, was a day for Pleading. The 6th call'd the VIII. of the Ides, was esteem'd unlucky. The 7th and the 8th were days of Assem∣bly. On the 7th the Romans solemniz'd the coming of Isis; and the 8th was consecrated by the Athenians to Neptune. On the 9th, which is the V. of the Ides amongst the Latins, they celebrated the Feast called Agonalia, instituted by Numa Pompilius in honour of Janus, and the King of Sacri∣fices sacrificed a Ram to Janus. See Agonalia, according to the Alphabetick order. The 10th, or the IV. of the Ides, was a day divided in two, thus mark'd in the old Calendar En, and in the new Calendar media Hyems. The 11th, or the III. of the Ides, was the Feast call'd Carmentalia, in honour of the Goddess Carmenta Mother to Evander; they offered her Sacrifices every year before noon; wherefore that day is mark'd in the Ca∣lendar Nefastus primo, to signify that it was not allowed to do any thing that morning. This Sacrifice was offer'd in acknowledg∣ment to this Goddess, because she had fore∣told a great many things to the advantage of the Roman Empire. The same day was cele∣brated the dedication of the Temple of Ju∣turnus in the Field of Mars. The 12th was a Meeting-day, and some time this day they kept the Feast of Compita∣lia or Cross-ways. The 13th, or the day of Ides, consecrated to Jupiter, was mark'd in the Calendar by these Letters, N. P. Nefastus prima parte diei, which was only kept holy in the morning. They sacrificed to her a Sheep, called Ovis Idulis. This day Caesar Octavius took the Name of Augustus, by the advice of Munacius Plancus. The 14th, or the XIX. of the Calends of February was express'd by these Letters EN in the Calendar, to denote that it was divided half into a Festival, and half into a day of Work. The 15th, or the XVIII of the Calends of February, they solemniz'd for the second time, the Feast called Carmentalia secunda, or repetita & relata, in honour of Carmenta the Mother of Evander. See below Carmentalia. The 16th, or the XVII. of the Calends of February, was the Feast of the Dedication of the Temple of Concord, not that which the Praetor Manlius vowed, and which Caius Atti∣lius Duum-vir had dedicated, nor that which the Secretary Flavius did likewise dedicate in Foro Vulcanis, but of the great and magnificent Temple vowed and dedicated by Camillus, and adorn'd by Livia Drusilla, with a great many Statues and a noble Altar. From the 16th to the Calends of February are the Comitial or Assembly-days; if you except The 24th, For that day the Feriae Sementinae were celebrated for the Sowing-time. The 27th they kept the Feast of the Dedica∣tion of the Temple of Castor and Pollux, near the Lake called Juturna the Sister of Turnus. The 29th there were Horse-Races, called Equiria, in the Field of Mars.
The 30th was the Feast of the Peace, they sacrificed then a white Victim, and burned abundance of Frankincense. JANUS. Writers don't agree upon the Etymology of the word Janus. Some derive it from the Latin Verb ire, or its Gerund eun∣do, as if one said Eanus, because God presided at the beginning of all undertakings; where∣fore the Preface of Prayers was directed to him, by whom they had access to the other Gods; and because the Doors of Houses are the entries, through which, one must pass to go into the most remote Apartments, they were therefore called Januae from Janus, and were dedicated to him. This is reported by Tully, in his Book De. Nat. Dcorum. Cumque in omnibus rebus vim haberent maximam prima & postrema, principem in sacrificando Janum esse voluerunt, quod ab eundo nomen est ductum, ex quo transitiones perviae Jani, foresque in liminibus pro∣fanarumae diuns Januae nominantur. Vossius says, that the word Janus seems to be derived from the Hebrew Jain, i. e. Wine. The birth and origine of Janns is no less controverted; some tell us, that Janus is the same as the World and the Sun; others say, that he is the same as Ogyges an ancient King, who built Thebes fifteen hundred years before the foundation of Rome; and some others, as Ovid, confound Janus with Noah, and ascribe to him the glory of the origine of the World, having been the only Man, who saw the old and new World before and after the Deluge. However, the Authors, who report that Noah divided all the Earth to his Sons after the Flood, and gave Europe to Japhet for his share, say more likely, that Japhet was called Janus, and settled himself in Italy, where he taught a great many things, very useful to Man∣kind. Fabius Pictor reports, that the ancient Tus∣cans learn'd to improve the Vine of him, to sow Corn, and to make Bread; and that he also taught them to build Temples and Altars to the Gods; for the Ancients to that time, worshipped Gods only in Groves. He was the first who consecrated the boun∣daries of Towns, both without and within: Wherefore, when Romulus built Rome, he sent for some Men out of Tuscany, who observ'd exactly all the formalities and ceremonies they had learned of Janus for that purpose. And to set up better the service of the Gods, he drew Rituals and Formulars of Prayers to their honour; wherefore the preface of Sa∣crifices was directed to him, and he was the first called upon, as a Being who presented their Prayers to the Gods, and to whom the first libations of Wine and Wheat were offer∣ed. 'Tis reported that he was the Inventer of Locks and Keys, for the security of Houses and of folding Doors, which in his Honour were called Januae. 'Tis said yet that his Wife was called Vista, and that she instituted the holy fire, committed to the care of certain Virgins, called after her name Vo∣stals. In short, Janus was a very wise King, who govern'd his People by just Laws; where∣fore his Subjects plac'd him after his death in the rank of the Gods, and gave him many Names, because of his great Qualifications; for they call'd him Deus Deorum, because they esteem'd him the first of Gods, on ac∣count of the good Ordinances he had made during his Reign; and was sirnamed Bifrons and Quadrifrons, because they took him for the World, the two chiefest parts whereof are the East and the West, and the other two are the South and the North. He was still called Junonius (Consivus, Patuleius, Clusius,) because the Calends of every Month were consecrated both to him and Juno; and for that reason, as Varro says, there were twelve Altars in his Temple, in respect to the twelve Months of the Year: Consivus à conserendo, either because he was the reparator of Man∣kind, who had been drowned in the waters of the Deluge, or because he had taught Men to plant the Vine, and sow Corn: Patuletus, because in time of War the Gates of his Temple were always open; and Clusius, be∣cause they were shut up in time of Peace. In the Hymns sung by the Salii the day of this great Feast, he was called upon by the name of Deus Doum, as being the most An∣cient of all the Gods; and by that Jane Pater, because he had been a true Father to his Subjects. To what we have said of the origine of Janus, Jacobus Ausolus opposes some Argu∣ments, taken out of Chronology, where∣by he proves that Noah was dead in that time, But if Wine and Vine might clear this point of controversy, Pliny will assure us, that under the reign of Numa Wine was very scarce in Italy; and yet 'tis true, that Numa reigned a thousand three hundred and forty one years after Janus. Dionysius Halicarnasseus affirms also, that there was but a little Wine in Italy in the reign of Ascanius, who reigned at Alba eight hundred eighty five years after Janus. Wine is a Liquor so much sought after, that if it had been known in Janus's time, 'tis very likely that Men had improv'd the Vines; and that Wine had not been scarce in the time of Ascanius and Numa. Peucer tells us, that Janus is Javan the Son of Japhet, and indeed the likeness of the name carries a great weight with it. In fine, let it be either Janus, or Noah, or Javan, if
he has planted the Vine or not, Pagan Histo∣rians, who dive into the most remore Anti∣quity, agree that Janus reigned in Italy. Now here is the History taken out of Dionysius Halicarnasseus, and Sextus Aurelius Victor. Ericteus King of Athens, had a Daughter called Creusa, of so extraordinary Beauty that Apollo fell in Love with her. The Lady was not cruel, but yielded to the passion of the God, and got a great Belly by him; yet she kept it so secret, that few people knew she was brought to Bed. Her Son, whom she called Janus, was likewise brought up very secretly. Creusa was afterwards married to Xipheus, but had no Children by him. Ericte∣us, grieved for the barenness of his Daughter, begg'd continually of the Gods, an Heir worthy to succeed him after his death: A∣pollo by an Oracle pronounc'd on the Tripos of Delphi, order'd him to take for his Son the first Man he should meet at his return. By chance, or more likely by the care of Creusa, he met young Janus: Ericteus adopted him, and brought him up like the Heir of a King. Janus being grown a Man, was impatient to stay so long for the Crown of Athens, and moved by his great courage went over into Italy, where he reigned, says Macrobius, toge∣ther with Cameses Native of Italy; and the City of their abode was called Janiculum, af∣ter the name of Janus; and the Country Ca∣mesene, by the name of the other King: Reg∣num Janus obtinuit cum Camese aeque indigenâ, ut Regio Camesene, oppidum Janiculum vocita∣retur. Cato in some Fragments remaining of his Books of Origines, having complain'd of the fictions and vanity of the Greeks, assures us, that the Scythians did populate Italy under the conduct of Janus, and that this Prince go∣vern'd his Subjects by so good and just laws, that his Posterity plac'd him in the number of the Immortal Gods. Plutarch favours this opinion, and gives this high Encomium of Janus. Whatever, says he, Janus was, either God or King, he was a wise and great Poli∣tician, who temper'd the Manners of his Subjects, and taught them Civility: Where∣fore he was esteem'd the God of Peace, tho' he was never called upon but during War. Janus was one of the first Kings of some Inhibitants of Italy, first call'd Aborigines, and then Latins. He was compared to Noah, be∣cause he was the first who cultivated this wild Country, and there planted the Vine: Wherefore they made an allusion of the name of Janus, to that of Jain in the Phaenici∣an Language, and to that of  in Greek, which signifies Wine. 'Tis said that he re∣ceived Saturn in Italy, because the first Man who began there to manure and dung the ground was called Saturn; and this happen'd in the same time that Janus cultivated the Vine. Plutarch assures us, that Janus came from Greece into Italy; and for that reason he was represented with a double Face, as being both Greek and Italian, or because he chang'd the gross manners of the Inhabitants of Italy into a more sweet and civil policy. The Romans built but three Temples and a little Chappel to Janus. The first Temple was built by Romulus, after he had concluded a Peace with the Sabins, and there he erected a Statue of Janus with two Faces, to shew that both the Roman and Sabine Nations were joined together, or else to signifie, that the two Kings Romulus and Tacius, were but one head to govern the same Com∣monwealth. This Temple was built in the Roman Field; and Procopius says, that in his time, it remain'd yet in the middle of that Field, over against the Capitol, with a little niche of Brass, and two doors like a Taber∣nacle, wherein a Statue of Janus five foot high was set up. Numa order'd that the Gates of the Temple should be shut up in time of Peace, and open in time of War For the Consul appointed to command the Army being upon his departure, went into this Temple attended by the Senate, the chiefest of the City, and his Soldiers in mi∣litary dresses, and open'd the Gates of the Temple. This Ceremony was but seldom perform'd, for this Temple continued open, during the space of seven hundred and twenty four years, till the time of Augustus, who took possession of Egypt. This Temple was shut up but three times; the first time was during the reign of Numa Pompilius; the se∣cond in the time of the Consulate of Titus Manlius Torquatus, and C. Attilius Balbus, seven or eight years after the first Punick War, and the third time was about seven hundred twenty four years after the foundation of Rome, nine and twenty years before the birth of our Lord, and towards the end of the Reign of Augustus. The new Consuls took possession of their Office in this Temple; wherefore it was said that they opened the year. The second Temple of Janus was built by Cn. Duillius in the Herb Market, after the first Carthaginian War, but being half ruined, it was built again by the Emperor Tiberius, as Tacitus says. The third Temple was erected under the name of Janus Quadrifrons, some say by Nu∣ma, and others by Augustus, in the Ox-mar∣ket in a little Valley called Velabrum, be∣twixt the Capitol and Mount Aventinus. Mar∣lianus
affirms, that this Temple was built neither by Numa nor Augustus, because in his time it was still almost entire, it being in∣credible it had lasted so long, had it been built by one of them. However, it may be said that it was built by Numa, and rebuilt by Augustus. This Temple was of a square fi∣gure of the Ionick order, all Marble, dedica∣ted to Janus Quadrisrons, or four Faced. The Romans, after the taking of the City of Faleria in Tuscany, having found a Statue of Janus with four Faces, made one after its likeness for the City of Rome, and erected them a Temple with four Fronts, and twelve Altars, to represent the four Seasons, and the twelve Months of the Year. Besides these Temples, there was also a Chappel call'd Aedes Jani Curiatii, dedicated to Janus by the Horace, who killed the three Curiatii. There were three Statues of Janus in the Roman Field. The first was at the entry thereof; the second in the middle, before the Palace of Paulus, and the place called Ro∣stras; the third was at the coming out of the Forum Romanum. The Statue that stood in the middle of the place was the most fa∣mous of all; for the Merchants and Bankers, and those who took Money at Interest met there. Wherefore, when Writers express'd by a Periphrasis, the Trade of a Banker, they said, ad Janum medium sedet; and Horace says of a Man, who had lost his Estate by bor∣rowing Money at great Interest, Postquam omnes res mea Janum Ad medium fracta est, aliena negotia curo Excussus propriis. Having lost all that I had, by borrow∣ing Money at Interest, I am oblig'd to do other Men's business having nothing to do for my self. JAPHETUS, One of Noah's Sons. The name of Japhet signifies a great extent, according to the blessing of Noah, God shall enlarge Japheth. Wherefore the Scripture says that Wisdom is wider, i. e. of a greater extent than the Seas. But instead of Japhet mention'd in the Holy Scripture, the Greeks have found out Japetus. However, the Jape∣tus of the Greeks, is nothing like the Japhet of the Scripture; for the Greeks tell us, that Ja∣petus was Brother to Saturn, and that Jupiter threw him headlong into Hell with the other Titans. They represent him like an old de∣cripit Man, and proverbially say, older than Jopetus;  notwithstand∣ing he was younger than Japhes the Son of Noah, for they say, that Japetus was the Grand-father of Deucalion, who liv'd: in Moses's time. JASION, The Son of Jupiter and E∣lectra, beloved by Ceres, by whom she had Plutus the God of Riches. JASON, The Son of Aeson King of Thessalia by Alcimede. When Aeson died, he left the government of his Kingdom to Pe∣lias his Brother, till his Son Jason came to age, and intrusted him with the care of Ja∣son's Education. Pelias sent him on the ex∣pedition to fetch the golden Fleece, which was in the possession of Aeta King of Colchis, and was guarded in a Wood consecrated to Mars, by brazen-footed Bulls, casting fire out of their Mouths. Jason ordered a Ship to be built for this Expedition, which he called Argos, after the name of Argus the builder of it. Jason went on board of her, accompanied with fifty Noble-Men: And having run ma∣ny dangers at Sea, at last arriv'd at Colchis, and seiz'd upon the Golden Fleece by the Artifices of Medea, who by her Magick, en∣chanted the Monsters that guarded the Trea∣sure, wherefore Jason married her, and be∣got two Sons on her: But afterwards he fell in love with Creusa, the Daughter of Creon King of Athens, and married her; whereup∣on Medea, to revenge herself, set his Palace on fire, where he was consumed by the flames, together with his new Wife. But some say, that Jason and Medea were reconciled. The Fable runs thus; here is the History. Strabo reports the Expeditions of Phryxus and Jason, or the Argonaustes into Colitus, to fetch from thence Treasures, and especially the Gold, that the Inhabitants of that Coun∣try had got out of the Sands of the River, by sifting them through a Ram's Skin; and from thence concludes, that all that is rela∣ted by the Poets concerning the same is a true History, either of the nature of those Countries, or the several Voyages made there. Thus this learned Man proves by Ar∣guments, taken from the Cities and other Monuments. called still by the Names of Phryxus and Jason, that both these Lords had undertaken the acquiring the Riches of Gol∣chus. Bochart tells us, that perhaps Poets have ex∣press'd the Treasure of the King of Colchis by the word of Fleece, because the word Gasa is of an ambiguous signification in its origi∣nal Tongue, viz. Syriack; for it signifies a Treasure; and in this sense it was commu∣nicated to the Latins, and all its Dialects; and it signifies also a Fleece; where∣upon Poets have grounded their allusions: And we may say also, that the two Oxen that guarded the Treasure, were the two Walls which encompass'd the Castle where it was laid up; for the Syriack word-Sour, signifies an Ox and a Wall. The
Dragon that watch'd the Treasure, was no∣thing else but the Iron Gate of the Fort, be∣cause Nachas signifies Dragon, Iron and Steel. Here is in short the true History and Physio∣logy, whereupon was grounded all the Fi∣ctions that we read in the Argonauticks of Or∣pheus and Apollonius. ICARUS, The Son of Daedalus, who being escaped, together with his Father, out of the labyrinth where King Minos had shut them up, by the help of Wings joyn'd with Wax, flew higher than he should, and ap∣proaching too near the Sun, melted his waxen Wings, and fell into the Sea, which therefore was called the Icarian Sea, as Ovid says, Icarus Icarias nomine fecit aquas. The Truth is, that Daedalus imbark'd with his Son Icarus to avoid Minos's anger; and the Ship that carried them away is repre∣sented by Wings. There is still another Icarus, Son to OEba∣lus, and Erigonus's Father, who treated some Shepherds of Attica with Wine; but the Shepherds having never before that time drank of that Liquor, and being perswaded they were poison'd with it, kill'd Icarus, and cast him into a Well. His little Bitch call'd Mera, went back to his Daughter Erigone, and brought her to the place where the body of her Father lay; and having pronounc'd many Curses against the Murtherers of her Father, hang'd herself, not being able to bear her grief; and the little Bitch died also out of sorrow. But the Gods took pity of them, and turn'd the Bitch Mera into the Dog-Star, Icarus into the Constella∣tion called Boates, and Erigone into of Virgo. IDA, A Mountain of Troas in Lesser Asia, the highest of all the Mountains of the Hellespont, cover'd all over with Timber fit for the building of Ships. Athenus reports, that out of this Hill issue fifteen Rivers, wherefore Horace calls it Ida undosa. There was also another Mountain in the Island of Crete, which the Corybantes or Idaei called Ida, because of their ancient dwelling place on Mount Ida. in Phrygia. The Dactyli Idaei found out the invention of forging Iron. IDOLOLATRIA, IDOLOLATRAE, and IDOLA, Idolatry, service and wor∣ship tender'd to Idols or false Gods. Some Writers refer the beginning of Ido∣latry to Ages more remote than we do our selves. St Epiphanius ascribes the beginning of Idolatry to the time of Serug, Rehu genuit Se∣rug, caepitque inter homines Idololatria, and says, that Tharah the Son of Nachor made the first Statues, which were worshipped. Nachor ge∣nuit Tharam. Tunc simulacra ficta sunt figlino opere ex argillâ. Nachor begat Tharah: Then Statues were made of Potter's Clay. Abraham's Ancestors were Idolaters, as Joshua says to the Israelites: Our Fathers dwels on the other side of the Flood in old time, even Tha∣rah the Father of Abraham, and the Father of Na∣chor; and they served other Gods. Idolatry was common in Chaldea, and began not long after the Deluge, and from the Chaldeans it pass'd into Egypt, where they ador'd Beasts and their Images, as Mola tells us; and Juvenal reports, that they worshipp'd the Plants of their Gar∣dens, as Leeks and Onions. Porrum & caepe nefas violare aut rodera morsu: O sanctas Gentes, quibus haec nascuntur in hortis Numina. Eusebius assures us, that the Phaenicians and Egyptians taught Idolatry first, and began to render divine honours to the Sun, Moon and Stars: and that having forsaken the true God, to follow shining and luminous Bo∣dies, they ador'd also reasonable Beings, which are to be preferr'd to Bodies meerly an∣imated. Wherefore the Phaenicians and Aegyp∣tians communicated to other Nations not only the worship of the Stars, but also the adoration of other Gods, which were at first but emblems of Stars under the figures of Animals, as it appears by the Constellations; then they worshipp'd the Animals them∣selves, as living symbols of the Stars; and from thence they easily came to adore Men and their Images. Tertullian says, that there were formerly Idolaters without Idols, and that in his time there were still Temples without Idols, where false Divinities were ador'd. For it must be observ'd, that although Idolatry has preceded Idols, because Idolatry was invent∣ed before Painting and Carving; yet it was much increas'd since these Arts have been improv'd. This Father takes also notice in another place, that in Numa's time, there were neither Idols nor Temples at Rome, but only Altars made with earth and green turfs, erected for prefent occasions, as it was pra∣ctised before Moses's time, as we learn in the Scripture. Silius Italicus speaks thus of Jupi∣ter Ammon, Inrestincta focis servant altaria flammae; Sed nulla effigies, simulacrave nota Deorum, Majestate locum & sacro implevere timore. By which he means, that the Temple of Jupiter Ammon was without Idols, and conse∣quently
more venerable, because the eternal fire represented better the Divinity than any other Image whatsoever. Clemens Alexandrinus, a Greek Author, says the same thing concerning unform'd matter; that was ador'd, before the art of perfect re∣presentations was found out, which led Men into a new abyss of Errors, and that that kind of worship is an adoration of Art and Mat∣ter, not of Gods or Devils; and tells us, that according to Berosus's opinion, Artax∣erxes the Son of Darius, Ochus's Son, was the first who propos'd the Image of Ve∣nus to be ador'd. Epiphanius assures us, that painted Images were invented before Statues, and that Thara the Son of Nachor ordered first the worship of Statues. Sanchuniaathon repores, that the first Statues of stone that were ador'd, were but unpolish∣ed and unformed, which he calls Baetylia. 'Tis very like that this word come from Be∣thel, which is the name given by Jacob, to the stone whereupon he laid his head during night, and erected it the next morning in the form of a Statue, and consecrated it to God, by pouting Oyl or some rich perfume upon it, in remembrance of the mysterious Ladder he had seen in that place, and this action of Jacob was afterwards imitated. Therefore 'tis no wonder, that the first Sta∣tues of Idolaters were but Pillars or Stones without form. Pausanias speaks of Statues of Hercules and Cupid, which were but unpolish∣ed Stones: And Clemins Alexandrinus tells us, that before carving was found out, Idols were but Columns: Antequum statuae esseut affabre formatae, veteres erexerunt columnas eas∣que colebant ut Dei simulacra. And still after Carving was brought to perfection, the old Statues made of rough stone were yet ador'd. The God Heliogabalus, who very likely was the Sun, was nothing else but a great round stone, broad below and ending in a Cone, as Herodian tells us, in the description he has gi∣ven thereof, Lapis est maximus, ab imo rotundus, & sensius fastigiatus. The worship of Idols is very ancient, at least in the East. The Precepts of the Deca∣logue, which forbids Idols is an argument thereof. But if we come out of Phaenicia, Syria and Egypt, we shall find a great number of Na∣tions who had no Idols. Herodotus reports, that the Persians had neither Temples, nor Altars, nor Idols, and that they rallied the Greeks, who chose Men for their Gods. This Historian relates somewhere else, that in the famous Temple of Bell at Babylon, there was two distinct Chappels; one below, wherein a great Golden Statue of Jupiter was erected, and in the highest part of the Tower, but without any Statue, but only a Bed and a golden Table, and here (as the Priests af∣firmed) this God came down by night. Herc∣dotus says again, that he heard in Egypt, that the Egyptians were the first who erected Al∣tars and Statues to the Gods, and made re∣presentations of Animals in stones. And if Idols were first set up in Egypt, Phaenicia and Syria, the reason thereof is, that Carving and other like Arts, were first invented and im∣proved in those Countries. This same Historian in another place, gi∣ving an account of what he had learn'd of the Egyptian Priests, says after them, that du∣ring ten thousand three hundred and forty years, no God had been represented by any shape of a Man, even without excepting the Kings of Egypt. And this shews us, that Men pass'd from the worship of the true God, to that of the Stars and Nature, as seeming to be his most perfect Images, then they came to worship Animals as emblems of the Stars; and when Carving was found our, they substituted the figures of Animals in∣stead of the Animals themselves; but came to the worship of Men and Images thereof but very lately. In fine, Herodotus-speaking of the Scythians Religion, having mentioned the Earth, Jupi∣ter, Venus, Apollo, Mars, he tell us, that this worship was perform'd without either Al∣tars, or Temples, or Statues, only they erected a kind of a Statue to Mars, which was only a Sword of Steel. And the Scythi∣ans had only an Idol of Mars, but none of other Gods; because the Idol of Mars was but a Sword, and this warlike Nation was not ignorant of the art of making Swords; but being Barbarians, they had no skill to carve true Statues. Justin affirms, that Antiquity ador'd Spears instead of Statues, and that in remembrance of that practice, the Gods were always represented in their Statues with Spears. But if the Scythians represented Mars by a Sword, the other Nations represented com∣monly their Gods by Stones. Pausanias re∣ports, that in a place of Greece, near a Statue of Mercury, there was thirty square stones, called by the name of several Gods. Then this Another tells us, that formerly all the whole Nation of Greeks, used unpolished Stone instead of Statues to represent their Gods; for the art of melting Metals came very late to the Greeks and other remote Na∣tions. Wherefore at first they used Stones without form for Idols, then they polished Stones, and made Figures of them; at last the art of melting Metals was found out, and then they made Statues thereof.
In short, we learn of this Author, that the Inhabitants of Chaeronea had a very particular veneration for a Scepter or Spear that Vulcan had forg'd for Jupiter, as it is reported by Homer. Straba tells us, that Moses blamed the cu∣stom of the Egyptians, who represented their Gods by the figures of Beasts, and condemned the Greeks, who ascrib'd them the figure of Men; shewing that the Divine Nature can't be represented by corporal Images, but that they should build him a Temple without Idols. The Author of the Dea Syria says plain∣ly, that the ancient Temples of the E∣gyptians had no Statues, that the first Statues were of their invention, and that they had communicated all this superstitions policy to the Syrians and the Greeks. He adds still, that it was not allowed to make any Statue either of the Son or the Moon, because they may always be seen in the brightness of their own light. Plutarch assures us, that Numa settled Religi∣on at Rome upon the same Maxims, that were afterwards put forth by Pythagoras, viz. that God was invisible and immaterial, that it was impossible to represent him by any Image: and for that reason, the Temples of the City of Rome were one hundred and therescore years and more without any Sta∣tues. Varro the most learned of the Romans tells us, that the ancient Romans ador'd the Gods near two hundred years, without making any Images to them: And if this, says he, was still observ'd, the Service of the Gods would be more pure; and brings the exam∣ple of the Jews, and says, that those who first taught Men to represent the Gods by Images, have taken away reverence, and increased error, fancying that it was easie to be incli∣ned to despise the Gods, by the consideration of the impotency of their Statues. IDUS, The Ides, a word used by the Romans in their Calendar, to distinguish the days of the Month. They commonly fell out the 13 of every month, except in the months of March, May, July and October, for in these the Ides were the 15th of the Month. This word is said to be derived from the Hetrurian word Iduare, i, e. to divide, because the Month is in a manner equally divided in two parts by the Ides; and that the Nones were perhaps called from Nono Idus the ninth of the Ides, because they were in the room of the ninth of the Ides. Some others observing, that there were three considerable different varieties in the motion of the Moon: the first when she is quite hid under the beams of the Sun; the second, at the first day of her appearing, when we see her in an Evening, with her Horn proceeding out of his Rays; and the third, when she is in her full light. The common opinion was, that from thence Romulus had took occasion to divide the days of the months, which he began always by the Ca∣lends, in the time that the Moon sub radii Solis celaretur was hid under the beams of the Sun, and then gave the name of Nonae or Ne∣vae Lunae to the day of the first appearing of the new Moon, and Idus when she was full, and appeared in her beauty, from the Gre word , i. e. from Beauty. From thence they draw an Argument for the inequality of the days of the Nones; for as it falls out by the composition of the motions of the Sun and the Moon, that the Moon comes out of the beams of the Sun, sometimes sooner and sometimes later: and that this diversity is commonly included in the space of two days; 'tis likely, say they, that in the time that Romulus instituted his Calendar, the Moon was kept a longer time hid under the beams of the Sun, in the month of March, May, July and October; where∣fore he allowed seven days to the Nones in these four Months, and five days only to the others; during which, it may be the Moon got off from these beams, and appear'd sooner. Others draw the word Idus from Idalium, which was the name of the Victim offered to Jupiter, the day of the Ides that was con∣secrated to him. Some derive this word from the Tuscan word Itis, which signifies amongst that Nation, the same that Idus a∣mongst the Romans. IGNIS, Fire. The Chronicle of A∣lexandria assures us, that Nimred, who was Ninus the first King of the Assyrians, or∣dain'd the worship and the Religion of Fire. And as the City of Ur was famous in the Province of Babylon, and that Ur signifies fire, they fancied that the wor∣ship of fire was first instituted in this City. Eupolemus reports, that Ur was accounted to be the same that Camarina, which took its name from the Hebrew word Camar, i. e. Fla∣grarae astuare: And her Priests were also cal∣led Camarins. The Hebrews themselves, as Hieronymus says, feigned, that these words of the Scripture, saying that Abraham came out of Ur of the Chaldeans, shew'd that he came miraculously out of the Fire, where the Chal∣deans had cast him, because he refus'd to adore it. Lucac's opinion is, that the Chal∣deans worshipp'd Fire, Chaldaeos culture focos.
Herodetus affirms that the Persians ador'd Fire as a God, wherefore they made scruple to burn the Corps of their dead, lest they should feed their God with a dead Body. 'Tis very likely, that the Chaldeans, Persi∣ans and other Eastern Nations, who ador'd the Sun and the Stars as eternal Fires, kept also a Symbol of them in a perpetual Fire, always burning on their Altars; and that in process of time, the simple people ador'd the fire itself that was burning on the Altars as their Gods, having no others to adore. However, few Writers ascribe the worship of Fire to the Chaldeans, and other Ancient Inhabitants of the East. Julius Firmicus says only, that the Persians preferr'd Fire to all o∣ther Elements, and had it carried before them. Quintus Gurtius shews, that the Persi∣ans and their Wise men kept an eternal Fire upon silver Altars, as a Symbol of Jupiter, i. e. the Sun. As the Greeks and the Romans were not so much given to the worshipping of Stars, as the Eastern Nations, so they ador'd Vesta and Vulcan, as the terrestrial and elementary Fire, distinguishing the fire of the Earth from that of Heaven; taking Vesta for the Earth, in the center whereof (according to their opini∣on) an eternal Fire was burning. This is reported by Ovid in his Fasti. And this Poet tells us also afterwards, that the perpetual Fire was the only Image they had of Vesta, being impossible to have a true Image of Fire; and that it was a custom formerly to keep a fire at the entry of Houses, which therefore has ever since kept the name of Vestibulum; and that they sat at long Tables to take their Meals in these Entries, where the Fire represented the Gods. Esse diu stultus Vestae simulachra putavi, Mox didici curvo nulla subesse tholo. Ignit inextinctus templo celatur in illo, Effigiem nullam Vesta nec Ignis habent. Ante focos olim longis considere scamnis Mos erat, & mensae credere adesse Deos. This Fire was not only watch'd and kept by the Vestal Virgins, but the care thereof was also committed to the High Pontiff, and was a function of his Office, even in the time that the Imperial Purple was joined to the Pontifical Dignity; as we learn of Ovid, who gives us this reason for the same; that this Holy Fire being the same that Aeneas brought from Troy, as an assurance of the eternity of the Empire, it was wisely left to the care of the Emperors who were Aeneas's Posterity, and more concern'd than any o∣thers about the eternity of the Empire. This eternal Fire kept at Rome came from Troy, where it was in the like veneration, as Virgil has often testified. And he introduces the Ghost of Hector speaking to Aeneas, to perswade him to re∣tire from the Ruins of Troy, and carry along with him the Gods called Penates, and the holy Fire. Sacra suos quae tibi commendat Troja Penates, Hos capae fatorum comites..... Sic ait & manibus vittas, Vestamque potentem, Aenumque adytis effert penetralibus ignem. And doubtless other Nations kept a perpe∣tual Fire on their Altars, to imitate these Israelites. For God commanded Moses that an eternal Fire should be kept on his Altar, saying, Aaron shall burn thereon sweet Incense, and he shall burn Incense upon it, a perpetual In∣cense before the Lord. And 'tis very likely, that the severe punishment that was inflicted on the two Sons of Aaron, befel them, because they had neglected the holy Fire of the Al∣tar, and attempted to light it again with profane Fire. The Vestal Virgins were also very severely punished, when they let out the Fire of Vesta, as 'tis reported by Livy; for they were perswaded that the eternity of the Empire depended upon the Eternity of that Fire. Dionysius Halicarnasseus says, that Numa built at Rome a Temple to Vesta, to keep a Fire therein by the ministry of Virgins, like that which was kept at Alba by the like ministry of Virgins; that it might be a sacred Fire common to the whole City, re-united toge∣ther by that means, as if it was but one Fa∣mily, for each Family had its own holy Fire; tho' Romulus had allow'd only so many Altars and Fires, as there was Wards in the City of Rome, called Curiae. The same Author tells us still, that Numa found a conformity be∣twixt the chastity of Virgins and the puri∣ty of Fire, and that that Fire was consecrated to Vesta, because Vesta denoting the Earth, and being in the middle of the World, she affords Food with her Vapours to the Stars, which are the perpetual Fires thereof. Plutarch reports, that Numa committed the care of the eternal Fire to the Vestal Vir∣gins, because purity and barrenness are common both to Fire and Virgins. We learn also of him and of Pausanias, that per∣petual fire was likewise kept at Delphi and Athens, the care whereof were not commit∣ted to Virgins, but Widdows, who were bound to live chast. Every Town of Greece had its Prytanium, but that of Athens was the most famous of all. The most likely etymology of this word is , the place where the Fire was
kept.  rytaneum's were the fire of the Lamps consecrated to Vesta, which were ne∣ver let out. Pliny observes the custom of the Ancients, to hang up Lamps in their Temples to adorn them. Atheneus tells us, that Dionysius Junior Tyrant of Sicily, conse∣crated in the Prytaneum of Tarentum a Candle∣stick , that had as many Lamps as days in the Year. These Lamps were con∣stantly kept burning, and very chargeable, for they were so abundantly supply'd with Oyl, that to express the perpetual duration of a thing, it was commonly said, 'tis like the Lamps of the Prytaneums . And this shews us that these eternal Fires and Lamps were kept in imita∣tion of the Temple of Jerusalem, or the first Tabernacle which Moses built by the order of God. The Learned agree, that before Men used to burn Oyl in their Lamps, they burnt Wood all night to give them light, as 'tis observed by Virgil, Urit odoratam uocturna in lumina cedrum. Servius says, that formerly Fires were not kindled on Altars, but drawn from Heaven by Prayers made for that purpose: apud ma∣jores arae non incendebantur, sed lgnem divinum precibus eliciebant. Diodorus Siculus observes, that when the Persian Kings died all the Fires were put out, and were kindled again, either with Glasses, as Plutarch says, or by Magick Artifice, as Servius seems to insinuate. The fire that was burning in the Temples came from Heaven, either by Lightning or Burning-Glasses, or by boring or rubbing a piece of Wood with violence, as Festus re∣lates: Mos erat tabulam felicis materiae tandiu terebrare, quousque exceptum ignem cribro aeneo, virgo in aedem ferret. The fire of the Stars seems to have been honoured in the person of Jupiter, called in Greek  and in Phaenician Language Cham; both these names being derived from heat and fire. But the fire of the sublunary world was represented either by Vesta or Vulcan. They called Vesta the fire of private Families, that was a part of the Gods Penates; or the publick and perpetual fire kept in the Tem∣ples, representing either celestial Fires, or the Fires that are in the center of the Earth. They ascrib'd to Vulcan the Fire of the Clouds, wherefore they said that Vulcan for∣ged the Thunderbolts of Jupiter, or the fire of Mountains casting out Flames, for they supposed that Cyclops or Smiths were work∣ing therein, or fire used in all kinds of Arts. ILITHYIA, A Divinity called up∣on by Women in labour; we learn of  that this Goddess was Diana. Tauc cùm matura vecabis Praepositam timidis parientibus Ilithyiam. The word Ilythyia comes from the Hebre not from the Greek , as if this God∣dess came to help. Dionysius Halicarnass speaks thus of her: Ilithyiam Romani Voc Junoners luciferam; but Orpheus in his Hym Diana Ilythyia, & casta eadem Prothuraea:  Plutarch says plainly, that this Goddess is the Moon, Unde censeo etiam Dianam Lochiam  Partns praesidem & Ilithyiam, ut quae non alia  à Lunâ, esse nominatam. IMAGINES, Images and Portraic of Ancestors, which noble Romans kept un∣der the Porches of their Houses, in wooden cases made for that purpose, which wor carried at their Funeral Pomps or Trium∣phal Entries. These Images were commonly made of Wax or Wood, and some of them were of Marble or Brass; and when the House was sold, it was not allowed them to remove  out of their places. Appius Claudius was the first who placed them in the Temples of the Gods, 259 years after the foundation of Rome, with Inscrip∣tions mentioning the Origines of those An∣cestors and their brave Archievements. Polybius a Greek Historian reports, that these Images represented Faces in basso relievo to the life, so that they were shut up in wooden cases, which were open in days of solemn Feasts and publick Sacrifices; and that they were adorn'd suitable to their Dignities, and crown'd with Garlands of Flowers. Flo∣vius Vopiscus assures us, that amongst the pub∣lick Rejoycings at Rome, when the Senate elected Tacitus Emperor, the Romans in all their Houses open'd the cases of the Images of their Ancestors, and offered white Victims in sacrifice. Cornolius Tacitus writes, that in the Funeral Parade of Junia, Cato's eldest Daughter, Cas∣sius's Wife, and Sister to Brutus, they carried the Pictures of twenty Illustrious Families, viz. the Quintilians, Manlians, and other great Families of the Empire. We read also, that Julius Caesar, to shew the greatness of his Fa∣mily, ordered that the Pictures of Marins should be carried at the Funeral Pomp of his Aunt; and that at the Funeral Parade of Drusus, Tiberius commanded they should car∣ry the Pictures of the Caesar's Family, since Aeneas and the King of Alba; till Romulus the Founder of the Empire, and that after them
the Images of Appius Claudius, and the whole Family of the Claudians should be carried in a long and sumptuous March. However, it was not allowed to all Men, who had the Pictures of their Ancestors in their Houses to have them carried at their Funerals; this was only granted to those, who had honorably performed the functions of their Magistracies; for if they had fail'd in any point, they forfeited the priviledge of being attended at their Funerals by the Effigies of their Ancestors; and if they had committed some great crime, all these Pi∣ctures were broke in pieces. These Figures carried on Chariots attended the Funeral Pomp, and were set upon Ivory Chairs in the Field call'd Rostra. INDIGITES, Gods call'd Indigites, were great Men and Heroes, placed in the number of Gods for their Great and Heroick Actions. The Tutelar Gods, protectors of any place, were called by that name. The Romans had a great number of these Demi-Gods, as Hercules, Aesculapius, Faunus, Quiri∣nus, Carmenta, Castor and Pollux, Acca Lauren∣tia, and others. INFERUS, Hell, a place under ground. Lucian has given us a fabulous de∣scription of that place in his Treatise of Mourning. The people, says he, abused by Poets; and particularly Hesiod and Homer, came to be perswaded, how there was be∣low, a subterranean place very deep and gloomy, where the dead were detained in eternal and invisible bands, without ever any being suffer'd to stir from thence, ex∣cepting some few, through all extent of Ages, says Virgil; nay, and that a particular favour too, and for reasons of great impor∣tance, for the whole Country is surround∣ed with great Rivers, whose very names are terrible, Styx, Phlegeton, Cocytus, with∣out mentioning Acheron, a great Lake just at the entrance, which exhales so gross a va∣pour, that Birds can't fly over without dy∣ing presently. First, at the descent you find an Adamantine Gate, guarded by Aeacus the Cousin German of Pluto, in the company of Cerberus, a triple headed Dog, that fawns and caresses highly all the comers, but barks terribly at those who would go out. Beyond this Meadow is a great Field of Daffodils, through which glides the River Lethe, a mortal Enemy to Memory, if we may pin our Faith on such persons, as for∣merly returned from thence; tho' it is somewhat strange, how they could remem∣ber it, after having drank thereof, and re∣count all those dismal things, which we only know by their Narrative Pluto and Proserpina sway the Scepter in those Regi∣ons: The latter the Daughter of Ceres, kid∣napp'd forsooth, and carried away by force; and the former Jove's Brother, who had this Empire for his share; and is intitled Pluto, which signifies Wealth, because he is rich in Ghosts, as a Man told me, who fancied to know it well. His Ministers are Pain, Horrors and the Furies, without mentioning Minos and Rha∣damantus, both Cretans, who are very severe in their execution of Justice. As for Mer∣cury, he is only there as a Sojourner. Good Men are sent into the Elysian Fields, a Colo∣ny of Felicity and Delights, and the Wick∣ed into eternal Dungeons, where they are wrack'd and tormented suitably to their se∣veral Crimes, some in the Fire, others up∣on Gibbets or on Wheels; this Man for his punishment, is constrained to rowl Stones that run back again, against steep Hills, or fetch Water in a Pot full of holes; another is prey'd upon by a Vul∣ture, or dies of thirst, as Tantalus, without being able to squench it, tho' he is up to the very Chin in water. The rest, that have done neither Good nor Evil, strowl in the Meadow above mentioned, where they are fed with such Meat, as are carried to the dead, and the oblations and effusi∣ons, that are poured upon their Sepulchres; tho' after all, they are no more than shades, that have only the figure of the Body, and when touch'd vanish like smoke. The same Author hath also left us a de∣scription of Hell, in the second Book of the true History. At our going out of that sweet and fra∣grant Air, we entred one thick and stink∣ing, which distill'd Pitch instead of Dew. We smelt afar off Sulphur and Brimstone, with an exhalation like unto that of dead Bodies broiling upon the Coals. Amidst of all this we heard the lashings of a Whip, the gingling of Chains, and the roarings of the damned. We touch'd at one of these Islands, which was all encompassed with craggy Cliffs and Precipices. Having made shift to scramble up through a craggy and thorny Cliff, we arrived at the place of pu∣nishments, which was all sowed with points of Swords and Spears, and surrounded with three Rivers, the one of Blood, the other of Mud, and the third of Fire, but of a rapid stream like unto a Torrent, and subject to Tempests like the Sea. We went in, and there we saw many Kings torment∣ed. After this away we went, not being able to suffer the stench, nor the horror of the place. We have a large account of Hell, as 'tis represented by Poets, in what Diodorus Si∣culus
reports of the Funerals of the Aegyp∣tians. The Corps being put into a Boat guided by a Pilot, called in the Egyptian Language Charon, Proreta quem suâ linguâ Charontem vo∣cant; they stopt in a Lake, where every body was allowed to charge the dead with Accusations. If the Crime was prov'd, they pronoun∣ced Sentence against him, whereby he was deprived of Burial. If the Impeacher was not able to prove his Accusations, he was punished; and the Kindred of the deceased left off Mourning, sung his Praises, com∣mended not his Birth and Family, but his Vertue and Piety towards the Gods, pray∣ing the Gods of Hell to receive him in their company, and then they buried him. The same Author speaks of the piece of Mo∣ney, that was put in the Mouth of the dead to pay the Ferry-man, and gives an account of the Temple of Hecate, Cocytus, the Gate of Truth, and the Statue of Justice, without either Head or Eyes, to shew that Justice had no regard to persons. There are Judges who examine the Crimes and Vertues of this present Life, inflict punishments to the Ma∣lefactors, and send just Men to the Elysian Fields. Virgil mentions Minos, Quaesitor Minos vitas & crimina discit. After the Sentence is pronounced, the pu∣nishment follows. Continuò sontes ultrix accincta flagello Tisiphone quatit insultans, torvosque finistrâ Intentans angues, vocat agmina saeva Serorum. 6. Aeneid. The Rivers represented by Poets flowing in Hell, are Rivers of Arcadia or Italy, or the Eastern Countries. Homer Odysse. l. 10. places these four following Rivers in the Cimmeria, viz. Acheron Phlegeton, Cocytus and Styx, and tells us, that the Country inhabited by the people called Cimmerii, one days Journey from Mount Circaeeum in the Country of the Latins, is accounted to be Hell. The Italians, who have taken their Fables from the Greeks, have represented them as Rivers in Italy: The Styx was in Arcadia near Nonacris, and its Waters were so extream cold, that they were present poyson, and Historians report that Alexander the Great was poison'd with them. Pausanias l. 8. makes a long description of the River Styx in Greece, and refers the two places, where Ho∣mer and Hesiod makes mention of them. All Geographers place also the Rivers Acheron and Cocytus in Epirus, adjoining to Arcadia. All these Names, Acheron, Cocytus, Avernus, or ra∣ther Aornus, Phlegeton and Styx signify in the Greek Tongue, the same they should to represent the emblems of Hell. Wherefore 'tis certain that the Latins have borrowed their Hell from the Greeks, and the Greeks from the Funerals of the Aegyptians, as Pausa∣nias reports. INO, The Daughter of Cadmus and Her∣mione, who took for her second Husband Atha∣mas King of Thebes, who had married Nephele of whom he had two Children Phryxus and Helle. This cruel Step-mother attempted to destroy her two Children; but Phryxus to prevent her design, got a Ram with a golden Fleece, and riding upon him with his Sister Helle, fled away, and cross'd over the Sea, but this fair Lady, frightned by the depth of Waters, let go her hold, and fell into the Sea, which thereupon was called by her name Hellespontus. As for Phryxus, he safely arriv'd at Colchis, where he sacrificed his Ram to Jupiter, who plac'd him in the number of the twelve Constellations of the Zodiack, and the golden Fleece was left to King Aeta, who placed it in a Wood consecrated to Mars, un∣der the guard of a dreadful Dragon and two Bulls, casting fire and flame out of their Mouths. This is what Lucian reports of the same in the Dialogue of the Sea-Gods, where he introduces Neptune and Amphitrite, speak∣ing thus. Nept. Let the Sea where this fair Lady is fallen, be called after her name Hellespontus; and let the Nereids carry her Body into Tr, where the Inhabitants of the Country shall take care to erect her a Monument. Amph. I think we should do better to bury her here; for her fate, and the barbarous dealing of her Step-mother break my heart. Nept. But she can't lye in the bosom of the waves, and it would not be decent to bury her in the sand. 'Tis comfort enough for her, that her Mother-in-law shall be attended by the same fate, and pursued by Athamas, she shall cast herself down from the top of Mount Cytheron into the Sea, together with her Son Melicerta. Amph. But how came it to pass that this fair one fell off the Ram she was riding upon, and her Brother did not? Nept. 'Tis no wonder that a Man should ride better than a Maid; besides, that she was frightned by the depth of Waters she saw under her Feet. Amph. Why did not the Clouds help her in this encounter. Nept. No body can avoid their bad For∣tune. The Bodies of Ino and her Son Palamus were carried by a Dolphin on the shoar of
Schenuntia, from whence Amphimacus and Donaci∣nus brought them to Corinth, and honour'd them like Gods, Ino by the name of Lucothoe or Matuta, and her Son under the name of Melicertes or Portumnus, and instituted solemn Games in their honour, kept every fifth year at the Streights of the Isthmus of Corinth. As we learn of Ovid, in the 6th Book of his Fasti, v. 541. Laeta canam: gaude defuncta laboribus Ino, Dixit, & huic populo prospera semper ades. Numen eris Pelagi, natum quoque pontus habebit: In vestris aliud sumite nomen aquis. Leucothoe Graiis, Matuta vocabere nostris. In portus nato jus erit omne tuo. Quem nos Portumnum, sua lingua Palemona dicet: Este precor nostris aequus uterque locis. This same Poet explains at large this Fable, in the 4th Book of his Metamorphosis. Lactantius doth not question the History of Ino, called Leucothea or Matuta, and her Son, who had also three names, at least after his Apotheosis; for to put out of Men's memo∣ry that they were Men themselves, they chang'd their names after their consecration: Solent enim mortuis consecratis nomina immutare, credo ne quis putet eos homines fuisse. Ino post∣quam se praecipitavit, Leucothea, materque Matu∣ta, & Melicertes filius ejus Palaemon atque Por∣tumnus. Ino and Semele were the Daughters of Cadmus and Hermione; wherefore they were all Natives of Phaenicia, Cadmus himself being a Phaenician. The name of Melicertes is also a Phaenician name, and signifies also the King of the Town. And thus of the three names of the Mother and the Son, one was Phaenician, Ino and Melicertes; the other Greek, Leucothea and Palemon; and the last was Latin, Matuta and Portumnus. These three names shew, that the same History was brought from Phaenicia into Greece, and from Greece in∣to Italy. Pausanias describes the fury of Athamas a∣gainst Ino his Wife, whom he took to be the cause of the death of Phryxus, and the flight of Ino, who run away with her Son, and cast herself headlong with him into the Sea, and tells us, that the Dolphins received Melicertes, and carried him to the Isthmus of Corinth, where he was named Palaemon, and there the Isthmian Games were dedicated to him: As for Phryxus, Ino his Step-mother had really conspired his ruin; and to compass her wick∣ed designs, she employed the Priests of Del∣phi to perswade the people, that the State of Thebes should enjoy no tranquility, till Phryx∣us was sacrificed to Jupiter; whereupon Phryxus fled away with his Sister Helle, who fell into the Sea called by her name; and retired himself to King Aeta at Colches. This is related by Apollodorus. INSCRIPTIO, An Inscription. The Ancients ingrav'd on Pillars the prin∣ciples of Sciences, or the History of the World. Porphyrius mentions Inscriptions kept by the Inhabitants of Crete, wherein the Ce∣remony of the Sacrifices of the Corybantes were described. Euhemerus, as Lactantius reports, had written an History of Jupiter and the other Gods, collected out of the Titles and Inscriptions, which were in the Temples, and principally in the Temple of Jupiter Tri∣philianus, where, by the Inscription of a golden Column it was declared, that that Pillar was erected by the God himself. Pli∣ny assures us, that the Babylonian Astrologers made use of Bricks to keep their observati∣ons, and hard and solid Matters to preserve Arts and Sciences. This was for a long time practised; for Arimnestus, Pythagoras's Son, as Porphyrius re∣lates, dedicated to Juno's Temple a brass Plate, whereon was engrav'd the Sciences that were improved by him: Arimnestus, says Malchus, being returned home, fix'd in the Temple of Juno a brass Table, as an Offer∣ing consecrated by him to posterity; this Monument was two Cubits diameter, and there were seven Sciences writ upon it. Pythagoras and Plato, according to the opi∣nion of the Learned, learnt Philosophy by the Inscriptions of Egypt, ingraven on Mer∣cury's Pillars. Livy tells us, that Hannibal dedicated an Altar with a long Discourse, ingraven in the Greek and Punick Language, wherein he de∣scrib'd his fortunate Atchievements. The Inscriptions reported by Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus shews sufficiently, that the first way of instructing People, and transmit∣ting Histories and Sciences to posterity, was by Inscriptions. And this particularly ap∣pears by Plato's Dialogue intitled Hyparchus, wherein he says, that the Son of Pisistratus, called by the same name, did engrave on Stone Pillars, Preceps useful for Husbandmen. Pliny assures us, that the first publick Mo∣numents were made with Plates of Lead; and the Treaties of Confederacy made be∣tween the Romans and the Jews was written upon Plates of Brass; that, says he, the Jews might have something to put them in mind of the Peace and Confederacy concluded with the Romans. Tacitus reports, that the Messenians in their dispute with the Lacedaemo∣nians concerning the Temple of Diana Lime∣netida produc'd the old division of Peloponnessus, made amongst the posterity of Hercules, and proved, that the Field where the Temple was built fell to their Kings share; and that the
Testimonies thereof were yet seen engraven upon Stones and Brass. An. l. 4. c. 43. INTERPRES, An Inteepreter. There was an Interpreter appointed, whose Office was to explain to the Senate the Speeches of Ambassadors, who could not speak Latin. The Magistrates who commanded in the Pro∣vinces had also an Interpreter, to explain their Orders to those to whom they were di∣rected; because it was not allowed to these Magistrates, says Valerius Maximus, in all the functions of their Office, to speak in any other Language but Latin; wherefore the Praetor of Sicily reproached Tully, that he had spoken Greek in the Senate of Syra∣cuse. IO, The Daughter of Inachus, debauch'd by Jupiter, and then turn'd into a Cow, whom Juno committed to the care of Argus, and though Argus had a hundred Eyes, yet Mercury having lulled him to sleep with his Caducaeum and his Flute, stole her away; whereupon Juno being much vexed, made Io mad, and oblig'd her to run through many Countries, and to cross over the Bosphorus of Thracia, thus called after her name. From thence she came again into Egypt, where, Ju∣piter mov'd with compassion for her misfor∣tune, restor'd her to her first shape, and then she married King Osiris. From that time she was called Isis, and honoured by the Egyptians; and after her death, rank'd in the number of the Goddesses, and honoured by the name of Isis. Herodotus writes, that the Egyptians consecrated to her Cows, and the Females of all Cattle. Diodorus and Philostra∣tus say, that she was represented with Ox's Horns. The Nation called Eubaei had an Ox's head for a symbol, in remembrance that Io was brought to bed of Epaphus in a Den, called for that reason , the Ox's Den. Plutarch writes, that Horus out of passion, having taken the Royal Ornament from the head of his Mother Isis, Mercury gave her another, made of an Ox's Head, in form of an Head-piece. Lucian in his Dialogue of the Gods, brings in Jupiter talking thus with Mer∣cury. Jupiter. Dost thou know Io? Mercury. Who, the Daughter of Inachu? Jupit. Yes, her; Juno out of jealousy has turn'd her into a Heifer, lest I should love her, and has committed her to the guard of a Monster, that never sleeps; for as he has an hundred Eyes, there is always some watch∣ing. But thou art cunning enough to get me rid of him; go and kill him in the Ne∣mean Forest, where he watches this fair one; and after his death, thou shalt carry Io by Sea into Egypt, where she shall be ador'd by the name of Isis. I will have her preside over the Winds and the Waves, and be the Patro∣ness of Sea-men. JOCASTA, The Daughter of Creon King of Thebes, who being warn'd by the Oracle, that he should perish by the hand of one of his Children, bad Jocasta, who mar∣ried Laius, to murther all her Sons. OEdipus being born, was deliver'd to a Soldier to murther him, according to the King's order. But the Soldier, struck with horror for the murther of an innocent Child, contented himself to run a twig of Ozier through both his Feet, and tye him to a Tree, his Head downwards: A Shepherd of Polybus King of Corinth having found him, untied him, and presented him to the Queen, who carefully brought him up. Being grown a Man, he went into Phocis, according to the Oracle, to discover there his Father. There was then in that Country a Monster called Sphinx, who had a Face and Voice like a Maiden, the Bo∣dy like a Dog, the Tail like a Dragon, the Claws like a Lyon, and Wings like a Bird, and devoured all Passengers, who were not able to expound the Riddles she propos'd to them, which was very troublesome to Thra∣cia: But OEdipus clear'd the Country of that Monster, and forc'd her to kill herself, hav∣ing expounded her Riddle, viz. What Crea∣ture is that, that in the Morning goeth with four Feet, at Noon with two, and at Evening with three: OEdipus answered it was a Man, who in his Infancy went on all four, to wit, his Hands and Feet; in his middle Age on two Legs; and when he is old on three, that is, he us'd a Staff OEdipus was unknow∣ingly advanced to his Mother's Bed, for ha∣ving delivered Thebes of that Monster. And thus Laius King of Thebes, and Jocasta his Wife, endeavouring to prevent the prediction of the Oracle, saying, their Son should kill his Father and Marry his Mother, were them∣selves the Instruments and Ministers of the fulfilling of the Oracle. For OEdipus un∣knowingly kill'd Laius his Father, and mar∣ried his Mother Jocasta, Laius's Widow, whom Creon had promis'd to the Man, who should expound the Riddle abovementioned. IPHIGENIA. The Grecian Fleet be∣ing bound at Aulis by contrary winds, the Southsayer Calehas declared, that Diana would hinder favourable winds, till Iphigenia, Aga∣memnon's Daughter should be sacrificed to her. Agamemnon obey'd the Orders of Heaven, and sent for Iphigenia, under pretence of mar∣rying her to Achilles. Clytemnestra brought her Daughter Iphigenia, and having notice of Agamemnon's design, she oppos'd him vigo∣rously, as also Achilles, who resented his name being made use of to cover an untruth.
In fine, Iphigenia determined the Controver∣sy, by the great desire she had to be sacri∣ficed for the Service of Greece. All the pre∣parations being made for the Sacrifice, Diana substituted a Hind in her room, and carried her away to Tauros, where she was made Priestess to Diana, and sacrificed to her all the Foreigners, who landed upon that Coun∣try. The Sacrifice that Agamemnon offer'd of his Daughter Iphigenia, has so great confor∣mity with that of the Daughter of Jeptha, that 'tis plain, that Agamemnon's sacrifice was but a copy of the other. The name it self of Iphigenia seems to imitate, that she is the Daughter of Jephta, as if she was called Jephtigenia. But we must confess, that Poets have taken to themselves a soveraign Authority to dis∣guise History into Fables, and have con∣founded the Sacrifice of Jephta's Daughter with the Sacrifice of Isaac, and as God him∣self saved Isaac, whom he had order'd to be offered to him in sacrifice, and that a Ram was substituted in Isaac's room; so the Fable says, that the Virgin Iphigenia being ready to be sacrificed to Diana, this Goddess took her away, and substituted a Hind to be sacrificed in her room; as Ovid reports. The Vow of Agamemnon, and the Sacrifice of Iphigenia, as they are related by Tully, have yet a greater conformity with the History of Jephta. For he says, that Agamemnon vowed to offer in sacrifice to Diana, the finest Creature that should be born that year, wherefore he was obliged to sacrifice his own Daughter. Tully assures us, that Iphigenia was really sa∣crificed, like the Daughter of Jepht; and that Poets, being wiser than Agamemnon, have substituted a Hind to be sacrificed in her room. IRIS, The Rain-bow, one of the most wonderful Meteors of the Air. Plutarch re∣ports, that Plato writes, that she was esteem∣ed the Daughter of Thaumas, because of her wonderful beauty. And Hesiod in his Theogonia has made Iris the Daughter of Thaumas and Electra. Tully agrees with Plato's opinion: Cur autem Arcûs species non in Deorum numero re∣ponatur? Est enim pulcher, & ob eam causam, quia speciem habet admirabilem, Thaumante dici∣tur esse nata. Poets call her Nuncia Junonis the Messenger of Juno, because she gives us notice of the disposition of the air, represented by the name of Juno. And God himself in Genesis, has given the Rainbow for a token, that there never shall be any more Flood. And altho' the Rainbow might have appear'd before the Flood, yet it was not seen at all in the time of the Deluge, all the Sky being then cover∣ed with very thick Clouds, where the Rain∣bow was not able to appear, because its fair Colours shine only upon a thin Cloud. Wherefore it was a token naturally proper to signifie, that living Creatures should ne∣ver any more be destroyed by a Flood. Servius observes, that Mercury and Iris being both Messengers of the Gods, the Errands of Mercury are always tending to Concord, and the Messages of Iris to War and Discord, from whence she was called Iris. And this Grammarian wisely observes, that Iris doth not always raise Discords, for her first insti∣tution was to declare the Treatise of Pacifi∣cation between God and Man. As for the Etymology of the word Iris, Plato is rather to be believ'd than Servius, when he says that it comes from  di∣cere, annunoiare, because it predicts fair wea∣ther. What Vossius says is not to be omitted, viz. that the name of Iris may be derived from the Hebrew word Ir or Hir, which signi∣fies an Angel or Messenger; for this name is given to the Angels in the Holy Scripture, because of their watchfulness. For the pro∣per meaning of the word Hir is Vigil. However it must be granted, that Servius has grounded his opinion upon Hesiod's report, when he derived the word Iris from ; and said that her Errands were tending to discord: And this Poet tells us still, that when any of the Gods has told a lye, Jupiter sends Iris to fetch water from the River Styx in a golden Vessel, whereupon the Lyer must take the Oath, and if he forswears himself, he remains a whole year without life and motion, but a long year, which contains many thousand of years. Therefore the Errand of Iris sup∣poses indeed some discord, but yet conduces to pacify it. Statius seems to give another reason why Iris is the Messenger of the Gods, viz. her situation, one part of her touching Heaven, and the other Earth. ISIS, Queen of Egypt: 'Tis certain by the testimony of many Writers, that the Goddess called by the Greeks Io, and the Egyp∣tians Isis, is the same whom the Romans honoured by the name of Cybele, viz. the Earth, or Nature herself, married by the Egyp∣tians to Osiris, who was the Sun, to make her fruitful, and Mother of all productions, which are formed in her bosom. 'Tis both Plutarch and Apuleius's opinion, who introduces Isis speaking thus, Rerum natura, parens sum omnium elementorum. Macrobius says also, that Osiris is nothing else but the Sun, and Isis the Earth and Nature. And truly, there is such likeness between the Pictures and Representations, that the
Ancients have given of these two Divinities, viz. Isis among the Egyptians, and Cybele among the Romans, that 'tis easily to be perceived that both were the same Cybele, as we see by the reverse of many Medals. Cybele wore a Turret on her head, and was attended by Lions, holding in her hand a musical Instru∣ment like a Tabor, with this Title Mater Magna, the Great Mother, viz. Nature. Isis had also a Turret on her head, as it appears by a great many of her Statues, and parti∣cularly in that which was found at Rome in the time of Leo the tenth. She is also accom∣panied with many Lions, as we may observe in that famous piece of Cardinal Bembo, re∣presenting Isis, which Kircher caus'd to be en∣graven. She holds a Sistrum in her hand, which is a musical Instrument, and in fine, she is called Earth and Nature herself. Wherefore she is often represented with ma∣ny Breasts. Apuleius reports, that this Goddess was had in veneration all over the World, but under several names and representations, for she is named Diana, Ceres, Venus and Proserpina. And it must be observ'd that Isis was a Queen of Egypt, who reigned there with King Osiris her Husband in the time of the first Israelites; for Tacitus tells us, that during the reign of Isis, the multitude of Jews being extraordina∣rily augmented, they went to settle themselves in the neighbouring Country, under the command of Jerusalem and Juda. And as Isis was a woman of great wit, and courage to undertake the most difficult things, she ordered a Ship to be built, and fitted out for her to travel; and went into the most re∣mote and barbarous Countries, such as Gaul and Germany; and Tacitus assures us, that she penetrated into the Country of Suabia; and having met there but very gross and wild Nations, she taught them to honour the Dei∣ties, to till the Ground, and sow Corn. And thereby she was in so great esteem among these Nations, that they took her for the Goddess of the Earth, to whom they were much obliged, for having taught them Agri∣culture and Religion, which were at that time unknown to them. Tacitus observes also in this place, that the Germans of Suabia ador'd her under the fi∣gure of a Ship, in commemoration, doubt∣less, of the Ship that had brought this Queen into their Country to do them so good an Office. We have some Egyptian Medals of Julian the Apostate, wherein he is represented in a Ship; and there are some of her. Figures found in Kircher and others, wherein she car∣ries a Ship in her hand. Diodorus and Apulei∣ assures us, that she govern'd over the Sea; and the last ascribes these words to her: Na∣vigabili jam pelage facto, rudem dedicantes cari∣nam, primitias commeatûs libant mei Sacerdotes: as if she had been the first who found the Art of Navigation, or at least the use of Sails. Some Authors, not being able to discover from whence the Arms of the City of Paris are derived, which is a Ship, ascend as far as Isis to find the origine thereof, and the name of that City. For many were of opi∣nion that the name of Paris was a Greek word, and came from , near the fa∣mous Temple of Isis, since we must suppose, that a Temple was dedicated to this Goddess, in the compass of the ground that belongs now to the Abbey of St Germain in the Fields; and this Temple remained till the establishment of Christianity in France: And when it was demolished, they kept out of curiosity the Idol Isis, who was there ador'd, and laid it in a corner of the Church of St Germain in the Field, when it was built by Childebert, and dedicated to St Vincent. This Idol was kept there till the year 1514, that Cardinal Briconnet, who was then Abbot of that Church, being inform'd that some good old Woman, out of simplicity and supersti∣tion, had offered some Candles to the Idol, caused it to be removed from that place, and broke in pieces. This Temple, so famous, was served by a Chapter of Priests, who lived, according to the common opinion, at the Village of Issy, in a Castle, the Ruins whereof were yet seen at the beginning of this Age. Plutarch speaks of these Priests of Isis, they observed, says he, Chastity; their Head was shaved, and they went about bare foot, and cloathed with a linnen Habit: Wherefore Juvenal calls them Linigeri. Nunc Dea Linigerâ colitur celeberrima turbâ. Qui grege Linigero circundatus, & grege calvo. Isis had many Temples at Rome; one near the Baths of Caracalla at the end of the new Street, with this Title upon an old Marble, Saeculo Felici Isias Sacerdos Isidi Salutaris Consecra∣tio: Another at the Garden of St Mary the new, with this Title, Templum Isidis Exoratae. P. Victor and Sextus Rufus mentions another by the name of Patrician Isis, near Mount Esquilinus, and Lampridius in the Life of Alex∣ander Severus tells us, that this Emperor has adorned the Temple of Isis and Seraphis, Isim & Saraphim decenter Ornavit. Josephus writes, that the Emperor Tiberius ordered, that the Temple of this Goddess should be levelled to the Ground, her Statues cast into the Tri∣ber, and her Priests hang'd, fo having been
too favourable to the amours of a young Gentleman, with a Lady called Paulina. The Emperor Commodus had a singular vene∣ration for Isis, as Lampridius has observ'd in his Life, Sacra Isis coluit, ut & caput raderet & Anubin portaret; because of the Debaucheries committed in her Sacrifices. Here is an Encomium of Isis related by Diodorus, as it is ingraven on a Column. I am Isis the Queen of Egypt, instructed by Mercury. No body can abolish what I have esta∣blished by my Ordinances. I am the Wife of Osi∣ris, I have first invented the use of Corn. I am the Mother of King Horus. I shine in the Dog-star. By me the City of Bubasti was founded: Where∣fore rejoyce thou, Egypt, reioyce thou, thou hast brought me up and fed me. The Egyptians ascribed the overflowings of the Nile, to the tears that she shed for the death of her Husband Osiris. We have a statue of Isis habited like a Ro∣man Matron, having a Half Moon on the top of her Head, her right Hand turned towards Heaven, and her left towards the Earth, to inform us, that she receives the influences of Heaven. We have also a Medal of the Em∣peror Commodus, where Isis is represented with a Half Moon, holding a Sphere with her right hand, and a Vessel full of Fruits with her left. The Sphere denotes Astrology, wherein the Egyptians excelled; and the Fruits the fecundity of Egypt. For the Egyptians were the first who made Gods of the Sun and Moon, calling the Sun Osiris, and the Moon Isis, holding a Sphere in her Hand, as the Mother of Arts and Sciences, and an Amphora full of ears of Corn, to re∣present the fertility of the Country. The Egyptians adored the Earth, by the name of the Goddess Isis. Servius and Isidorus after him, speak thus of her, Isis liuguâ Egyptiorum est Terra; quam Isim volunt esse. They ascrib'd many Breasts to Isis, wherefore she was called , to shew that the Moon or the sub∣lunary world affords food to all Creatures. The opinion of Julius Firmicus is, that ac∣cording the Egyptian Poetry, Isis was the Earth. Isis was also the same with Ceres, as Herodotus says Isis secundum linguam Graecorum est Ceres, &c. ut Aegyptia linguâ Isis est Ceres. St Austin declares that this was the opinion of the Egyptians: Isis invenit hordei segetem, atque inde spicas marito Regi, & ejus conciliario Mercurio demon, travit: un∣de eandem & cererem volunt. ITALIA, Italy, a very famous Country of Europe. Italy had several names, sometimes it was called Hesperia, either from Hesperus, bro∣ther to Atlas, King of Mauritania, or Hesperus the Star of Venus, called Lucifer, at the rising of the Sun; and Hesperus or Vesper in the e∣vening when the Sun sets. Wherefore the Greeks have called the Western parts of Italy Hesperia magna, to distinguish it from Spain called minor Hesperia. Italy was also called Oenotriae, of Oenotrus King of the Sabins, or Oenotrus the Son of Ly∣caon King of Arcadia, or rather from the Greek word  Wine, which Janus brought into this Country, by planting there the Vine. They gave her also the name of Ausonia, from Ausonius the son of Ulysses and Calypso. That Countrey is now called Italia, Italy, either of Italus King of Sicily, or from Oxen called  in the old Greek, Italiam dixisse minores. Virg. Strabo, speaking of Italy gives it this follow∣ing encomium. There, says he, men breathe a temperate air; there are abun∣dance of fountains, the waters thereof cure several distempers, and preserve health. There are all sorts of excellent Fruits, and quar∣ries of Marble of several colours. The Inha∣bitants thereof are witty, subtle and cun∣ning, fit for learning, and principally Poetry and Eloquence; but are great dissem∣blers and revengeful, even to the very Al∣tars. The chiefest City of Italy is Rome, fa∣mous for the birth of several great men both in War and Peace: The Romans have represented Italy in their medals like a Queen sitting upon a Globe, holding with her right hand a horn of plen∣ty, having the other arm and the breast un∣covered. With this title Italia. ITALUS, sirnamed Kitim, or Marsitalus, left his son Sicor in Spain, and came into Italy, where he asurped the throne of his brother Hesperus. Natales Comes says, that he was one of the Captains of Hercules, whom this Hero left Governour of Italy. Cato and Fabius Pictor tell us, that these two brothers, one called Hesperus and the other Italus, reigned both in Italy, wherefore that Country was called by their names, sometimes Hespe∣ria and sometimes Italia. The word Kitim, says Bochart, signifies hid, which is the proper name of Latium a laten∣do. Wherefore Dionysius Hallcarnassius and other Writers who will derive the Etymology of Italy from a noble origine, take it from the name of that King, but others derive it from a Calf that Hercules lost at his return from Spain: whereupon he called it Vitalia, and since Italia. This is Cato's opinion upon the origine of the word Italia. ITALUS had a daughter called Rome, whom he established Queen of the Aberigines, who built the City of Rome, as it will be said upon the word Roma.
JUBA, King of Mauritania, whom Julius Caesar vanquished, and reduced his Kingdom into a Province. This Prince is represented in one of his Medals, with a long face, and an arrogant and cruel air, his hair curled and set by degrees. It was the custom of the Kings of that Country to curl their hair, and powder it with Gold powder. Petretus and this King killed one another, lest they should fall into the hands of Caesar, after the defeat of Pompey, whose part they had taken. JUBAL, the posterity of Cain, menti∣oned in the Book of Genesis, invented Musical Instruments, Jubal was the father of all such as handle the harp and organ. The opinion of Vossius is, that Jubal men∣tioned in the Scripture is Apollo, whom the Ancients esteemed the inventer of Song and Musick. JUDAEI. The Jews. Some Authors, says Tacitus, reports that the Jews came from Candia, as if the word Judea, was made of the word Ida, which is a mountain in that Island, and says that they were driven out of that place when Saturn was divested of his Empire by Jupiter; and went to settle themselves in the furthermost parts of Libia. Others write that they came from Egypt, and that during the reign of Isis, their number being extraordi∣narily increased, they inhabited the neigh∣bouring Country under the command of Je∣rusalem and Juda. And many others assure us, that they came out of Ethiopia, either out of fear or hatred of King Cepheus; some say al∣so, that the Jews were a multitude of Assyrian Mob got together, who not being able to live in their Country, possessed themselves of a part of Egypt, and built afterwards the Towns of Judea in the neghbouring Syria. Some allow them a more illustrious origine, and affirm that they were already famous in the time of Homer, and call them Solymes, from whence came the name Solyma or Jerusalem, notwithstanding the greatest number of wri∣ters agree in this point, that Egypt being in∣fected with leprosy, King Bocharis, by the ad∣vice of the Oracle of Hammon, drove them out of this Country, as a multitude unprofita∣ble and odious to Diety, and that being scat∣tered in the wilderness, and courage failing them, Moses one of their Leaders advised them to expect no relief neither from Gods nor Men, who had forsook them; but to follow him as a celestial Guide, who should deliver them out of dangers, which they did without knowing where he led them. They say that nothing was more troublesome to them than thirst, and that they were ready to perish for want of water, When on a sudden a herd of wild asses, that came from feeding, got into a Rock covered with a wood; which Moses having perceived he followed them, fancying that he should meet with some fountain in a place covered with green; which succeeded according to his desire, for he found there abundance of water, wherewith they quenched their thirst After they were thus refreshed they continu∣ed their Journey for the space of six days, then they found a cultivated Country, and took possession of it, having driven away the inhabitants thereof, and there they built their Temple and City. Moses, the better to get their affection and fidelity, instituted a Religion and Ceremonies amongst them, contrary to those of all other Nations. For all that is holy amongst us, is accounted profane by them, and all that is forbid to us is lawful to them. Moses consecrated in the Sanctuary the Figure of the animal that was their guide, and offered in sacri∣fice the Ram out of the hatred he bore to Jupiter Hammon; and the Ox, because it was adored in Egypt; and forbad them to eat any flesh of swine, because they were subject to leprosy. He instituted many fasting days, in remembrance of the hunger they had suf∣fered in their Travel, and ordained unleaven∣ed bread, for a token that they had lived upon rapine. And ordered them to keep the seventh day holy, because upon that day they had made an end of their labours; but as men are inclined to idleness, they keep also holy the seventh year. Some Writers tell us, that it is an honour render∣ed to Saturn, with whom they were dri∣ven out of Candia, or because they revere his Planet, which is the highest and most large of all; besides, that most part of the celestial bodies observe the number of seven in their course and influences. But by what means sooner this Religion was introduced, 'tis certain that it is more ancient than any other Religion whatever. These Jews ne∣ver dwell nor eat with any men, but those of their own Religion, and abstain from foreign women, tho they are much given to luxury. They have invented circumci∣sion; for a distinction from other nations, and those who embrace their Religion are tied to the observation of that ceremony. They bury their dead standing, after the ex∣ample of the Egyptians, instead of burning them like other Nations, and have the same opinion, as the Egyptians, concerning Hell, but have quite another belief concerning the Diety. For the Egyptians adore several animals under different shapes, but the Jews adore but one God in Spirit, accounting all those Idolaters who represent him like a man that they believe; he is eternal and immu∣table, and will not suffer any image neither
in their City nor in their Temple. Some fancied that they adored Bacchus the conque∣ror of the East, because a Golden Vine was found in their Temple, and that their Priests did beat the Drum, and played upon the Flute, and are crowned with Ivy; but their ceremonies are quite different from those of Bacchus, which are attended by mirth, feast∣ings and rejoycing; for the ceremonies of the Jews are filthy and absurd. This whole discourse of Tacitus is contrary to the holy Scripture in the main circum∣stances, as 'tis easily observed; for this Na∣tion ador'd the true God, and came out of Egypt by his own order under the conduct of Moses, who performed several Miracles to oblige Pharoah to let them go into the Desert, and Moses got the Waters to come out of the Rock with his mystical Rod; and God gave to this Nation, whom he had chosen to him∣self, a Land abounding in all kinds of wealth, which is Palestina or Judea, as he had promi¦sed to their Fore-Fathers. Tacitus reports also, that this Nation have Arabia on the East, Egypt on the South, Syria on the North, and Phaenicia and the Sea on the West. Their Bodies are healthy and strong; their Country very plentiful, tho they have but little rainy weather, and bears the same things that grow in Italy, and besides that, the Palm-tree and the Balsome-tree; the first of these Trees is great and fine, the other small, but of great use in Physick; when its Branches are full of moisture, they make an incision therein, with a Stone or Potsherd, (for it abhors Iron) and distils a most pre∣cious Liquor. The chiefest Mountain of that Country is Libanus, always green, and covered with Snow in very hot weather, which is a miracle of Nature. There is the Spring of the River Jordan, which running through two Lakes, loses it self in the third, which is as large as a Sea, but of a very bad taste, and a pestiferous smell. Its Waters are not agitated by the Winds, and neither Ri∣ver Birds nor Fishes can endure it; whatso∣ever is cast into it floats over, and Men who can't swim never sink under its Waters; however, no Man knows the cause of this wonder: At certain times it casts forth Bitu∣men, which experience has taught Men to ga∣ther like other things; 'tis a black Liquor, which is congeal'd by Vinegar, and floats over water: The manner of loading Ships with it, is to draw it up the sides of the Ship, just to the Deck, and so it will follow suc∣cessively, and run down, if not interrupted, into the Hole. 'Tis thus reported by the Ancients, but the Inhabitants of the Country assure us, that Bitumen is gathered by heaps, is either driven by the winds, or drawn to the shore, where it is dried, both by the heat of the Sun and the exhalations of the Earth, and being thus grown hard, 'tis cut like stone or wood. Near this Lake are those fruitful and well peopled Plains, the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrha, which were consumed by Fire. 'Tis said that the marks of the wrath of Hea∣ven remains there still, and that the Earth is burnt, and has not strength to produce any thing. That all that grows or is planted there, either bearing Blossom or Fruit, grows black and is turned into ashes, which is caus'd, according to my opinion, by the cor∣ruption of the air and earth, occasioned by the neighbouring Lake; notwithstanding, I do not deny, that the fire of Heaven might have destroyed whole Cities. The River Be∣lus disembogues itself into the Sea of Judaea, and at its mouth they take up Sand, with which they make Glass, by mixing Niter with it; and tho the River be but a very small one, yet it is never exhausted. This Country has many Villages and few Cities, whereof Jerusalem is the chiefest: and is en∣compass'd by three walls; the first incloses the City, the second the Palace, and the third the Temple, which is a very stately building, and which might serve for a Cittadel. The Jews are not allowed to go further than into a Gate thereof, and the Priests only are per∣mitted to go into it. This people was always despised by other Nations, first by the Assy∣rians, then the Medes and Persians: but under the Macedonians, Antiochus attempted in vain to govern them, by taking away their su∣perstition, and introducing the Greek customs amongst them, for he was prevented in his design by the rebellion of the Parthians. Wherefore they took opportunity, by the falling of this Empire, and the rising of the Empire of the Arsacides, to elect their own Kings to govern them. Pompey was the first of the Romans who conquer'd Judea, and enter'd the Temple by the right of Conquest, and ordered that the Walls of the City should be pulled down, but he preserved the Temple, and all that was therein. JUGATINUS, A God presiding over Marriages, at the conjunction of Husband and Wife. JUGERUM, An Acre of ground, so much as a yoke of Oxen will plough in a day; it contains in length 240 foot, in breadth 120, as Quintilian says. JUGUM, A Yoke, a piece of Timber, made use of to joyn two Oxen together to draw a Plough or a Cart. The Romans or∣dered the enemies whom they had overcome to pass under the yoke, which was accounted to be a great disgrace; that is to say, that
they pass'd under a kind of a fork like a Gal∣lows. This Fork, or Pike, or Halberd lay on the top, and was supported by two others set upright. JULIA. There were many Roman Ma∣trons called by that name. JULIA, The Daughter of Augustus, who for her wantonness was banished by her Fa∣ther, first into the Island of Pandatauria, then into the Town of Reget, about the Streights of Sicily. She was first married to M. Agrippa, of whom she had Agrippina, Nero's Mother; then she married Tiberius, whom she despised, as being unworthy of that honour; and this was the chief cause of her long exile in the Isle of Rhodes. But when Tiberius was raised to the Empire, he so barbarously revenged that affront, that she died of hunger and misery, after she had been banished, and had lost all her hopes after the death of her son Agrippa. She was debauched by Sampronius Gracchus during her marriage with Agrippa, and this con∣stant adulterer still kept company with her, after Tyberius had married her, and malicious∣ly provoked her against him. And it was a common report that he was author of the Let∣ter she wrote to her Father, so full of re∣proaches and injuries against her Husband. JULIA, called Medullina and Camilla, designed to be the second wife of the Empe∣for Claudius Caesar, but she died on her wed∣ding-day. JULIA, wife to the Emperour Severus, and the mother of Geta and Caracalla. She is called in an inscription brought from Barba∣ry, Juliae Dominae Aug. Matri Castrorum, Matri August. Spartianus, Eutropius, and Aurelius Victor assure us, that Julia was but Caracalla's mother in law, and that he married her after the death of his father Lucius Septimius Severus, but yet this is not mentioned by the Writers of that time: on the contrary, Dio tells us, that Julia was the mother of Caracalla, and speaking of the tem∣per of this Emperor, he says, that he had the malicious mind both of his mother, and the Syrians, and consequently Julia was his mother; and when the two brothers Caracalla and Geta fell out, she used them both alike, and spoke to them in these words, related be Herodian You have, my dear children, divided betwixt you the Land and the Sea, but how will you share your Mother? If she had been but their step-mother the argument she brought to reconcile them, would bear no weight. Philostratus who was very great at the Court of Severus, calls also Caracalla the son of Julia. JULIA, the daughter of the Emperor Titus, whom Domitian her Unkle stole away from her Husband to marry her; but he caused her to miscarry, whereupon she died. JULIANUS sirnamed the Apostate, because he forsook the Christian Religion, after he had made profession thereof. The Emperor Constantius his Cousin elected him Caesar, and having adopted him, gave him his Sister Helena for his wife. He was learned, chast, va∣liant, laborious, sober, watchful, liberal, and a great lover of learned men. With these qualifications he got the affection of the Le∣gions, who proclaimed him Emperor in the City of Paris. Constantius was much troubled at the hear∣ing this news, and leaving off his design a∣gainst the Persians to oppose Julian, he came to Tharsus, where he had some fits of a fever, and from thence to Mopvestus in Cilicia, where it increased so much that he died. Ammia∣nus Marcellinus writ that he named Julian for his successor; but St Gregory of Nazianzen says on the contrary, that in this last period of his life, he repented to have elected Julian to the Empire. As soon as Julian saw himself ab∣solute master by the death of Constantius, he ordered that the Temple of the false Gods should be opened, and their service set up a∣gain; and took upon him the office of High Priest, re-establishing all the Heathen ceremo∣nies, and restored those Priests to all their former Priviledges. He repaired the ruins of Idolatry, ordering that the Temples which were pulled down during the Reign of Con∣stantine and Constantius should be built again, and new ones added to them. He ordered also that the Images of the Gods should be set up amongst his own, to deceive the Soldiers when the Donative was made; for it was a custom to offer Frankin∣cence to the Images of the Emperors at the time of that ceremony. At first few of the Christian Soldiers took notice of it, yet those who perceived that they honoured the false Gods, tho they designed only to honour the Emperors, were so much concerned at it that they refused the largess of the Prince, throwing at his feet in a scornful manner the money they had received from his libe∣rality. Sozomen reports that by his own orders Ju∣piter was represented near him, as if he was come from Heaven on purpose to give him the badges of the Empire, and Mars and Mer∣cury's images were looking upon him, insinu∣ating by that posture that he was eloquent and valiant. And this Author observes, that he intended by these means to bring his Subjects under pretence of the honor due to him, to the adoration of the false Gods, who were re∣presented
with him. Wherefore St. Gregory of Nazianzen says, in his invective against Julian, that the ignorant people being de∣ceived were brought to adore the Pagan I∣mages. Besides, to flatter his own vanity, he commanded that he should be adored under the Image of Serapis, in imitation of Domi∣tian, who ordered that he should be repre∣sented by the figure of Pallas, and Nero who commanded a marble figure of his head to be set upon the body of a Coloss. Julian is re∣presented on a medal with a beard, contrary to the custom of his age; upon which ac∣count the Inhabitants of Antioch reproached him with ridiculous affectation; whereby he intended, it may be, to imitate Marcus Aurelius, who did wear a Philosophers beard. For Eutropius assures us that he affected to be his imitator, and was ambitious of the title of a Philosopher. At last, having engaged the Persians, his army was routed, and him∣self mortally wounded, and brought into his Camp, and the following night having held a long discourse with Maximus and Priscus con∣cerning the immortality of the soul, he died at one and thirty years of age, having reign∣ed but one year and seven months. 'Tis reported that when he found himself wound∣ed, he took some of his blood in his hand, and flung it against Heaven, pronouncing these words: Thou hast overcome, Galilean; for thus he called our Saviour in derision. The Works he has left us shew both his Wit and Learning. The Panegyricks he had writ both in Prose and Verse, collected by Eunapius are lost; and there remains little of him, but the Invectives the Fathers have writ against him. JULIUS, Julius Caesar, of whom I have spoken under the name of Caesar. He was both Dictator and High Priest, and ordered the Roman Calendar to be reformed, where∣fore it was called the Julian Calender, or the Calender of the Julian Correction. Marc. An∣tony during his Consulat, ordered that the Month Quintilis, wherein Julius Caesar was born, should be called by his name, for the future Julius, or July, under Jupiter's Protecti∣on. JULIUS, viz. MENSIS. July: This Month was called in the Calender of Romu∣lus, Quintilis, because it was the fifth Month of the Year, according to this King's Calender, who made up the Year of Ten Months only, beginning the Year with the Month of March: But afterwards this name was changed by the orders of Marc. Antony, and it was called Ju∣lius, in honour of Julius Caesar who had re∣formed the Calender of Romulus. The first of this Month was a time ap∣pointed for removing Lodgings, and paying Houses Rents, as we learn by this Epigram of Mtial, l. 12. Epigr. 32. O Juliarum dedecus Calendarum, Vidi, Vacerra, sarcinas tuas, vidi: Quas non retentas pensione pro bimâ Portabat uxor rufa crinibus septem. He means that his House Goods were so inconsiderable, that the owner of the House refused to keep them for payment of Two Years Rent due to him. The fifth of this Month, or the third be∣fore the Nones, was a Holy Day called Po∣plifugia, the flight of the People, when Ro∣mulus was killed, and a dreadful storm put them to flight. The seventh, or the day of the Nones, was called Caprotinae Nonae, from the Latin Word Caprificus, a wild Fig-Tree, in remem∣brance of a Servant Maid called Tutola, or Philotis, who got upon a wild Fig-Tree, holding a burning Torch in her hand, as a token to the Romans, to surprize the Army of the Latins. The next Day after this Feast, they kept another rejoycing Day, called Vitulatio, in honour of the Goddess Vitula; because the following Day after the Victory obtain'd o∣ver the Latins, there were publick Rejoyc∣ings all over the City. The 12th was Julius Caesar his Birth-day, kept holy. The Games called Apollinarii Circenses, and Minervalus were represented in this Month. And a Temple was Dedicated to Female Fortune, in acknowledgment of the great Service that Veturia and Volumnia, the Mo∣ther and the Wife of Coriolanus, had done to the Commonwealth, by hindering him to take revenge of the affront of his Banish∣ment. At the Ides of the Month they made a ge∣neral Muster of the Roman Knights, called Transvectio, Crowned with Branches of Olive Tree, and riding their own Horses from the Temple of Honour to the Capitol. The Cen∣sors were present at this Ceremony, to see if their Horses were in good case, and if they march'd in good order The same Day the Feast of Castor and Pol∣lux was kept in their Temple, built by the Son of Aulus Posthumius, in the great place of Rome, because they had fought for the Ro∣mans against the Latins, who attempted to re∣store Tarquinius Supurbus to Rome. The 18th was accounted fatal, because upon that Day the Romans were defeated near the River Allia, and put to flight by the Gauls. The 23d Women with Child offered a
Sacrifice to the Goddess Opigena, and carried small Wax Figures into her Temple, and prayed to her to grant them a happy Delive∣rance. The 24th, the Feasts of the Pontifs were kept. The 25th, they went in Processions about the Fields, which were called Ambervalia. The 28th, a Sacrifice of Wine and Honey was offered to Ceres; and the remainder of the Month was bestowed to Sacrifice reddish Dogs to the Dog-star, to moderate the ex∣cessive heat of that Season. JULUS, The Son of Aeneas and Creusa, sirnamed Ascanius, who came with his Father into Italy, and Reigned there after him. He built a City called Alba Longa, in a place where he had found a wild Sow with her young ones. JUNIUS, June, the sixth Month of the Year, wherein the Sun enters the Sign Can∣cer, which makes the Summer Solstice. This Word comes from the Latin Junius, which some derive à Junone, as Ovid in the 5th of his Fast, introduces this Goddess, saying, Junius a nostro nomine nomen habet. Others take the Etymology of this word a Junioribus from young people. Junius-est Juvenum. Ovid. And some others from Junius Brutus who ex∣pelled the King of Rome, and settled the go∣vernment upon the people. This month was under the protection of Mercury. The first day of the month they solemni∣zed four feasts, one dedicated to Mars out of the City, because upon the like day, F Quintius Duumvir of the Sacrifices had dedica∣ted a Temple to him out of the gate Capena on the via Appia, by the title of Mars Extra-Muranus. The other feast was kept in ho∣nor of Carna, in remembrance of the Tem∣ple that Junius Brutus consecrated to him up∣on mount Celius, after he had driven away Tarquinius. The common opinion was that this Divinity presided over the heart of chil∣dren, and inclined them which way she plea∣sed. They offerd Pap, Bacon, and Beans to her in Sacrifice. The third feast was celebrated in honor of Juno Moneta, to perform the vow that Ca∣millus had made, to build her a Temple. The fourth feast was solemnized in honor of Tempest, and instituted in the time of the second Punick war. The fourth, or the day before the Nones, the feast of Bellona was kept, whereof I have spoken under the word Bellona. This same day a feast was celebrated in honor of Hercu∣les, and the Senate dedicated him a Temple in the Circus by Sylla's Order, who gave state∣ly entertainments to the people, and present∣ed Hercules with the tenth part of his wealth. The 5th, or the day of the Nones, they offered a sacrifice to God Fidius, to whom the Romans built a Temple on mount Quirinal, after the peace was concluded with the Sa∣bins; and they honoured this God, because the oaths taken in his name were invio∣lably kept. Upon the 7th day happened the Fishermens Feast, which was solemnized in the field of Mars with games, mirth and banquetting. The 8th, or the 6th day of the Ides, a so∣lemn sacrifice was offered to the Goddess Mens in the Capitol, to whom Attilius Crassus vowed a Temple after the defeat of the Consul C. Flaminins at the lake of Trasimenes, praying her to remove out of the mind of the Romans the fear occasioned by the rout of the Consul. The 9th, or the 5th of the Ides, was kept the great feast of the Goddess Vesta, whereof I shall speak in its place. The 11th, or 3d of the Ides, was solemnized the feast of the Goddess Matuta, which shall be mentioned afterwards. Upon the Ides of June fell out the feasts of Jupiter sirnamed Invictus or Invincible, to whom Augustus dedicated a Temple for the victories he had obtained. And this same day was kept the feast of Minerva called Quinquatrus minores the Fiddlers feasts, mentioned in this book according to its order. The 19th a sacrifice was offered to Pallas on mount Aventinus. The 20th, another was of∣fered to Summanus, to whom a Temple was dedicated upon such a day during the war of Pyrrhus. The 22d was reckoned a fatal day, because that day F. Flaminius was overcome by the Carthagimans. The 23 Syphax was vanquished by Masinissa, and the same day was called Dies Fortis Fortunae, because King Servius dedicated her a Temple out of the City be∣yond Tiber, where Workmen and Slaves crowned with flowers went by water to di∣vert themselves and be merry, as inhabitants of great Cities commonly do upon holy days. The 27th was the feast of the Lares or houshold Gods'. The 28th the feast of Quirinus was celebrated on the mount of the same name, and the 30th the feast of Hercules and the Mu∣ses were kept in a Temple dedicated to them both. JUNO, The daughter of Saturn and Rhea, and Sister to Jupiter. 'Tis reported that she was born at Argos a Town of Greece, where∣upon she was sirnamed by Poets Argiva Juna. Others assure us, that she was born at Samos, and have called her Samia.
She Married her Brother Jupiter, who got into her bosom, according to the Fable, under the shape of a Cuckow, and then re-assuming his own form, enjoyed her upon condition he should marry her, which he performed. The truth is, that in that time Brothers and Sisters married together, after the custom of the Persians and Assyrians. Wherefore Juno is represented by the Figure of a Goddess set∣ting on a Throne, holding a Scepter in her hand, with a Cuckow on the top of it. Poets don't agree among themselves, nei∣ther about the number of Children she had of Jupiter, nor the way she conceived them. Pausanius reports, that she had Mars, Ilithyia and Hebe by him. Lucian asserts in one of his Dialogues, that she was brought to Bed of Vulcan without having lain with her Hus∣band; and that she was big with Hebe for having eaten too much Lettice. Dionysius Halicarnasseus writes, that King Tullus ordered that a Piece of Money should be brought into her Temple at Rome, for e∣very one that was born, as they were obli∣ged to bring one to the Temple of Venus Li∣bitina, for all those who died; and another to the Temple of Youth for those who put on the Viril Gown. And thus they kept in their Records a very exact account of all those who were born, or died at Rome, or were at an Age fit to bear Arms. This Ju∣no who presided over the birth of Men, was named by the Romans, Lucina, and by the Greeks, Ilithyia: Statuit quanti pretii nummos pro singulis inferre deberent cognati: In aerarium Ilithyiae, Romani, Junonem, Lucinam,  vocant, pro nascentibus; in Veneris ararium, in Luco situm, quam Libitinam vocant, pro de∣functis, in Juventutis pro togam virilem sumen∣tibus. Some Writers report, That Lucina is ei∣ther Diana, or another Goddess than Juno; but the Pagans confound often the Goddes∣ses with Juno. Here is what Lucian says a∣bout this matter, in his Deo Syria. In Syria, not far from Euphrates, stands a Town called the Holy City, because 'tis Dedicated to Juno of Assyria. Within are the Golden Statues of Jupiter and Juno, both in a sitting posture; but the one is carried upon Oxen, and the other upon Lions. That of Juno has some∣thing of several other Goddesses, for she holds a Scepter in one hand, and a Distaff in another: Her Head is Crowned with Rays, and Dressed with Turrets, and her Waste girt with a Scarf, like the Celestial Venus. She is adorned with Gold and Jew∣els of divers Colours, that are brought from all parts. But what is most marvel∣lous, is a precious Stone she has upon her Head, which casts so much light, that by Night it illuminates all the Temple; for which reason they have given it the name of Lamp; but by day it has hardly any light, and only seems like Fire. And indeed, as some Men have confound∣ed all the Gods with Jupiter, those who made the Image of Juno, mentioned by Lucian, had the like design to Incorporate all the God∣desses in Juno's Person. Lactantius tells us, that Tully derives the names of Juno and Jupiter, from the help and sucour that Men receive of them à Ju∣vando. Juno presided over Weddings and Wo∣mens Labours, and was called upon in these Exigencies; as we see in Terence, where Gly∣ceria being in Labour has recourse to her Juno Lucina, far opem. When the Roman Matrons were barren, they went into her Temple, where having pulled off their Cloaths, and lying on the Ground, they were lashed by a Lupercal Priest, with Thongs made of a Goat's Skin, and thus became fruitful; wherefore Juno was represented holding a Whip in one hand, and a Scepter in the other, with this Inscrip∣tion, JUNONI LUCINAE. Poets have given many Epithets to Juno, calling her Lucina, Opigena, Juga, Domeduca, Cinxia, Unxia, Fluonia. She was called Lucina, à Luce, because she helped Women to bring forth Children, and show them the Light: and for the same rea∣son she was also named Opigena and Obstetrix, because she helped Women in Labour. Juga, Juno was called, because she presided at the Yoke of Matrimony, and consequent∣ly over the Union of Husband and Wife, and because of that Qualification, she had an Al∣tar erected to her in one of the Streets of Rome, therefore called Vicus Jugarius, the Street of Yokes. Domiduca, because she brought the Bride to the House of her Bridegroom. Unxia, because of the Bride's anointing the side Posts of the Door of her Husband going in thereat. Cinxia, because she helped the Bridegroom to unite the Girdle the Bride was girded with; in fine she was called Fluonia, because she stopp'd the flux of Blood in Womens Labours. In one word, Juno was like a Guardian Angel to Women, in the like manner that God Genius was the keeper of Men; for ac∣cording to the Opinion of the Antients, the Genius's of Men were Males, and those of Women Females: Wherefore Women swore by Juno, and Men by Jupiter. The Romans gave her several other names, and called her sometimes Juno Caprotina, Me∣neta
Sospita, and sometimes Regina and Ca∣lcadaris. She was sirnamed Caprotina, because, as Plutarch reports in the Life of Romulus, the Gauls having taken the City of Rome, the Sa∣bins and several other Nations of Italy, fan∣cying that the Romans were weakened there∣by, took this opportunity to destroy them: Wherefore they raised a considerable Army, and proclaimed War against them, unless they would send them their Virgins to sport with them. The Romans unwilling to com∣ply with their demand, accepted the Propo∣sal of Philotis a Maid-Slave, who offered her∣self to go over to them with her Compani∣ons; promising withal, that she would give warning to the Romans, when their Enemy should be deeply ingaged in Debaucheries: Which she performed thus, She got up into a wild Fig-Tree, from whence she gave a Signal to the Roman Army, who thoroughly routed the Enemy. In remembrance of this Victory the Romans ordered a Feast to be kept every Year, at Nonae Caprotinae, in ho∣nour of Juno, called also Caprotina, from the wild Fig-Tree, à caprifico, at which time the Maid Slvaes diverted themselves, played the Ladies, and entertained their Mistresses. JUNO MONETA, Juno was called Moneta à monendo, i. e. to advise, or because when the Gauls took Rome, she advised the Romans to Sacrifice to her a Sow great with young, or because that the Romans being at War with Pyrrhus, they called upon Juno, to be relieved with Money. Wherefore hav∣ing driven Pyrrhus out of Italy, they built her a Temple, with this Title, JUNONI MONETE, and in that Temple the Mo∣ney was kept. JUNO REGINA, or Queen Juno. Un∣der this Title, Camillus after the taking of the City of Veiae, where she had a very rich Temple, asked if she was willing to come to Rome there to be adored, and her Statue having made a sign that she consented to it, he built her a Temple upon Mount Aven∣tine. JUNO CALENDARIS, Because the first days of every Month, called the Calends, were consecrated to her, and a White Cow, or a She Goat was commonly Sacrificed in her Honour, wherefore she was sirnamed Aegophagos, or She-Goats Eater. She was represented with Birds that were under her protection, viz. the Goose, the Peacock, and the Vulture. The Assyrians and Affricans, and after them the Greeks and Romans have given the name of Juno to the Air; and for that reason some Writers assure us, that the name of Juno in Greek , is but a transposition of . Tul∣ly speaking of the nature of the Air, explains the Fable of Juno: Aer, ut stoici disputant, in∣terjectus tuter mare & caelum, Junonis nomine consecratur. The Air between Heaven and the Sea, is called by the name of Juno, quae est sorer & cusjux Jovis, quod ei similitudo est a∣theris, & cum eo summa conjunctio. And here∣upon is grounded the Kindred and Marriage between Jupiter and Juno, i. e. Heaven and Air. And this is plainly discovered in a Fa∣ble of Homer, wherein he tells us, that Jupi∣ter tied Juno to a Chain, with two Anvils hanging at her Feet, to shew that the Air is independant on Heaven, and the Earth and the Sea are dependant on the Air. In fine, Poets have ascribed to Juno the quality of , albis ulnis, because of the trans∣parency of the Air. JUNONALIA, A Holy-day kept in Honour of Juno, not mentioned in the Fasts of Ovid, but fully described by Livy, 1. 7. Decad. 3. This Feast was instituted on oc∣casion of certain Prodigies that happened in Italy: Wherefore the Pontiffs ordered, that seven and twenty young Girls, divided in∣to three bands, should walk singing a Song, composed by Livius the Poet. But, while they were learning the Song by heart in the Temple of Jupiter Stator, the Thunder fell upon the Temple of Queen Juno, on Mount Aventine: Whereupon the Southsayers hav∣ing been consulted, answered that the Ro∣man Matrons were concerned in this Prodi∣gy, and that they should pacifie the Goddess by some Sacrifices and Offerings: Where∣fore they collected Money, and bought a Golden Bason, and presented the Goddess with it on Mount Aventine. Then the De∣cemviri appointed a day for a solemn Sacri∣fice, which was thus ordered. Two white Cows were led from the Temple of Apollo, into the City through the Gate called Car∣mentalis, and two Images of Queen Juno, made of Cyprus Wood, were carried. Then marched seven and twenty Girls, cloathed with long Gowns, singing an Hymn in Honour of the Goddess. Then followed the Decemvirs crowned with Laurel, and clad with Robes, edged with Purple. This pomp passed by the Vieus Jugarius, and stopp'd in the great Field of Rome; where the Girls fell a Dancing, keeping time with the Hymn. From thence they marching by the Tuscan∣street and Velabrum through the Market for Oxen, they arrived at the Temple of Queen Juno, where the Victims were Sacrificed by the Decemviri, and the Images of Cyprus Wood set up therein. JUPITER. Varro reckons three hun∣dred Jupiters, of several sorts and Countries. The great Multitude of these Jupiters is
doubtless grounded upon the first who went by that name, who had been kind to Men, and had assisted them in their wants; where∣fore after his Death, each Nation gave the sirname of Jupiter to their King, either out of flattery, or because he was really a good Prince, and imitated the Vertues of the true Jupiter, by the name whereof Poets meant the true God. In the like manner that the name of Hercules was abscribed to all great Men, because the first of that name was ve∣ry valiant and generous, as the Roman; did, who gave the name of Caesar to all their Em∣perours, tho' they were not of Julius Caesar's Family. Tully, lib. 3. de natura Deorum, records but three Jupiters, two whereof were born in Arcadia; one the Son of Aether, and the o∣ther of Caelus, who begat Minerva. The last was a Native of Crete or Candia, the Son of Saturn and Rhea, or Ops, to whom all the actions of the two other are ascribed, and was called Jupiter, quasi juvans Pater, as Ma∣crobius and Aulus Gellius report, and not from the word Jehova, i. e. God, for the Romans had then no acquaintance at all with the Hebrews. After his Mother Rhea was delivered, she did not put him to Death as she had promi∣sed Saturn, but sent him to the Curetes, Inha∣bitants of Mount Ida, where he was secretly Nursed up: and she put in his room a Stone wrapp'd up in swaddling Cloaths, which, as 'tis said, Saturn swallowed down, thinking it was his Son. This Child was then deliver∣ed up to the Nymps to take care of him, and Amalthea suckled him with the Milk of a She Goat; which Jupiter, being grown up, ranked amongst the Number of the Celestial Signs, in acknowledgment of her kindness, by the name of Olenia Capella, from the Town of Olenus in Baeotia. Oleniae surget sidus pluviale Capellae, Quae fuet in cunis Officiosa Jovis. Some relate, that Rhea being afraid that her Son should not be safe upon Mount Ida in Phrygia, sent him to a Mount of the same name in Candia. Jupiter being grown up, delivered his Fa∣ther Saturn, and his Mother Rhea from the hands of the Titans; for having got together a Troop of Creteans, he marched against the Titans, routed them, and restored his Father to the Throne. Before he went to this Expedition, as he was offering Sacrifice in the Isle of Naxos, an Eagle came flying before him, which he took for a good omen; and after he had obtain∣ed the Victory, he ordered that the Eagle should be consecrated to him. Poets say that he turned himself into an Eagle to steal a∣way Ganymedes upon  Ida. However, Saturn resoved the ruine of Jupiter; but Pro∣metheus having acquainted him with his de∣sign, he tied him up with Woollen Bands, as the Fable says, gelded him, and threw him headlong into Hell; from whence be∣ing got out, he came to Janus in Italy, of whom he was kindly received. Primus ab aetherio venit Saturnus Olympo, Arma Jovis fugtens & Regnis exul ademptis. In the mean while Jupiter took possession of the Kingdom of Crete: Then maintained a War against the Giants, under the com∣mand of Aegon, who had an Hundred Arms, and as many Hands, and blew Flames out of as many Mouths. But Jupiter, with Mer∣cury's assistance, defeated them in the Phlegrean Fields in Thessalia, and amongst others pu∣nished severely Typheus, laying whole Sicily over his Body, and Mount Oeta over his Head. After this famous Victory, Jupiter made War against Tyrants, and protected Men in trouble, whereby he got a great name: For he governed his Dominions by good and just Laws, and shared his Kingdoms with his Brethren, giving the Empire of the Sea and Rivers to Neptune; the Government of Sub∣terraneous places to Pluto, and kept for him∣self the Empire of Heaven, with the gene∣ral Government of all that is done upon the Earth, according to the Fable. The truth is, that Jupiter possessed himself of the Em∣pire of the East, and left the command in the West to Pluto, and to Neptune the Govern∣ment of the Seas. And tho' the name of Ju∣piter was granted to these three Brothers, yet it was with this difference, that the name of Jupiter, absolutely taken, signifies the King of Heaven; also called Supremus Rex hominum atque Deorum; but some Epithet is always ad∣ded when that name is bestowed upon the two other; for when they speak of Pluto, he is called Jupiter Infimus or Stygius, and Nep∣tune is sirnamed Jupiter Medius. The Philosophers, who have Physically Interpreted this Jupiter by a natural Cause, understand by him, the highest Region of the Air, where the Elementary Fire is pla∣ced, and the Fire it self; which warming the inferiour Air attributed to Juno, is able to produce all things. Others have taken this Jupiter for the Air in all its extent; from whence comes this way of speaking, Sub Dio, i. e. under Jupiter, or in the Air; for the Greek Word , the Genitive where∣of is , signifies Jupiter. Wherefore Ho∣race says, Manet sub Jove frigido, he is exposed to the Air.
Lactantius reports, That Jupiter was called  or , because he was the eldest of Saturn's Sons then living; his eldest Bro∣thers having been all devoured by their Fa∣ther: Quod primus ex liberis Saturni maribus vixerit. And that Euhemerus of Messina in Pe∣loponnesus has written his History, as well as that of the other Gods, taken out of the an∣cient Titles and Inscriptions he found in the Temples; that Ennius translated that Hi∣story into Latin; and that these Histories are true, tho adorned with new inventions of Poets. That Jupiter reigned on Mount Olympus, the name whereof is sometimes given to Hea∣ven, because of his heighth: wherefore Poets fancied that he was King of Heaven. That he gave the Government of the Sea, and some Islands in the neighbourhood of his Domini∣ons to Neptune, which gave occasion to Po∣ets to represent Neptune as the King of the Seas. That, in fine, Jupiter died and was bu∣ried, as Lucian and Euhemeris report, in Crete, with this Inscription, , Jupi∣ter Saturni. At last Lactantius says, that Ju∣piter having travelled over all Provinces, and gained the Friendship of all Princes, per∣swaded them to build him Temples after his departure in token of Hospitality. Every Nation had their Jupiter, called by several names, but the Greeks and Romans cal∣led the Soveraign God of each Nation by the name of Jupiter. Pliny, speaking of the God of the Ethiopians in Africa, called Assabi nus, says that he was esteemed to be Jupi∣ter. Osiris, The most famous King of Egypt, ranked in the number of Gods, was also known by the name of Jupiter, as 'tis record∣ed by Diodorus Siculus. The Phaenicians had their Belus, or the Sun, whom the Greeks called Jupiter, as Eusebius re∣ports. Dagon the God of the Phaenicians of the City of Axotus, was called by the Hus∣bandmen Jupiter, because he had taught them how to manure the ground, and cultivate Wheat. Dagon quod frumentum & aratrum in∣venisset, nuncupatus est Jupiter Aratrius. Jupiter the Son of Neptune was a God of the Sidonians, called Maritimus, because this people was wholly given to Navigation. Stephanus assures us, that the same who was called Marnas at Gaza, was named Jupi∣ter at Crete, for Marnas or Maranasin in the Phaenician Language, signify King of men. There was a Jupiter Belus amongst the Ba∣bylonians, and a Jupiter Indiges amongst the Latins, which shews, that what Varro affirms, as Tertullian relates in his Apologetick, is true, that there were three hundred Jupiters, i. e. three hundred Kings, and King's Fa∣thers, who called themselves Jupiter, to im∣mortalize their name, and obtain Divine ho∣nours. Notwithstanding it must be granted that the Jupiter of Crete, the Father of Minos, was one of the most famous, and most ancient Jupiters of the West. Callimachus the Poet, and his Scholiasts have written, that Minos ha∣ving been buried in that Island, with this In∣scription, that he was the Son of Jupiter; the name of Minos was put out, and that of Jupi∣ter left. Wherefore the Inhabitants of Crete said, that they had the Sepulcher of Jupiter. The Dactyli of Mount Ida, the Curetes and Corybants, were ascribed to this Jupiter, be∣cause they had taken care of his Education. Jupiter Ammon was also very famous, and was represented with a Ram's-head, because of his intricate Oracles, if we believe Servi∣us. Herodotus gives us a better reason for the same, when he says that the Ammonites had that worship from the Egyptians, who inhabit∣ed the City of Thebes, where Jupiter was re∣presented with a Ram's-head. Jupiter Ammon was a King of Egypt, rank'd by the Egyptians in the number of Gods, and adored in the most remote Provinces. Diodo∣rus Siculus reporting the tradition of the In∣habitants of Libya, gives us a quite different account of him, which yet comes to the same; for he says that Jupiter Ammon was a great King, who, after his death, was reck∣oned a fabulous God, and a Chimerical Ora∣cle. This Historian mentions still another Writer more ancient than himself, who wrote that Ammon reigned in Libya, and mar∣ried Rhea the Daughter of Caelus. Sister to Saturn and other Titans, and that Rhea being divorced, she married Saturn, and induced him to make War against Ammon, whom he vanquished, and forced him to make his es∣cape by Sea, and retired to Crete, where he possessed himself of the Kingdom. Then the same Author tells us, that Dio∣nysius having conquered Egypt, established young Jupiter King of that Country, and gave him Olympius to be his Governour, from whence Jupiter was named Olympius. Strabo writes, that the Arabians had also their Jupiter; however this Jupiter was but one of their Kings, as it appears not only because he was associated with Bacchus, but also by the undertaking of Alexander. For this Prince being acquainted that the Arabi∣ans honoured but two Divinities, Jupiter and Bacchus, resolved to subdue them, that he might be their God amongst them. Poets tell us that Jupiter married several Wives, and even Juno his Sister, according to the Assyrian and Persian Fashion, and that being a fruitful Lover, he begat a great many Children, both legitimate and natural, turn∣ing
himself, sometimes into a Bull, some∣times into a Swan, or an Eagle, or into Gold, to enjoy his Amours; wherefore Lucian in∣troduces Momus rallying thus. Your fine Metamorphoses made me sometimes affraid, left you should be brought to the Shambles, or put to the Plough, when thou wert a Bull, or that a Goldsmith should melt thee down, when thou wert Gold, and when a Swan, lest they should have put thee upon the Spit and roasted thee. 'Tis also reported, that he brought forth Minerva out of his Brain, which Vulcan open∣ed with an Axe, as Lucian relates in the Dia∣logue of the Gods, where Vulcan and Jupiter speak thus. Vulcan. Here is a very sharp Axe, I bring you; what am I to do with it? Jup. Prythee strike hard, and cleave my head asunder. Vul. You have a mind to see whether I am mad or no, I warrant: but tell me in good earnest, what will you imploy it about? Jup. To divide my Skull, I say, I am not in jest, and if you refuse, I will plague you. Strike with all thy might; for my Head is ready to split with pain; and I suffer such torments as if I was in labour with a Child. Vul. 'Tis a∣gainst my will, but I must obey. Great Gods! No wonder your head-ach was so great, having such an Amazon with a Sphear and a Shield lodged in it. 'Tis still recorded that Bacchus came out of his thigh, where he had been lodged, to perfect his time, after he was taken out of his Mother Semele's Womb, being yet but half form'd. Wherefore an incision was made in his Thigh, when the pains of labour seiz'd him, to give a free Passage to little Bacchus. And this is yet reported by the same Lucian in the Dialogue of the Gods. The Nations of the World built him a great many Temples, and honoured him like a God, under several names, according to his several performances. He is called Jupiter Inventor, an Epithet that Hercules bestowed upon him, because by his means he had found again the Cows which Cacus had stole away from him, and erected him an Altar, whereupon he offered him sacrifices. Romulus called him Jupiter Feretrius, because he had strengthned him to overcome his Ene∣mies, and get the spoils which he consecrated to him in a Temple built at the top of the Capitol under the Title of Jupiter Feretrius: Livy gives us the words of this dedication: Jupiter Feretri, haec tibi victor Romulus Rex regia arma fero, templumque his regionibus, quas modo animo metatus sum. dedico; sedemque opmis spols quae Regibus Ducibusque hostium caesis me auctorem sequentes posteri ferent. This was the first Tem∣ple that was consecrated to Jupiter in Rome, whither the spoils taken from Kings or Com∣manders of the Enemies Forces were brought. JUPITER STATOR; a Sistendo, i. e. to stop, because upon the day of the en∣gagement between the Romans and the Sabins, Romulus perceiving that his Soldiers lost ground, and were upon the point of running away, begged earnestly of Jupiter to stop them, and raise their Courage, promising him withal to build another Temple to his ho∣nour: which being granted to him, he built a Temple at the foot of Mount Palatinus, under the Title of Jovi Statori. JUPITER ELICIUS. Numa gave him this title, upon this occasion. For in his time Mount Aventinus being not yet in∣habited nor inclosed into Rome, and that Hill being covered with Springs of Water and thick Groves, frequented by Picus and Faunus, two Satyrs, who cured most desperate Di∣stempers by Inchantments; Numa having heard of them, desired to see them and learn their secrets; wherefore by the advice of the Nymph Egeria, he ordered that Wine should be poured into the Fountain, and men should lye in wait to seize upon the Satyrs at their coming to it. Both Satyrs according to their custom came thither, but being got drunk with the Wine of the Fountain, they fell asleep, and were easily seized upon, and brought to Numa, who learned of them the secrets how to bring down Jupiter upon the Earth, Elicere Jovem. And Numa having im∣mediately tried it, Jupiter came down, where∣upon he commanded that a Temple should be built to his honour by the title of Jupiter Elicius. JUPITER CAPITOLINUS, Thus called, because of the Temple vowed by Tarquinius Priscus, in the War against the Sabius; he laid only the foundations of it, and it was finished by Tarquinius Superbus. The Temple was of a square Figure, having 220 Foot every way, and eight Acres of ground in compass. There were three Cha∣pels in it, the Chapel of Jupiter in the mid∣dle thereof, that of Minerva at the Right hand, near the place where the Nail was driven in every year to reckon the number of years, and that of Juno, which was on the Left hand. The admirable Building, and the rich Ornaments of this Temple, made it the most famous in Rome; and all the Pro∣vinces subdued to the Roman Empire, and the Confederate Kings in emulation one of ano∣ther, sent Presents thither. JUPITER LATIALIS had a Temple on Mount Albanus, which Tarquinius
Superbus caused to be built to his honour after the defeat of Turnus. This Temple was com∣mon to all the Confederates, and a Sacrifice was therein offered every year in common, to the Feriae Latinae. JUPITER SPONSOR, The Tem∣ple built to him by this Title, was consecra∣ted to his honour by Tarquinius, in the Wood of Bellona, and dedicated by Sp. Posthumus Consul, in pursuance of a decree of the Se∣nate, in the year cclxxxvii. JUPITER PISTOR, Thus cal∣led, because the Gauls having besieged the Capitol, and the Romans being very much streightned by the enemy, and pressed with hunger, Jupiter inspired them to make Bread with the remainder of their Corn, and throw it into the Camp of the enemy. Which ha∣ving performed, the enemy lost all hopes to starve them, wherefore they raised the Siege and retired; and in acknowledgement of this good advice, the Romans erected him an Al∣tar under the title of Jupiter the Baker, Jovi Pisteri. There was also in the Capitol a Fi∣gure of Jupiter Imperator, which Titus Quintius Dictator, brought from the Town of Praeneste, and placed there with a Table, whereupon were ingraven his great Atchievements. JUPITER VICTOR, Jupiter the Conquerour, to wom L. Papyrius Cursor built a Temple by this title, because he had over∣come the Samnites and the Gauls. VE-JUPITER, or VE-JOVIS had a Temple between the Tarpeian Rock and the Capitol near the Asylum. His statue was made of Cyprus Wood, holding a Dart in his hand ready to be flung. JUPITER TONANS, Jupiter thundering, an Epithet that Augustus gave him; for having built a Temple to him upon the Capitol, he dedicated it to him under that name; and erected therein three sta∣tues, one done by the hand of Buthyraus Dis∣ciple to Miron; the other by Locras, and the third was made of Brass. Augustus caused this Temple to be built in honour of Jupiter Tonans, because going once by night against the Inhabitants of Biscay, the Thunder fell by his Litter, and killed one of his Servants, who carried a Torch; whereupon the Em∣peror vowed a Temple to Jupiter Tonans, for having preserved him in so great a danger Jovi Tonanti, says Suetonius, edem consecravit, liberatus periculo, cum expeditione Cantabrica, pur nocturnum iter lecticam ejus fulgor perstrinxisset, servumque praelucentem exanimasset. JUPITER ULTOR, Jupiter the Revenger of Crimes had a Temple dedica∣ted to him by M Agrippa. JUPITER HERCEUS, from the Greek . The Jupiter of private houses, where an Altar was erected. This privilege was only allowed to the Citizens of Rome, says Arnobius; Quicunque Herceum Jovem habe∣bant, jus civitatis etiam habebant. JUPITER AMMON, or Hammon, had a Temple in Libya, and a Statue under the Figure of a Ram, from whence he was called Corniger Hammon. This Temple was very famous on the account of his Oracles. Jupiter is represented on several Medals, sometimes carrying Victory in his right hand, and a Spear instead of a Scepter in the left; sometimes riding on a Kam, or a She Goat, with this Inscription, JOVI CRES∣CENTI, because he had been Nursed up with her Milk; sometimes sitting in the midst of the Four Elements, holding a Dart with one hand, and laying the other upon the Head of his Eagle; with two Figures that lay along under his Feet, which repre∣sent the Two Elements of Water and Earth, having the Zodiack round about him, where the Twelve Signs are represented. JUPITER OLYMPIUS, sirnamed Eleus, famous for his Oracle, and the pub∣lick Games performed in Elis, called Olym∣pick Games. On the Silver Medals of Lucius Lentulus, and Caius Marcellus, both Consuls, is repre∣sented the Head of Jupiter, holding his Thun∣der Bolt with his right hand, and his Eagle with his left; having before him a little Al∣tar, and the Star of Jupiter. This Medal was stamp'd to pacifie Jupiter after the Thunder was fallen upon the Capitol. Jupiter, Conservator, was also represented holding his Thunder-bolt with one hand, and a Dart with the other, and the Figure of the Emperour under his Thunder, to shew that he was under Jupiter's protection; or else his Figure was Ingraven, laying upon a Globe, and holding Victory, which he en∣deavours to Crown, and the Eagle at his Feet, with these words, JOVI CONSER∣VATORI AUGUSTORUM NOSTRO∣RUM. On the Medals of Nero and Vespasi∣an, Jupiter was named Custos, and represent∣ed sitting on a Throne, holding his Thun∣der in his right hand, with this Inscription, JUPITER CUSTOS, or JOVIS CUS∣TOS. JUPITER, was sirnamed Anxurus in Italy, and is represented like a young Boy, without a Beard, Crowned with Branches of Olive, and holding a Goblet or Patera in his right hand, and his Scepter in the other. JURAMENTUM, An Oath taken to confirm a thing. The solemnal Oath of the Gods, was by the Waters of the River Styx. The Fable says, that Victory, the Daughter of Styx,
having assisted Jupiter against the Giants, he order'd for a Reward of her Service, that the Gods should Swear by the Waters of that River; and in case they forswore them∣selves, they should be deprived of Life and Feeling, during Nine thousand Years, as Servius reports; and gives this reason for this Fable, that the Gods being Immortal and happy, swear by the Styx, which is a River of sorrow and grief, which is very contrary to their temper; and that Oath was a kind of Execration, in lib. 6. Aeneid. Hesiod in his Theogonia relates, that when any of these Gods had told a lye, Jupiter sent Iris to fetch some Water out of Styx in a Golden Vessel, whereupon the Lyer takes the Oath; and if he forswears himself, he is a whole year without life and motion, but a very long one, including many Millions of Years. Diodorus Siculus, l. 11. Pag. 67. tell us, that the Temple of the Gods, called Palici, fa∣mous in Sicily, was there much respctred and very ancient; and that two very deep Ba∣sons were kept therein, full of boyling Wa∣ter mix'd with Brimstone, always full, and never flowing over. In this Temple solemn Oaths were taken, and Perjuries were imme∣diately punished very severely; some of them being condemned to have their Eyes put out. Silius Italicus has expressed in Verse what Diodorus has here reported. Et qui praesenti domitant perjura Palici, Pectora Supplicio. To this purpose Virgil speaks thus, Lib. 9. Aeneid v. 584. .......... Symethia circum Flumina, pinguis ubi & placabilis ara Palici. The two Basons where the Oaths were ta∣ken, and the Divine vengeance broke out upon the Purjured, were called Delli. Ma∣crobius after Callias makes mention of them, saying, Nec longe inde lacus breves sunt, quos in∣colae Crateres vocant, & nomine Dellos appellant, featres que eos Palicorum aestimant. Aristotle as∣sures us, that the Person who took the Oath wrote it upon a Ticket which he threw in∣to the Water. The Ticket floated over if the Oath was true; if it was false, the Tick∣et appeared no more. Appollonius Tyaneus, l. 1. c. 4. in his Life, written by Philostratus, mentions a Spring of Water at Tyana in Cappadocia, which was ve∣ry like this above-mentioned. This my Story of taking the Oath, and punishing Perjuries, was doubtless an imita∣tion of what is written in the Book of Num∣bers, concerning the trial of Waters, which Women impeached of Adultery were o∣bliged to drink. The Rom ans swore by their Gods, and He∣roes, ranked in the number of Gods, as by Quirinus, Hercules, Castor and Pollux, &c. Sue∣tonius relates, that under the Empire of Julius Caesar the Romans began to swear by the health of the Emperours, and by their Genius. However, Tiberius did not allow it, but Cali∣gula ordered, that all those who should re∣fuse to do it should be put to Death; and came to such an excess of folly and madness, that he commanded that the People should swear by the Health and Fortune of a fine Horse, which he intended to take for his Colleague in his Consulat, as Dion tells us, lib. 59. They also Swore by one anothers Genius, as appears by a place of Seneca: Ju∣rat per Genium meum. JUS. The Law. There are three kinds of Laws; the Law of Nature, the Law of Na∣tions, and the Civil Law. The Law of Nature is what Nature teaches all living Creatures, and is in a manner common to Men and Beasts, as Marriage, Procreation, and Education of Children. The Law of Nations is what natural Rea∣son has inspired and dedicated to all Men, and is practised by all Nations, as Religion towards God, Piety towards Parents, and Love of our Country. From thence comes the difference and division of Nations, settle∣ment of Kingdoms, share of Demesn, Trade, and most sort of Obligations: From hence also arises the right of War, to take Priso∣ners, to accept of their ransom, to set them at liberty, or to detain them in slavery. The Civil Law is what each City or State has established or enacted for a Law: For natural reason having taught Men to live to∣gether, and for that purpose to build Towns, and create Magistrates, has also taught them to make Laws, and assume to themselves a private and particular right, to be the tye and rule of their Societies; and this is cal∣led the Civil Law, i. e. the Law of the City or Countrey. The Civil Law which is now taught in Schools, is a body composed of Roman Laws, viz. a Collection of the Law received, in∣troduced and observed in the City of Rome, and all the extent of the Roman Empire, du∣ring the space of more then twelve hundred years; during which time, the Roman peo∣ple, who seem'd born to command, not only made a considerable Progress by their Valour towards the general Empire of the Universe; but also carefully and dili∣gently inquired after the best methods and rules to govern themselves and their Sub∣jects with Justice and Equity, and render to every particular Man what was due to him, keeping withal all Men in their Duty. And to succeed in their design, not being satisfied with their own, they lent to Greece,
then flourishing in all kinds of Learning, to inquire after their Laws: Wherefore the Body of the Roman Law is not the work of a man only, nor of some few Years, but the work of many Nations and Ages toge∣ther, brought to perfection by a long and laborious Observation of humane affairs, that the greatest wits of that flourishing State, fully instructed by the exercise of in∣feriour Magistrates, and from thence raised to the highest Offices of the Empire, have collected and reduced under certain Princi∣ples and general Maxims, of which it was formed and perfected. And because so many Men having put their hand to this work, the number of Vo∣lumes were grown almost infinite. Justinian the Emperour gave order to Trebonianus his Chancellor, and some other great Lawyers of his Age, to reduce it to a perfect Body, which they divided into three Volumes, which are remaining still, viz. Pandectae or Digests, the Code, and Institutes, as we may see in the Preface of the Institutions of Justi∣nian, and by the title of the Code, de vete∣ri jure enucleando. The Digests contain the Opinions and Re∣solutions of antient Lawyers. The Code is composed of the Constitu∣tions and Rescripts of the Emperours, since Adrian to Justinian. The Institutes is an excellent Abridgment of all that is contained in the two former Volumes, i. e. an Abridgment of the Ro∣man Law. To these three Volumes they have since added the Constitutions of Justinian, called Novellae or Authenticae; which, altho' they are not contained in the body of the Law, col∣lected and published by the order of Justini∣an, yet they have obtained such an Autho∣rity, that tho' they were published last by Justinian's order, yet they have exceeded the former in many things. And this Work was so excellent, that e∣ven after the ruine of the Roman Empire, the best polited Nations in the World make still use thereof to decide all their differences. The Civil Law is twofold, the written and the unwritten. The written Law is that which being col∣lected into Writing, is published in a man∣ner usual to each state. In the Roman Domi∣nions there were six kinds of this written Law, called by several names, viz. Lex, Se∣natur Consulta, Plebiscita, Principum Placita, Ma∣gistratuum. Edicta, Responsa Prudentium. These several Definitions are related by Justinian in the 2. Cap. of his first Book. The unwritten Law is that which has in∣troduced it self by Practice and Tacit consent of them who use it, and this is called Cu∣stom. These two several kinds of Laws are much in request in France, for they have there the Edicts and Ordinances of their Kings for a Written Law; and as for Cu∣stom, there is almost no Province, but has Laws called customs particular to them∣selves. The Canon Law is nothing else but a col∣lection of Ecclesiastical rules, definitions and constitutions, taken out of the antient Gene∣ral and Provincial Councils, the writings and resolutions of the Fathers of the Church, and constitutions and rescripts of the Popes, whereby are decided all controversies of the Ecclesiastical State, not only concerning the administration of Sacraments, management of the Estates, and regulating of Clergymen, but also in what concerns the Laity, and Se∣cular men in Spiritual matters, and this Law, which was lately collected and composed on the Model of the Civil Law, is contained and reduced into three Volumes, the first whereof is called the Decree of Gratian, com∣posed of the ancient Canons, or rules taken from the ancient Councils and Writings of the Fathers. The Second is called the Decretals, con∣taining the Decretal Epistles i. e. the con∣stitutions or rescripts of the Popes, chiefly since Alexander III. till Gregory IX. by whose authority it was compiled and some Chap∣ters taken out of the Epistles of Pope Gregory, and some other Antients. The last volume is called Sextum, contain∣ing the rescripts of the Popes since Gregory IX. till Bonifacius VIII. by whose authority it was collected; but this volume is hardly re∣ceived in France, because of the difference between Bonifacius and Philip, called le Bel King of France, and for many things inserted therein, contrary to the liberties of the Galli∣can Church. At the end of this volume are added the Clementina, which are the constitution of Cle∣ment V. decreed in the Councel of Vienna, and some rescripts of John XXII. and other Popes commonly, called extravagantes, because they are out of the Body of the Canon-law, composed in three volumes. JUSTITIA. Justice, A Goddess called by the Ancients Astraea, Daughter of Jupiter and Themis. She is reprenseted by the figure of a naked and blindfolded Virgin, holding an even ballance with one hand, and a naked Sword with the other, to shew that Justice has no regard to persons, and punishes and rewards equally. Hesiod says, that Justice the Daughter of Ju∣piter is tied to his Throne in Heaven, and demands revenge of him, every time that
her Laws are violated, whereupon a long Succession of calamities is poured upon Na∣tions who are punished for the Crimes of Kings and great men. Aratus in his Phaenomena gives us still a finer description of the Goddess Justice, who during the Golden Age was conversant night and day on the earth, amongst People of all sorts of Age, Sex, and Condition, teaching her Law. During the Silver Age, she ap∣peared only in the night, and in secret re∣proaching men with their unlawful ways; but in the Iron Age, she was forced to quit the Earth, and retire into Heaven, because of the multitude and enormity of Crimes. JUTURNA. A Fountain in Latium, disimboguing itself into the River Numicius. The Fable tells us, that she was Daughter of Danaus, and Sister to Tutnus King of the Ru∣tnll, whom Jupiter loved and enjoyed, she assisted her Brother against Aenaeas; but ha∣ving perceived that the Fates were averse to him, out of despair she cast herself headlong into the River Numicius. Ovid, in the 6th Book of his Fasti, speaks of the Temple of Juturna the Sister of Turnus, so often mentioned by Virgil in his Aeneids, who was beloved by Jupiter, from whence she took her name, as if one said Joviturna. The truth of the History is, that it was a Fountain in Italy, the waters whereof were very fine and wholesom, from whence it took also its name, as Servius informs us, in lib. 12. Aeneid. Jaturna fons est in Italia saluberrimus, cui nomen a juvando est inditum. Varro on the contrary seems to say, that the waters of that Fountain were sought after, because of its name, out of a superstitious and common simplicity, Nympha Juturna quae juvaret; itaque multi propter id nomen hinc aquam petere solent. JUVENTAS, called by the Greeks Hebe, the Goddess of Youth, Juno's Daughter. See Hebe. IXION, The Son of Phlegias or Aetion. Lucian in his Dialogue of the Gods introduces Juno and Jupiter talking thus of Ixion. Jun. Who do you think was Ixion? Jup. A very gallant man, and good Company, or else I would not have admit∣ted him to my Table. Jun. He is an insolent fellow, who doth not deserve that honour. Jup. What has he done? I would fain know? Jun. I am ashamed to tell it, such is his impudence. Jup. Has he made an attempt upon some Goddesses honour, for you seem to intimate as much. Jun. He has made his addresses to my∣self. At first I took no notice of his love; but afterwards he had always his eyes fasten'd upon me, and that from time to time he sighed, and let some tears drop, that he af∣fected to drink after me, and lookt on me while he was drinking; and then kissed the Glass, I perceived his folly, and I was a∣shamed to acquaint thee with it, and thought it would soon be over. But at last he grew so insolent as to tell me of it; then present∣ly stopping my ear, lest I should hear him, I came running as fast as I could, to give thee notice of it, that thou mightest make an ex∣ample of him. Jup. That is a bold Rogue to attempt to plant Horns on Jupiter's Head. He was certainly drunk with Nectar; but 'tis my fault to love mortals so well, as to admit them to my Ta∣ble. For 'tis no wonder if feeding upon the same meat as I do, they are transported with the same desires, and fall in love with im∣mortal Beauties. Thou know'st thy self what a Tyrant Love is. Jun. 'Tis true, that he is thy master, and that, as they say, he leads thee by the Nose. However I do well perceive why thou pityst Ixion: He doth nothing but what thou hast deserved; for thou hast formerly lain with his Wife, and begot Perithous by her. Jup. Dost thou remember it still? Shall I tell thee my opinion in this matter? It would be too great a punishment to banish him for ever out of our Company; but see∣ing that he cries and sighs, my opinion is...... Jun. What! That I lay with him? Jup. No, some other Phantom like thee, somewhat to satisfy his passion. Jun. This would be to reward him, in∣stead of a punishment. Jup. But what harm would that do thee? Jun. He would think to embrace me, and the disgrace would redound to me. Jup. But he should be deceived; for if we should form a Cloud like thee, it should not be Juno herself. Jun. As men have commonly more vani∣ty than love, he would brag of it, and say, that he had lain with me, and I should lose my reputation. Jup. If it thus falls out, I will throw him headlong into Hell, where being tied to a Wheel, he shall turn for ever, without en∣joying any rest. Jun. This wont be too great a punishment for his crime. In short, Ixion being per∣swaded he had imbraced Juno, because he hugged a Cloud like her, bragged of it,
whereupon Jupiter precipitated him into Hell, where he turns a Wheel without Intermission. Isaac Tzetzes relates, That Ixion having kil∣led his Father in law, and being wandering and vagrant, as a punishment of his crime, was entertained by a King named Jupiter, who kindly received him in his Palace, and admitted him to his Table; but Ixion having forgot this kindness, imbolden'd himself to discover his love to the Queen; which be∣ing reported to the King, to inform himself of the truth of the matter, ordered that one of the Queens Maids of Honour called Ne∣phele, or Cloud, should be dressed with the Queens Apparel, and brought to Ixion, who enjoy'd her, thinking it was the Queen her self. K. K, A double Consonant, and the tenth Letter of the Alphabet, taken from the Latin, and comes from the Greek Kappa. It was accounted useless by Priscian. Claudius Dausquius says, from Salust, that the inventer of the Letter K, was named Salvius, and that it was unknown to the ancient Romans. K is also a Numeral Letter, which signi∣fies amongst the Ancients two hundred and fifty; and with a stroke above it, it stands for an Hundred and fifty thousand. KALENDE, The Calends, or the first day of every Month amonst the Romans. See Calendae, &c. L. L, Or Ell, the name of the eleventh Letter of the Alphabet. L is also a numeral Letter amongst the Ancients, which stands for Fif∣ty, and signifies the same in the Roman Arith∣metical Figures: And when a stroke is ad∣ded to it, it stands for fifty thousand. LABARUM, The Standard of the Ro∣man Emperours, carried before them in the Wars, and adored by the Soldiers. It was a long Spear, with a Staff set cross-way at the upper end thereof, and from that Staff hung down a rich Standard of Purple co∣lour, edged with a Fringe, and beset with precious Stones. The Roman Emperors carried in their Colours or Labarum, an Eagle Paint∣ed or Embroidered with Gold; as we may observe in the reverse of a Medal of Max∣entius, wherein this Tyrant is represented armed with his Breast Plate, holding with one hand the Labarum, wherein an Eagle is drawn. But Constantine the Great, in the War against Maxentius, where he vanquished him by the sign of the Cross, which he saw in the Clouds, Crowned the Labarum with a rich Crown, beset with precious Stones, and ordered that this Cypher P, ie! Christ, with these two Letters, A and Ω, to signifie that Jesus Christ is the beginning and the end; should be wrought in Gold upon the Purple Stand∣ard. We have a Medal of Constance, wherein the Emperour is represented with his Coat of Armour on, with his right hand holding up Victory, which Crowns his head with Laurels, and with the left hand he carries the Labarum. Those who did bear the Labarum, in the Armies, were called, Labariferi. LABRUM, A great Tub, standing at the entrance of the Temple of the Jews, and the Pagans in imitation of them, where the Priests wash'd their Feet and Hands be∣fore they offered Sacrifices. Labrum. signi∣fies also a Bathing Tub, used in the Baths of the Ancients. LABYRINTHUS. A Labyrinth, a place full of turnings, and windiags, so con∣trived, that 'tis very hard to get out again. Pliny mentions four Labyrinths; that of Egypt, which was the greatest of all, described by Herodotus, having amongst other remarka∣ble things sixteen Wards, or great sides of Houses, answerable to the sixteen Govern∣ments of Egypt; which Menis or Maros King of that Country ordered to be built to serve him for a Mausoleum, as Philostraros reports: And upon the Model of this Laby∣rixth, Dadalus built that of Creta or Candia, by Minos's order, to shut in the Minotaur therein. But Daedalus was there shut up him∣self with his Son: However he got out by the means of Wings he made of Wax. The∣seus was there also exposed to be devouted by the Minotaur, and had not escaped but by the help of the clue of Ariadue. The third Labyrinth was in the Isle of Lemnos, and had a hundred and fifty Pillars of Marble: And the fourth was built in Italy by the orders of Porsenna King of Tuscany. LACERNA, A kind of a Garment worn by the Romans over their Gowns, like a Cassock to keep off rain and cold. The Soldiers, the common People, and the Empe∣rours did wear it even in days of Shews. The Emperours had this Garment made of Purple coloured Cloth. Ovid informs us, that Lucretia hastned her Servants to finish that kind of Garment, that she might send it to Collatinus her Husband, who laid Seige to Ardia.
Mittenda est Domino, nunc nunc properate, pu∣ellae. Quam primum nostra facta lacerna manu. And Lampridius speaking of the Emperour Alexander Severus, says, That he returned from the Baths with the common People, without any other badge of his Imperial Dig∣nity, but his Lacerna of Purple Colours, Hoc solum Imperatorium habens quod lacernam coccine∣am accipiebat. Some mistaking two places in Juvenal and Horace say, That this Garment was worn by Women; but have not observed that Juve∣nal speaks of one Sporus whom Nero Married as if he had been a Woman. Ipse lacernatae cum se jactarit amicae: And that there is a fault in the Verse of Horace; for Lainbinus will have us read, Sub clara nuda lacerna, instead of Sub clara nuda lucerna, it being a common thing for these prostitute Women, whereof Horace speaks, to wait for their Sparks by the light of a Lamp. LACHESIS, One of the three Desti∣nies, Daughter of Jupiter and Themis, or the Night and Erebus, who spins the Thred of Man's Life, according to the Fable. The Ancients represented her cloathed with a Garment sprinkled with Stars, and holding many Spindles in her hands. LACONICUM, A Sove, or Sweating house. The dry Stove were thus called by the Ancients, because the Lacaedemonians brought them into use. Mercurialis finds fault with those who confounded Laconicum, which is a place for Sweating, with Hypocaustum, which was the Stove that warmed the Laconicum. LACOTOMUS, A line to mark the lines in the Analemma. Grammarians have not asserted the signification of this word, which seems to be a Greek word, and is not found in the Treatise that Ptolomy has writ∣ten concerning the Analemma. The most common opinion is, that this word comes from the Greek , i. e. paring of Cloath, and from the Verb , i. e. to act; for the line called Lacotomus cuts one part of the Meridian. LAMIAE, were accounted Hags, or rather evil Spirits, who under the shape of fair Women enticed Youth to devour them. Philostratus in the Life of Appollonius calls them Lemures. The Origine of this word comes from a Fable, related by Suidas and Phavorinus; who tells us, that Jupeer fell in love with a certain Woman of extraordina∣ry beauty called Lamia; but Juno growing jealous, turned her beauty into terrible de∣formities, and put all her Children to death; whereupon she grew so mad, that she de∣voured all the Children she met. Dion Chrisostome reports this Story other∣wise; for he tells us, That there are in the Desart of Lybia some fierce Beasts, who have the Face and Breast of young Maids, and the rest of the Body, which they take care to hide, is like a Serpent; and that they intice the Travellers by a thousand Caresses, that they might devour them. Philostratus relates also in the same place, that he drove one out of Corinth who attempted to surprize a young Man called Menippus. In short, these Lamiae are Sea Monsters, and Fish of so prodigious bigness, that two Horses are hardly able to draw one of them in a Cart. The Inhabitants of Marseilles have taken some Lamiae, in the Stomach whereof they found whole Men, and even one arm∣ed. LAMPAS; A Lamp, a Vessel wherein they burn Oyl to give light. The Ancients had no other Lights but Lamps, and kept some burning before their Images. Lucian has given us the Descripti∣on of an Island of Lamps where he landed. He says, That this Isle is situated between the Hyades and Pleiades, and a little below the Zodiack; that these Lamps go forwards and backwards like the Inhabitants of a Town, and that every one has its own name and lodging like the Citizens of a Common-wealth. The Palace of the King is in the middle of the City, wherein he administers Justice all night, and every one of his Sub∣jects is obliged to meet there, to give an ac∣count of his actions: Those who have com∣mitted faults suffer no other punishment, but that they are put out, which is a kind of civil death amongst them. LANCEA, A Lanco; an offensive Wea∣pon, made of a long Staff like a half Pike, with a point at the end, armed with Iron. 'Tis said that the Aeolians invented this Wea∣pon Rallas is represented with a Lance. LAPITHAE. A Nation in Thessalia the posterity of Lapithus, the Son of Apollo and the Nymph Stilbe. At the Wedding of Perithous their King, with Hippodamia, they fought the Centaurs, and got the best of them. Ovid has described this fight in the 12th Book of his Metamorphoses. LARARIUM. A private Chappel in a house for the houshold Gods called Lares. Spartian in the Life of Alexander the Son of Mammeus says, that he kept in his Lararium the figure of our Saviour, with the Images of his other Gods. LARES. The Houshold Gods Lares. Apu∣leius in his Book of the God of Socrates explains also what is meant by Manes. The Soul of
Man, says he, being free from the bonds of the Body, and not obliged to perform its functi∣ons, becomes a kind of Daemon or Genius, for∣merly called Lamures. Of these Lemures those who were kind to their families, and kept them in peace, were called Lares Familiares, Domestick Lares, but those who for a punish∣ment of their crimes committed during their lives, were condemned to wander continu∣ally, without finding a place of rest, fright∣ing good men, and plaguing the wicked, were vulgarly called Larvae. The Lares called also Penates or houshold Gods, were adored in private Houses, under the figures of small Images of Silver, Brass or Earthen Ware. The Etymology of the word Penates comes either from penes nos nati sunt, or from the word Penus, which signifies the innermost part of the house. Some of these Lares were Gods of the High-ways, called Lares Viales: Wherefore Plantus i ntroduces Charinus making himself ready for a journey; calling upon the Gods of the Highways to preserve him during his Tra∣vels. Invoco Vos. Lares Viales, ut me bene tutetis. I implore your assistance, Gods of the High-ways, vouchsafe to protect me in my jour∣ney. 'Tis likely, that the word Lar comes from the Tuscan Language, for Lars amongst the Tuscans was the Prince of the People. Lactantius says, that the Goddess called Muta, Lara, La∣runda, was the mother of the Gods Lares. Ovid tells us, that Lara was formerly called La-lara from the Greek verb  Loquor, because she talked too much, for she dis∣covered to Juno the amours of Jupiter and Juturna: Whereupon Jupiter deprived her of her Speech, and gave order to Mercury to lead her to Hell, but Mercury deflowered her, and begat two Children of her called Lars. Thus this Goddess became dumb, and her Chil∣dren the Lares, were instructed with the care and government of the Highways and Houses. Forte fuit Nais, Lara nomine; prima sed illi Dicta bis, antiquum Syllaba nomen erat. Ex vituo positum....... Eripuit linguam: Mercuriumque monet Duc hanc ad Manes locus illeSilentibus aptus... Fitque gravis geminosque parit, qui compita Servant Et vigilant nostra semper in urbe Lares.Ovid. Fast. l. 2. v. 600. These Gods were honoured either private∣ly in Houses, and then something of what was brought upon the Table was burnt to their honour, as first fruits, or publickly by sacrificing a Sow to them, as being keep∣ers and overseers of Streets and High-ways. They were represented cloathed with the Skin of a Dog, and having a Mastiff Dog by them, to shew their watchfulness and fide∣lity in keeping the house, and defending their master, as we learn from Plutarch in his Roman questions: Why, says he, is a Dog represented by the Lares called Praestites, and why are they covered with Dogs Skin? The Ancients called Lares or Penates Gods, chosen to protect States, Highways, Forests, and other things like. And Nigidus Figulus, says Arnobius, calls the Gods Lares, sometimes Curetes, and sometimes Indigetes. But Asconius Pedianus explaining these words of Virgil,  magnis, tells us, that these great Gods were the Gods Lares of the City of Rome; and Propertius says, that they drove away Hannibal from his Camp before Rome, because he was frighted by some night appa∣ritions. Annibalem Lares Romana sede fugantes. This Inscription, which confirms what Arconius Pedianus has said. D. M. Genio Augg. Lar. Fam. Fortunatus. Aug. lib. To the great God, To the Genius of the Emperors, To the Houshold Gods, &c. To the familiar Lares, &c. There was also a distinction of publick Lares, viz. Lares of the Oaks, Lares of the Seas, Lares of the high ways, Lares of the Fields, and Lares that were enemies. 'Tis certain that the Ancients ranked all the little figures they had of their Ancestors, and others amongst their Gods Lares, espe∣cially when they excelled in some virtue, and in series of time, they all become indif∣ferently Lares protectors, because they were placed amongst Statues of other Gods; as we learn of Pliny, l. 2. where he speaks of the ancient Custom of placing those persons a∣mongst the number of Gods, who had be∣stowed some considerable favour upon men, to shew thereby an acknowledgment for their kindnesses. And we must not fancy that this Custom was first practiced, in publick Temples, on the contrary, it began first to be used in private families, who had no au∣thority to propose the subjects of their personal gratitude to publick veneration.
However, the great Gods were placed a∣mongst the number of the Gods Lares. Ma∣crobius assures us, that Janus was one of the Gods Lares, and presided over the High-ways, be∣cause he was represented holding a Key and a Rod in his hands, like the Keeper of all the Gates, and ruler over the High-ways, Nam & cum clavi & virga figuratur, quasi omnium & portarum custos & rector viarum. Apollo himself, says he in the same place, was also called by the Greeks , as presiding, over the corner of the Streets of the City. Likewise Diana and Mercury were also reckoned among the Gods Lares, because Atheneus calls Diana  present at the Highways, and one of the Gods Lares presiding there. And if the Gods Lares had been uncertain and unknown Gods, the Romans never had consecrated to them the famous games called Compitalitii, i. e. the Feast of the Crossways, solemnized according to the Law of the Praetor the xith. day before the Calends of January; for these games were not only celebrared to their honour, because they were Keepers both of the High-ways and Crossways, but also because they presided over the guard of Empires, and watched for the preservation of private men, wherefore at solemnizing of these games they offered Sacrifices for the Weal of the Re∣publick, and families of the Empire. 'Tis therefore certain, that all Gods, chosen Patrons and Protectors of places and private men, were called Lares; some little images and figures whereof were kept in the private Chappel of each Family, and the Palace of the Emperors, who had officers appointed to guard these Gods Lares. This plainly ap∣pears by the ancient Monuments, HYMNUS. CAESARIS. L. AUG. VOLUSIANUS, DECURIO LARIUM VOLƲSIA∣NORUM. Hymnus Volusianus, Freedman of the Emperor, Decu∣rio of the Volusiani Lares, and this following. M. FABIO. ASIATICO. SEVIRO MAG. LARUM AUG. To M. Fabius the Assiatick Sextum-vir, and master of the Lares of the Emperour. Wherefore all kinds of Gods whatsoever, appointed by Towns, Emperours, or pri∣vate Men for their Tutelar Gods, and of whom they kept small Images, were called Lares: And for this same reason the Feast of the Gods Lares solemniz'd the xith. day before the Calends of January, is called by Macrobius the Solemnity of the little Sta∣tues: Sigillariorum celebritas. They set up burning Lamps before these Figures, they crowned their heads, and perfumed them al∣most every day with Effusions. LARVAE, Ghosts of wicked Men wan∣dering up and down after their death; Phan∣toms who fight good Men, and torment the wicked. The word Larva, in the singular number is taken for a Vizard, that frights Children, like Larvae or bad Genius's. LARA and LARUNDA, The Mo∣ther of the two Lares, according to the Fable, whom Jupiter deprived of Speech, because she had discovered his amours to Juno, where∣fore she is called Muta. LATICLAVIUM, &c. See after Latrinae. LATIUM, A Countrey in Italy, thus called a latendo, because Saturn retired there to secure himself from his Son Jupiter. ...... Latium que vocari Maluit, his quoniam latuisset tutus in oris. Virg. Aen. 8. This part of Italy is extended along the Shore of the Tyrrhenean Sea, between Hetru∣ria and Campania, wherein the City of Rome is contained. LATINAE FERIAE, The Feast thus called, was kept four days together, and had no time appointed in the year for their Celebration; only the Consuls were bound to solemnize the same before they went to War: and it was observed, that those who neglected that duty were unfortunate in their undertakings. This Feast was instituted by Tarquinius Superbus, after he had vanquished the Tuscans, to maintain the Confederacy concluded by his means between them and the Latins. They agreed about the time of their meetings on Mount Albanus, where they repaired from all parts, this Hill being situated in the middle of these Nations. There every one brought along with him his own part for the Offering, either Milk, or Cheese, or Lambs; wherewith they made a Feast all together, in token of union. There was all so a Fair kept; but the most remarkable thing in this Feast was the Sacrifice of a Bull, offered to Jupiter, sirnamed for that reason Latialis: For 'tis observed that every one of those who were there present, carried home a piece how little soever of the Bulls entrails: And tho' this Solemnity was common to forty seven Nations, yet the Romans had the direction thereof; and if any Man failed to bring some Offering, or carry home a piece of the Victims, or neglected some other du∣ty, they were obliged to begin again, and that mistake was accounted for a great mis∣fortune. LATONA, The Daughter of Caea the Titan, and Phaebe, as Hesiod and Ovid, or of
Saturn, according to Homer's opinion, Jupiter was enamoured with her; whereupon Juno being jealous, raised a dreadful Serpent a∣gainst her, called Pytho, to pursue her. Lu∣cian in the Dialogue of the Sea Gods, introduces Iris and Neptune discoursing thus about Latona's affairs. Iris. Jupiter bids thee to stop the Island that floats over the Egean Sea, having got loose from Sicily by stormy weather. Nept. Why so? Iris. For Latona to be brought to bed in, who is in labour. Nept. What, are not Heaven and Earth sufficient for this service? Iris. Juno is angry, and won't suffer her in Heaven, and the Earth has sworn that she won't receive her; wherefore there is only this Island, which being now no part of the world, is not bound by oath. Nept. Stop at my command, floating Island, to receive two twins who will be the honour of heaven, and the finest chil∣dren of Jupiter. Let the winds be still, whilst the Tritons bring her to lie in: as for the Serpent, he will serve for a trophy to these young Gods, at the first instant of their birth. Go and tell Jupiter that all is ready, and that she may come when she pleases. And in another Dialogue Lucian introduces Juno and Latona quarrelling one with ano∣ther. Jun. In truth, Latona, thou hast born Ju∣piter fine Children. Latona. We can't all be the Mother of Vul∣can. Jun. 'Tis true he is lame, and yet in that condition Venus has accepted of him for her Husband.... But thy Daughter, out of a masculine courage unbecoming her sex, goes as far as Scythia to murther her guests; and thy Son, who is of all trades, an Archer, a Fiddler, a Poet, and Physician, has settled places for Prophesies at Delphi, Claros and Di∣dymas, where he pretends to tell things that are to come, and surprizes the people by de∣ceitful Oracles, which have always some back doors to secure themselves, &c. Latona. Your Jealousy won't permit them to Triumph in Heaven, and be famous there, one for her beauty, and the other for his harmony. Jun. Thou makest me laugh, when thou takest thy Son for an excellent Musician, who had been flea'd in the room of Marsias, had the Muses done him justice. As for thy Daughter, she is so fair, with her full Moon face, that Acteon was tore in pieces by his own Dogs, because seen he had her stark naked, lest he should discover her ugliness to the world. LATOR-LEGIS, A Law-giver, one who ordered a Law to be posted up, and then published his name under it. LATRINAE, A house of office. We don't find neither in the Writings nor Buildings that remain of Antiquity that they had any Privies in their Houses. For what they call'd Latrinae were publick places where the Slaves emptied and washed the Close∣stool-pans, called also Latrinae a Lavando, ac∣cording to the etymology that Varro gives of that word. Plautus speaks of a Slave who washes the pan of the Close-stool, qui latri∣nam lavat: for in that place of Plautus 'tis not meant the Privy which was washed by Canals under ground, with the waters of the River Tibor. 'Tis then most certain, that there were publick Houses of Office in many places of the Town for publick use. These Houses of Office were covered, and there was a Spunge hung up for cleanliness. Rich Men had Close∣stools, and other Vessels for that use, which the Slaves washed, after they had emptied them into the Common-shore. LATUS CLAVUS, or LATI∣CLAVIUM, or TUNICA CLA∣VATA: & LATI-CLAVII. A Tunick, a Wastcoat trimmed with broad Buttons like the head of a nail. It was a garment of di∣stinction, and a badge of honour amongst the Romans. The Senators had the priviledge to wear this sort of garment, and therefore were called by a single name Laticlavii, as Suetonius says, binos Laticlavios misit, he sent two Senators. The Consuls, Praetors, Aediles, and those that triumphed were allowed to wear this Robe; and during the time of the Empe∣rours, it was bestowed upon Governours of Provinces, and those who had perform'd some great service for their Country, as a badge of honour. LAVATIO MATRIS DEUM. The washing of the great Mother of the Gods, kept the 26th day of March. This Feast was in∣stituted in remembrance of the day that she was brought from Asia, and washed in the River Almon, at the place where it goes into the Tyber. Her Priests, called Galli Cybeles, carried her Statue in a Chariot, attended by a great croud of people, to the place where she was washed as her first coming to Rome. Here they washed and rubbed carefully, as Ovid says, Est locus in Tiberim qua lubricus influit Almo, Et magno nomen perdit in amne minor: Illic purpurea canus cum veste sacerdos Almonis Dominam sacraque lavit aqua.
St. Austin, l. 11. de Civ. Dei. cap. 4. gives us an account of this Feast. The day that Cy∣bele the Virgin and Mother of all Gods was solemnly washed, some wretched Buffoons sung fifty Songs before her Chariot, that de∣cency would not only allow the Mother of the Gods to hear, nor even any other Mother of Persons of the meanest rank: For Nature has printed in us a kind of modesty to our Parents, that Vice it self is not able to de∣prive us of. And these Buffoons would be ashamed to repeat at home before their own Mothers, all the words and the lascivious postures they played in publick before the Mother of the Gods, in sight of a great mul∣titude of people of both Sexes, who coming out of curiosity to see this Shew, return'd home with shame to have seen Representati∣ons that offended modesty. LAVERNA, The Goddess of Thieves mentioned in Horace, l. 1. Epist. 16. v. 60. Festus tells us, that the Ancients called Thieves Laverniones, because they were under the pro∣tection of the Goddess Laverna, who had a Wood consecrated to her, where they sha∣red their booty. Laverniones fures Antiqui di∣cebant, quod subtutela Deae Lavernae essent, in cu∣jus luco obscuro abditoque soliti furta praedam que inter se luere. LAVINIA, The Daughter of King La∣tinus and Amata, who married Aeneas, when af∣ter the sacking of Troy, he came into Italy: But being a Widow, lest Ascanius should attempt her life, to secure himself the Crown of the Latins, she retired into the Forest, where she lived privately in the house of Tyrrhenus, Overseer of the Herds of her Father Latinus. The Latins grumbled against Ascanius for the absence of Lavinia; whereupon he was o∣bliged to send some Persons to seek for her, and intreat her to come again to Lavini∣um. LAURENTALIA, Feasts instituted by the Roman people, in honour of Acca Lau∣rentia, kept during the Feasts called Saturna∣lia, which afterwards were solemnized as a part thereof. Authors write, that there were two Laurentia's, one who was Nurse to Ro∣mulus, and the other a famous Curtezan, who by her last Will, made the Roman People her Heir, and vanished away at her coming to the Sepulcher of the first Laurentia: Upon this account 'tis said, that the honours that the Priest of Mars performed to them both in the Valabrum, with effusion of Wine and Milk, were confounded together. LAURENTIA ACCA was a de∣bauched Woman, who nursed up Romulus and Remus: Which occasioned the Fable to say, that a She Wolf suckled them. She married afterwards a very rich Man, who brought her a great Wealth; which at her Death she left to the Roman people, in consideration whereof they performed her great honours. This is the most certain account we have of her, related by Macrobius, and by him taken from the most ancient Writers. LAURUS. The Laurel or Bay-tree, a Tree which is always green, used to Crown Victorious Men, and was planted at the Pa∣lace-gate of the Emperours the first day of the year, or any other time when they had obtained some Victory. Dion speaking of the honours the Senate performed to Augustus, says, that they ordered that Bay-trees should be planted before his Palace, to shew that he was always Victorious over his Enemies. Tertullian speaks of these Laurels, when he said, Who should be bold enough to besiege the Emperours between two Laurels? Qui sunt qui Imperatores inter duas lauros obsident? Wherefore Pliny calls Laurel the keeper of the Emperour's Gate, the only ornament and the true guard of their Palace: Gratissima do∣mibus Janetrix Caesarum, que sela & domos exor∣nat & ante limina excubat. The Fable tells us, that Daphne flying to avoid the pressing in∣stances of Apollo's love, was turned into a Lanrel. LECTICA. A Litter, a Horse Litter, The use and invention of this kind of Cha∣riot came first from Bythinia and Cappadocia, and was made use of to carry both living and dead Bodies: As Tully reports, Nam, ut mos fuit Bythiniae, lectica farebatur. There were two kinds of Litters, some covered, used in dirty Weather, and others uncovered on purpose to take the air in fair Weather. Pli∣ny speaking of Nero, calls the first kind of Litters, a Traveller's Chamber, Cubiculum viatorum. Suetonius reports, that when Au∣gustus was going into the Country, he often ordered his Servants to stop his Litter that he might sleep therein; for there were on both sides Pannels or Curtains that might be drawn at any time. These Litters were car∣ried by six or eight Men, called Lecticarios, and the Litter, lectica hexaphora, or octophora. LECTISTERNIUM, A great Ceremony among the Romans, but seldom practised but upon occasion of some great and publick Calamity. When this Ceremo∣ny was performed, the Statues of the Gods were brought down from their Basis, or Pe∣destals, and then laid upon Beds, made for that purpose in their Temples, with Pillows under their Heads; and in this posture they were magnificently entertain'd. Three most stately Beds were made, whereupon they laid the Statues of Jupiter, Apollo, with that of Lato∣na, Diana, Hercules, Neptune and Mercury, to pacifie them. Then all the Gates were opened, and
the Tables were every where served with Meat: Foreigners, known or unknown, were entertained and lodged for nothing; all mat∣ters of hatred and quarrel was forgot, they conversed with their Enemies like Friends, and liberty was granted to all Prisoners. This Feast was solemnized in time of Plague, or some other great and publick Ca∣lamity. The Feast Lactisternium was celebra∣ted by order of the Duumviri, in the year 335, after the Foundation of Rome. LEDA. The Wife of Tyndarus, King of OEbalia; beloved by Jupiter, who turned him∣self into a Swan to enjoy her. She brought forth two Eggs, out of one, which she had conceived by Jupiter, came Pollux and Helena; of the other, which she had conceived by Tyndarus her Husband, came Castor and Cly∣temnestra. LEGIO. A Legion, a kind of a Regi∣ment, or body in the Roman Army. Legi∣ons consisted of different numbers of Soldi∣ers and Officers, according to different times, but yet they were commonly made up of six thousand Men. The Forces of Rome con∣sisted of many Legions. In the time of the Emperour Tiberius, says Tacitus, two naval Armies, one at Ravenna, the other at Mize∣num guarded both Seas of Italy. The Coast of the Gauls was secured by the Gallies that Augustus had taken in the Fight of Actium: But the main Forces of the Empire, in the number of eight Legions guarded the Rhine. Three other Legions were employed to prevent the Enemies attempts upon Spain, which had been lately conquered by Au∣gustus. Africa and Egypt were both several∣ly secured by two Legions: And all the Countreys from the Sea of Syria to Euphrates and Pontus, Euxinus were kept in peace by four Legions. The passage of the River Danube was guarded by four other Legions, two in Pannonia, and two in Maesia, sustain∣ed by two other in Dalmatia; two kept the Darbarians in awe, and assist Italy in case of need. Rome was Garrisoned with three Co∣horts of the City, and nine of the Empe∣rour's own Forces, all chosen Soldiers out of Umbria, Tascany, the Countrey of the La∣tins, and other old Roman Colonies. Be∣sides the Armies and Gallies of the Confe∣derates lying in the most convenient Har∣bours of the Provinces, which were also equal to our Forces. Each Legion was divided in ten Cohorts; each Cohort in three Companies, and each Company into two Centuries. The chief Commander of the Legion was called Lega∣tus, i. e. Lieutenant. LEMNOS, An Island in the Egean Sea or Archipelago. Poets tell us, That Valcan was therein cast head-long, from the top of Heaven by Jupiter: However, he was receiv∣ed in the Arms of the Inhabitants of the Country, who preserved him from the fate of Astyanax: Notwithstanding he broke one of his Legs, and ever since was lame. They relate also that he settled himself in that Countrey, and became a Black-Smith, be∣cause of the Fire that breaks out from time to time from the middle of the Mountains, and the norse that is heard thereabout. LEMURES, Apuleius in his Book of the God of Socrates reports, That the Soul of Man released from the bands of the Body, and freed from performing of his bodily Functions, becomes a kind of Daemon or Genius called Lemures: And of these Lo∣mures, those that were kind to their Fami∣ly, were called Lares Familiares; but those who for their crimes were condemned to wander continually, without meeting with any place of rest, and terrified good Men, and hurt the bad, were vulgarly called Lar∣vae, Hobgoblins. LEMURIA, A Feast of Ghosts, and Phantoms solemnized the ninth day of May, to pacifie the Manes of the Dead, who were the Lemures that comes in the night to tor∣ment the living. The Institution of this Feast is ascribed to Romulus, who to rid him∣self of the Phantoms of his Brother Remus whom he had ordered to be Murthered, ap∣pearing always before him, ordained a Feast called after his name Remuria and Lemuria. They offered Sacrifices for three nights toge∣ther, during which time all the Temples of the Gods were shut up, and there was no Wedding. This is the chief Ceremony of this Sacrifice. About mid-night, the Person who offered, being bare-foot, made a Sig∣nal, having the Fingers of his hand joyned to his Thumb, whereby he fancied he kept off the bad Spirit or Phantom from him: Then he washed his hands in Spring Water, and putting black Beans into his mouth, threw them behind him, uttering these words, I deliver my self and mine by these Beans, making withal a deadly noise, with Pans and other Brass Vessels, which they did strike one against the other; desiring these Ghosts to withdraw, repeating nine times together that they should retire in peace without troubling any more the rest of the living. LERNA, A Lake, famous for the seven headed Hydra, defeated by Hercules. Out of this Lake came infectious Exhalations: And 'tis reported that the Denaides cast therein the heads of their Husbands, whom they Mur∣thered on their Wedding Night. LETHE, A River of Africa, which af∣ter a long course hides its self under ground,
and then appears again; wherefore Poets fancied, that all the dead drank a draught of its waters, to make them forget what was past. LEUCOTHEA. Ino the Wife of A∣thamas King of Thebes, who casting herself in∣to the Sea, together with her Son Melicerte, to avoid the fury of her Husband, who was attempting to murther her, was ranked by Neptune amongst the number of the Sea-Gods, and called Leucothea, or the break of day. LEUCOTHOE, The Daughter of Orchamus King of Babylon, beloved by Apollo, who enjoyed her, having introduced himself into her Chamber, under the shape of Eury∣nome her Mother. But Clythia, jealous of A∣pollo, having acquainted her Father with the same, he order'd that his Daughter should be buried alive, but Apollo took pity of her, and turn'd her into a Tree, out of which drops Frankincense. LEX, A Law. This word expresses the several Governments of States and Nations, and the Maxims they have agreed upon, or receiv'd from their Princes and Magistrates, to live in peace and mutual society; and in this sense we say the Laws of Solon and Lycur∣gus. The Laws of Draco were very rigorous and bloody. The Laws of the twelve Ta∣bles were the ancient Laws of the Romans, which the Decemviri fetch'd out of Greece, and made use of them to ground all their other Laws on. The Codex and Authenticae are the Laws and Ordinances of the Emperors. The Digest is a Compilation, made by Justini∣an's order of the several judgments and opi∣nions of the most learned in the Roman Law, and were received for Laws, as is or∣der'd by the Epistle at the beginning of that work; and 'tis that which composes the Ro∣man Laws. Moses, says Josephus, in the second Book of his Antiquities, was the first Law-giver, and Moses's Law was the first Law given to Men, many Ages before all other Legislators, and all other Laws; in fine, God gave it in a time when God only was able to give it, all Men (after the first Colonies of so many re∣mote Provinces) being fallen into incredible ignorance and confusion, and being then so far from giving Laws to themselves, that they were hardly able to receive them. Wherefore in Homer's time, and many Ages after him, there was yet no mention made, neither of Laws nor Legislators, States and Kingdoms being then govern'd not by Laws, but by their King's Ordinances and Customs recei∣ved among themselves. Lex Talionis is the most ancient and most just; and was observed by the Hebrews, and prescribed by the Law of Moses, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth, as 'tis said in the Gospel: Lex Talionis is natural Justice. Many famous Laws have been proposed by several Roman Magistrates, as the Falcidian Law made during the Triumvirat, to regulate last Wills. The Lex Julia, the Lex Cornelia, the Agrarian Law, the Sumptuarian Law, &c. Tacitus, in the third Book of his Annals, speaks thus of the Laws. Men formerly living without ambition and envy, had no occasion neither for Laws nor Magistrates to keep them in awe; and being voluntarily inclined to do good, had no need of a proposed reward to incite them to it; and as they desired nothing but what was lawful, nothing was forbad to them. But at last this equality being banish'd, Pride and Violence came in the room of Modesty and Shame. Some Nations were at first go∣vern'd by Laws, or had recourse to them after a long prevailing Authority. At the beginning Laws were simple as Mens minds, and Fame has principally celebrated those of Creta, Sparta and Athens, restor'd by Minos, Lycurgus and Solon; but these were more subtle, and in a greater number. Rome, during Romulus's Government, had no other Laws but the Will of the Prince. Numa esta∣blished Laws concerning Religion; Tullius, and Ancus made some politick regulations; but our great Law-giver is Servius Tullius, who bound even the Prince by Laws. Since the banishment of the Tarquins, the People found out some Laws to secure themselves from the oppression of great Men, and main∣tain Concord and Liberty. The Decemviri were afterwards chosen, and the most excel∣lent Laws of Greece gather together, out of them they compos'd the twelve Tables, which were the end of good Laws; for al∣though there were some regulations made a∣gainst wicked Men at the first appearing of Vice, nevertheless, the greatest part were settled by the dissentions of the People and the Senate, or established by the violence of some persons in dignity, to banish some il∣lustrious Men, and repress some other dis∣orders. From thence came the seditious Laws of Gracchus and Saturninus, and the Lat∣gesses of Drusus in the name of the Senate. The Wars of Italy, and then the Civil Wars gave occasion to several Ordinances contrary to one another; but at last the Dictator Sylla, chang'd or abolish'd the former, to establish his own. However, they were not lasting, tho' in great number; for soon after the People were in motion, by the turbulent Laws of Lepidus. Since that time there was nothing established but new regulations concerning every Crime, and the Commonwealth being
corrupted, the number of Laws became in∣finite. In fine, Pompey being chosen the re∣former of Manners, after he had found out Remedies worse than the Evils, saw his Laws perish with himself. And afterwards, during 25 years of Civil Wars, there was neither Laws nor Customs observ'd. But Augustus be∣ing elected Consul the sixth time, abolished the Laws which he had made during his un∣lawful Authority, and establish'd others to live in peace. And amongst other Laws, he made a Law concerning Marriage. The Romans had some Laws under their Kings, and some other in the time of their Commonwealth. Romulus was the first Law-giver of the Romans, according to the testi∣mony of Livy, Plutarch and Tully. There re∣main but some fragments of Romulus's Laws, related by Varro and Festus, the first whereof is here inserted. SEI PATRONOS CLIENTEI FRAU∣DEM FAXSIT, SACER ESTOD: If a Patron defraud his Client, let him be cursed. Servius quotes the fragment of this Law, as being taken out of the Laws of the twelve Tables; nevertheless, Romulus is doubtless the Author thereof, for 'tis thus expressed in Servius's Manuscript: Ex lege Romuli & XII. Tabularum. Si Patroxus Clienti Frandem Faxit, Sacer Esto. 'Tis yet true, according to the testimony of Dionysius Halicarnasseus and Livy, that Romulus had settled the rights of Clients and Patrons; and Scaliger and Cujacius report, that the Decemviri, who had compiled the Laws of the twelve Tables, and inserted therein the Laws made by the Kings: Ex his non dubium est leges Regias in XII. Tabulas à De∣cemviris conjectas fuisse; & primâ, secundâ, ter∣tiâ tabulâ leges Regias contineri; quia etiam leges Regias de patriâ potestate in quartam tabulam re∣latas autor est Dionysius. Whereby it doth ap∣pear, that the Laws made by the Kings, were inserted by the Decemvirs in the Law of the twelve Tables; and that the first, second and third Table, contained the Laws of the Kings; as also the Law concerning the power of Fathers over their Children, is co∣pied out of the fourth Table, as Dionysius Hali∣carnasseus tells us. Sei instead of Si. The Ancients in their Writings express thus the long i by the Dip∣thong ei, as it appears by Ancient Inscripti∣ons, and by this which is yet seen at Rome: Quod ejus Agrei, locei publicum populei Romanei erit. Patronos instead of Patronus. The Ancients often made use of the o instead of the u. Clientei instead of Clienti, by the same rea∣son of Sei instead of Si. Faxsit instead of Faxit, because of the harsh∣ness of the x. The Ancients added a Letter before or after the x, to make the pronuncia∣tion softer, as we see in the ancient Marbles, vicxit, juncxit, &c. Sacer Estod instead of Esto. The Ancients joined very often the letter d, after o at the end of a word, as it appears by the Column of Duellius, pugnandod. I have explained the meaning of this Law under the word Clientela; where the right of Patrons and Clients is expounded; for Romu∣lus allowed the people to chuse for themselves Patrons out of the body of the Nobles, and put themselves under their protection; and settled the reciprocal Rights of the Patron towards his Clients, and Clients towards their Patrons; and if they fail'd in the ob∣servation thereof, they devoted them to the Devil, and any Man might kill them, with∣out being punished by the Law. This is the meaning of these words Sacer Estod. The second Law of Romulus was expressed in these terms. SEI NOROS PARENTEM VERBE∣RIT, AST OLE PLORASIT, SACRA DIVEIS PARENTUM ESTOD. If a Daughter-in-law strikes her Father, and he complains of it, let her be cursed, and puxished by the Gods of the Fathers and Mothers. Besides these two Laws, the express terms whereof were kept till our time, there are still many others, the words whereof were lost by the misfortune of time, but the mean∣ing thereof is recorded by Latin Writers: There are sixteen mentioned by Dionysius Ha∣licarnasseus, Livy and Plutarch, some concern∣ing the Law of the Gods, and some others concerning the Civil Law. Here follows the first Law of the six, which concerns the Gods, related by Dionysius, Ha∣licarnasseus. I. NE QUID DEORUM FABULIS IN QUIBUS PROBRA EORUM ET CRI∣MINA COMMEMORARENTUR, AD∣HIBERETUR FIDEI: SED OMNES SANCTE, RELIGIOSE, CASTEQUE DE DIIS IMMORTALIBUS SENTI∣RENT ET LOQUERENTUR: NIHIL QUOD BEATIS NATURIS INDE∣CORUM AFFINGENTES. Not to believe what the Fable says of the Gods concerning their Crimes and Infamies, but to have Pious and Religious thoughts of them, and not to: speak of them but in a chaste way, ascribing no∣thing to them that is unbecoming blessed natures. The second Law is concerning the Holi∣ness of the Walls of a City. II. UT MURI SACRO-SANCTI ESSENT; NEVE QUIS NISI PER PORTAS UR∣BEM INGREDERETUR, NEVE EGRE∣DERETUR.
That the Walls of a City should be Sacred, and that no person should pass over them to come in or go out of the City, but only through the Gates. Upon this Law Plutarch in his Roman Que∣stions, Quest. 27. asks Why the Ancients consecrated the walls of their Cities, and not the Gates thereof? It was, answered he, to encourage the Citizens to defend them, out of respect to their holiness and consecra∣tion; and therefore Romulus ordered his Bro∣ther Remus to be murthered, because he had leapt over the Walls. But the Gates of Cities were neither holy nor consecrated, because all Provisions were brought in thereat, and the Corps of the dead were carried through the Gates out of the City to be burnt. Wherefore when they in∣tended to build the Walls of a City, they consulted the Augurs, and then drew a Line with a Plough drawn by an Ox and a Cow yok'd together, over that space of ground where the Walls were to be built, but did not drive the Plough over the place designed for the Gates of the City. This Ceremony is thus related by Plutarch; to which may be added, what Pomponius the Lawyer says, Si∣quis violaverit muros, capite puniter. III. NE QUIS EX ASYLOUT SACRO TU∣TOQUE LOCO VI ABSTRAHATUR. Let no man be drawn by vlolence out of a place of Refuge, where he has sheltered himself, as in a Sanctuary. These Sanctuaries were always Venerable amongst the Greeks and Romans. Cadmus was the first, who opened a refuge at Thebes, and those who retired thither, either Freemen or Slaves, were pardoned of the Crime they had committed. The Posterity of Hercules esta∣blished a Sanctuary at Athens. Tacitus com∣plains of the abuse made of places of refuge at Rome. The Reader may see what is said of them after the word Asylum. IV. NE QUID IN ADMINISTRATIONE REIPUBLICAE NISI AUGURATE FIE∣RET. That nothing should be done in the Government of the Republick, before the Augur was consulted to know the Will of the Gods. This is confirm'd by Tully, in his first Book de divinatione; and? by Dionysius Halicarnasseus, in the 2d Book of the Roman Antiquities, where he tells us, that Romulus being established King by the Will of the Gods, which he had consulted by taking the Au∣spices, he ordered that this custom should be religiously observed for the time to come, either in the Creation of Kings, or election of Magistrates, or in Affairs of great conse∣quence, wherein the Commonwealth was concerned. V. UT PENES REGES SACRORUM OM NIUM ET GRAVIORUM JUDICIO∣RUM ESSET ARBITRIUM ET POTE∣STAS: PATRICII EADEM SACRA CU∣STODIRENT ET CURARFNT, MAGI∣STRATUS SOLI REGERENT, JUSQUE DE LEVIORIBUS CAUSIS REDDE∣RENT: PLEBEII DENIQUE COLERENT AGROS, PECORA ALERENT, QUAE∣STUOSA EXERCERENT OFFICIA ET ARTES, NON TAMEN SELLULARIAS ET SORDIDAS, SERVIS, LIBERTINIS ET ADVENIS RELINQUENDAS. That Kings should have Soveraign Authority o∣ver Religious Matters, as also in the administrati∣on of Affairs of the greatest consequence belonging to the Law: that the Patricians should attend and take care of the Sacrifices; that they only should perform the office of the Magistrates, and admini∣ster Justice in cases of lesser moment: that the Ple∣beians should cultivate the Fields, feed the Cat∣tle, exercise Arts and Trades, except the vilest which were preserved for Slaves, Freedmen's Sons and Foreigners. Kings were the Overseers of Sacrifices, and joyned the power of Priesthood to the Royal Authority; wherefore the Romans having ex∣pelled the Kings, established a King whom they called Rex Sacrificulus, as we learn of Livy: Regibus exactis, & parta libertate, rerum deinde divinarum habita cura, & quia quaedam publica Sacra per ipsos factitata erant nec ubi Reguns desiderium esset, Regem sacrificulum creant: and the Wife of the King of the Sacrifices was called Regina, as Macrobius reports, l. 4. c. 15. The King administred Justice in causes concerning Witchcraft, publick Offences, Crimes of High Treason, under-hand Deal∣ings, sheltering of wicked Men, and unlaw∣ful Meetings. The Patricians performed the office of Infe∣riour Judges, in cases of Murthers, Fires, Robberies, publick Extortions, removals of Land-marks, and other Offences between private men. At first they were the only men who performed the office of Priesthood, but afterwards in the time of the Common-wealth, the offices of Religion were bestow∣ed upon Plebeians; for in the year ccccli. after the foundation of Rome, during the Consulat of Q. Apuleius Pansa and Marcus Valerius Co vi∣nus, five Augures were created out of the bo∣dy of the people. And in series of time they raised themselves to the High Priesthood. The Patricians only had a right to the Ma∣gistracy; but sixteen years after the Kings were banished Rome, it was conferred on the people, for in the year cccxli. after the foun∣dation of Rome, Quaestors were chosen out of the people; as also Tribunes out of the Sol∣diers
in the year cccliii. Some years after Consuls in the year ccclxxxviii. and other Magistrates called Aediles, Curules in the year ccclxxxix: Dictators in the year ccciic. Cen∣sors in the year ccciv. and in fine Praetors in the ccccxvii. but the interregnum only was left to the Patricians. VI. UT POPULUS ACCEDENTE SENA∣TUS AUCTORITATE, MAGISTRATUS CREARET, LEGES JUBERET, BELLA DECERNERET. That the People, with the Authority of the Se∣nate, should choose Magistrates, make Laws, and make the War. And this was done in the Assemblies of the people, either by Parishes, Tribes or Hundreds. VII. UT REGI MAGISTRATUIQUE AU∣GUSTIOR SEMPER IN PUBLICO ES∣SET HABITUS SUAQUE INSIGNIA. That the King and Magistrates should wear Ha∣bits of Distinction, and Badges of Honour. The Kings, Emperors and Consuls were cloathed with a Robe of State called Trabea, the painted Gown, and the Robe called Prae∣texta, mentioned in this Book in their order. VIII. UT SENATUS PUBLICUM ESSET ET COMMUNE CIVITATIS CONSI∣LIUM, ET IN EUM PATRICIIS TANTUM PATERET ADITUS. That the Senate should be the common Council of the City of Rome and the Empire and that the Patri∣cians only should be admitted into it. Romulus at first instituted one hundred Se∣nators; to whom he added the like number eight years after, because of the Peace con∣cluded with the Sabins. Tarquinius Priscus in∣creased that number to an hundred more: Since, during the Triumvirat, their number was augmented to nine hundred, and after∣wards to a thousand; but Caesar Augustus re∣duced that number. IX. UT COLONI ROMANI MITTEREN∣TUR IN OPPIDA BELLO CAPTA, VEL SALTEM HOSTES VICTI FRANGEN∣DIS ILLORUM VIRIBUS AGRI MUL∣TARENTUR PARTE. That the Romans should send Roman Colonies into the Conquered Cities, or at least that the Ene∣mies should forfeit one part of their Lands. Tacitus speaks thus of this custom in the 11th Book of his Annals, c. 12. Do we repent to have been seeking for the Family of the Balbi in Spain, or others no less il∣lustrious in Gallia Narbonensis? Their Po∣sterity flourishes still amongst us, and bear an equal love with us for their Country What is the cause of the ruin of Sparta and Athens, tho very flourishing Cities, but u∣sing the vanquished like Slaves, and refu∣sing them entrance into their Common-wealths. Romulus was much wiser in ma∣king Citizens of his Enemies in one day. X. ANNUS ROMANUS DECEM ESSET MENSIUM. That the Roman year should contain ten months. This year began with March, Numa added two Months to it, viz. January and February, and ordered that the year should begin with January. See what is said under the word Annus. XI. UT MULIER QUE VIRO JUXTA SA∣CRATAS LEGES NUPSIT, ILLI SA∣CRORUM FORTUNARUM QUE ESSET SOCIA, NEVE EAM DESERERET; ET QUEMADMODOM ILLE FAMILIAE DO∣MINUS, ITA HAEC FORET DOMINA; NEQUE DEFUNCTO VIRO, NON SE∣CUS AC FILLIA PATRI HERES ESSET, IN PORTIONEM QUIDEM AEQUAM, SI LIBERI EXTARENT; EX ASSE VE∣RO SI MINUS. That a Woman who had married a Man accord∣ing to the Sacred Laws, should participate of the Sacrifices and Wealth with her Husband, that she should be Mistress of the Family, as he was him∣self the Master thereof, that she should inherit his Estate in an equal portion like one of his Children, if there was any born during their Marriage, other∣wise she should inherit all. By the Sacred Laws in Marriages, it must be understood either the Marriages solemni∣zed with a Ceremony called Confarreatio, which was performed with a Cake of Wheat, in presence of ten Witnesses, and with Sacri∣fices and Forms of Prayers: And the Chil∣dren born of this Marriage were called con∣farreatis Parentibus geniti; or the Marriages made ex coemptione, by a mutual bargain, from whence the Wives were called Matres Familias, Mothers of Families. These two kinds of Marriages are called by ancient Law∣yers Justae nuptiae, to distinguish them from a third kind of Marriage called Matrimonium ex usu Injustae nuptiae, Concubinage. The Society of Sacrifices and Wealth, wherein the Wife had her share, must be un∣derstood of private Sacrifices, offered in some Families, practiced amongst the Romans as upon Birth-days, and day of Expiations and Funerals, which the Posterity and Heirs were bound to observe. Wherefore Plautus says, That a great Estate was fallen to one, without being obliged to offer any Families Sacrifice, se haereditatem adeptum esse sine sacris effertissan. The Wife was to be the Mistress of the Family, as the Husband Master. It was a
custom used amongst the Romans; that when the Wife set her Foot upon the threshold of the door of the House of her Husband, they asked her who she was, and she answered Caia sum, I am Caia; because Caia Caecilia Wife to Tarquinius Priscus, was much given to Huswife∣ry and Spinning, and from thence is come the custom, that Brides coming into the House of their Husband, answered that they were called Caia: Caeterum Caia usu super omnes est celaebrata; fertur enim Caiam Caeciliam, Tar∣quinii Prisci uxorem, optimam lanificam fuisse, & ides institutum esse, ut novae nuptae ante januam mariti interrogatae, quaenam vocarentur, Catam se esse dicerent. And Plutarch in the thirtieth Roman Questi∣on tells us, That the Husband said to his Wife at her first coming to his house, Ego Caius, and she answered Ego Caia. XII. UT MATRONIS DE VIA DECEDE∣RETUR, NIHIL OBSCOENI PRESEN∣TIBUS IIS VEL DICERETUR. VEL FI∣ERET, NEVE QUIS NUDUM SE AB IIS CONSPICI PATERETUR, ALIOQUIN CRIMINIS CAPITALIS REUS HABE∣RETUR. That they should give way to Ladies of Quality, that no obscenity should be either spoken nor done in their presence, and that no Man should be seen na∣ked in their presence, if otherwise he should he guilty of a capital Crime. XIII. UT MONSTROSOS PARTUS NECA∣RE PARENTIBUS LICERET. That it should be lawful to Parents to put their Children to Death, if they were born Monstrous. But they were obliged to call for Witnesses to justi∣fie that they were Monsters, says Dionysius Halicar∣nassaus XIV. UT PARENTIBUS LIBEROS RELI∣GANDI, VENDENDI, OCCIDENDI JUS, ALIISQUE MODIS DE EIS STATUEN∣DI PLENA POTESTAS ESSET. That Fathers should have a Soveraign Authority over their Children, confine them, sell them, and put them to death, and dispose of them which way they should think fit. XV. UT SI QUA IN RE PECCASSET MULIER POENAM LUERET EX MA∣RITI ARBITRIO: SI VENEFICIJ CIR∣CA PROLEM VEL ADULTERII ESSET ACCUSATA, COGNITIONEM, EJUS REI VIR ET COGNATI MULIERIS HABERENT; SIN CONVICTA ESSET, EX ILLORUM SENTENTIA MULTA∣RETUR: SI VINUM BIBISSET DOMI UT ADULTERA PUNIRETUR. SI VIR EX∣TRA VENEPICIUM NATORUM VEL ADULTERIUM MULIEREM REPUDI∣ASSET, RERUM EJUS PARS UXORI DARETUR, PARS AUTEM CERERI CEDERET. If a Wife was found faulty, her Husband pu∣nished her according to his pleasure: If she had Poysoned her Children, or committed Adultery, the Husband and her Kindred inquired into the fact, and if she was found guilty, they inflicted what Pu∣nishments they pleased upon her: If she drunk Wine, she was punished like an Adulteress: If the Hus∣band put away his Wife for any other cause besides Poysoning or Adultery, part of his Wealth was gi∣ven to the Wife, and part to Ceres. The Roman Matrons were forbidden to drink Wine, and their Husbands had pow∣er to kill them when they had drunk any, as Pliny assures, l. 14. c. 13. Non licebat vinum Romanis feminis bibere Invenemus inter exempla Egnatii Mecennii uxorem, quod vinum bibisset edo∣lio, interfectam fuisse a marito, eumque caedis a Ro∣mulo absolutum. Cato ideo propinquos feminis os∣culum dare instituit ut scirent antemetum olerent, (hoc tum nomen vina erat.) Wherefore Cato or∣dered, that married Women should kiss their Relations, to know if they smelt of Wine. XVI. UT OMNES PARRICIDAE CAPITE PLECTERENTUR. That all Parricides should be punished with Death. The following Laws were made by Numa the second King of the Romans. PISCES quei squamosei non sunt, nei pol∣luceto: squamosos omnes praeter Scarum polluceto: Do not offer in sacrifice to the Gods Fishes without scales, but only those which are scaly except the Scarum. SARPTA vinea nei siet, ex ea vinum Di∣is libarier nefas estod: 'Tis not lawful to offer to the Gods Wine, of the growth of a Vine that was never pruned. Festus explaining the word Sarpta, says Sarpta vinea putata, i. e. pura facta. Sarpere enim Antiqui pro purgare ponebant. For the Gods accepted of no Sacrifices, but those that were pure. The Ancients offered pure Wine to the Gods, uttering these words: Mactus hoc vino inferio esto. We will speak of it under the words Sacrificium and Libatio. QUOJUS auspicio clase procincta operma spolia capiuntur, Joves Feretrio bovem caedito, quei cepit aeris trecentum darier oporteto, secunda spolia endo Martis asam endo campo suove tauriliad, utra volet, caedito; quei cepit aeris ducentum darier opor∣teto: quotos auspicio capta Diis piacolom dato. Plutarch assures us, that he had read in the Annals of the Pontiffs, that Numa had spoken of the spoils called Opima, that one General had taken from another, and ordered that the first should be consecrated to Jupiter Feretrius,
the second to Mars, and the third to Quirlnus. Quojus instead of Cujus, an ancient word. Clase procincta, this word signifies an Army drawn into a line of battel, according to Fe∣stus; wherefore the Ancients called an Army Classis clupcata: opeima spolia instead of opima spolia, Spoils that the General of an Army took from another, as Festus says; and they are called opima, as he tells us, because such Spoils are but seldom got, and this happen'd but three times to the Roman Empire; once Ro∣mulus took spoils from Acron; a second time Gornelius Cossus took them from Tolumnius; and a third time, Marcus Marcellus got them from Viridomar and consecrated them to Ju∣piter Feretrius, as 'tis observed by Livy. Quei instead of qui cepit, aeris instead of aeris, ccc darier instead of dari, oporteto instead of oportet. Endo Martis asam instead of in Martis aram, endo campo instead of in campo, suove tauralia instead of sue, ove, tauro, a Sacrifice, where a Hog, a Sheep and a Bull were offer'd. SEI QUIS hemonem leiberom sciens dolo malo mortei duit, parricidad estod. Sei im imprudens, se dolo malod occisit, pro kapito occisei & nateiis ejus endo conscione arietem subjicito. If any body kill willingly and out of malice a Freeman, let him be declared a Parricide: if he doth it unwillingly, let him sacrifice in a full as∣sembly, a Ram for the life he had taken away. Sei instead of si, leiberom instead of liberum, mortei instead of morti, duit instead of dedit, parricidad instead of parricida, estod instead of esto, occisit instead of occidit, kapito instead of capite, occisei instead of occisi, nateiis instead of natis, endo instead of in, sobjicito instead of subjicito. Amongst the Athenians, he who had com∣mitted a Crime, was bound to offer a Ram for expiation. MULIER quae praegnans mortua ne huma∣tor, antequam partus ei excidatur; quei secus faxit, spei animantis cum gravidâ occisa reus estod. Ne∣gat lex Regia, says Marcellus the Lawyer, mulie∣rem quae praegnans mortua sit humari, antequam partus ei excidatur: qui contra fecerit, spem ani∣mantis cum gravida peremisse videtur. This Law of Numa forbids in express terms, to bury a Woman who died in labour, before her Child was taken out of her Body; and whosoever neglected to observe this Law, was accounted the murtherer of both the Child and the Mother. Valerius Maximus reports, that one Gorgias came out of his Mothers belly, when she was carrying to her Grave, and by his crying stopt those, who carried her Corps to be buri∣ed. SEI hemonem folminis occisit, im sopera gena nei tollito; sei folmine occisus escit, eei justa nulla Fieri oporteto. This Law is not clearly expressed, and can't be understood, but by considering the Customs observ'd by the Romans, in the Fu∣nerals of their Dead. Muma did not allow, that those who were killed by Thunder, should be carried upon shoulders like other dead, nor that any Cere∣mony should be performed at their Funerals, because they were dead by the wrath of the Gods. Folminis is written instead of fulmen, for the Ancients had no Nominative terminated in en. Sopera instead of supra, nei instead of us. VEINO rogum ne resparcito: That the pile of wood should not be moistned with Wine, but with Milk. PELEX asam Junonis ne tagito, sei tagit, Junonei crenebis dimiseis acuam feminam cadito. Let no Harlot touch the Altar of Juno; and if she do, let her be sentenced to sacrifice a young Sheep to her, having her Hair dishe∣vell'd. Asam instead of aram, tagito instead of tan∣gito, crenebis instead of crinibus, dimiseis instead of dimissis, acuam instead of agnam. By this Law, a married Man was not al∣lowed to marry another Woman. It was a custom in Marriages, for the Woman to take hold on the corner of the Altar of Juno. SI QUIS, aliuta faxit, ipsos Jovei sacet estod. Aliuta instead of aliter. We have but this fragment of this Law, the rest was lost by the misfortune of time. Here are still some other Laws of Numa, the words whereof were lost, but the mean∣ing is yet found in Writers, The first is concerning the Nature of God, the sense whereof is contained in these words. NE QUIS Deum, vel homines speciem, vel animalis alicujus formam habere existimaret: Let no man ascribe to God, either the figure of a Man, nor any Animal whatsoever. It seems by this Law, that Numa was well acquainted with the command of God in the 20 Chap. of Exodus. Thou shalt not make unto thy self any graven Image, or the like∣ness of any thing that is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the waters under the ground. AD DEUS caste adiretur, pietas adhiberetur, opes amoverentur. Separatim nemo Deos habera neve novos, neve advenas, nisi publice adscitos pri∣vatim colerent. Sacra Diis instituta sancte servo∣rentur; fruge molaque salsa litaretur. Templ Diis constructa profanis usibus ne polluerentur Templum Jani belli pacisque indicium esset: That they should draw near but with Purity and Piety, and remove Riches from them: That no body should have new or particular Gods:
That the Sacrifices instituted in honour of the Gods, should be religiously observed: That they should powr salted dough upon the Victims: That Temples built in ho∣nour of the Gods, should not be defiled by any profane use: That the Temple of Janus should be the Signal both of Peace and War. Wherefore in time of War the Temple of Janus was always open, and was only shut in time of Peace. UT DIVIS, aliis alii sacerdotes essent. Curiones triginta sacra Curiarum quibus praefecti curarent; proque Curialibus publice rem divinam facerent. Tres Flamines, Dialis, Jovi, Martialis Marti, Quirino Quirinalis, assidui sacerdotes essent. Tribunus Celerum sacris sibi assgnatis operam daret. Augures signa de Coelo servarent, publica que a pri∣vatis discernerent, quaeve vitiosa dirave dixerunt, irrita scaevaque haberentur. Vestales Virgines ig∣nem foci publici in urbe sempiternum custodirent, quae stupri convictae, ad portam Collinam vivae de∣foderentur; qui vitiasset, virgis in foro ad mor∣tem caederetur. Salii duodecim Deorum belli praesi∣dum universim laudatores, Marti Gradivo sacra in Palatio celebrarent. Feciales foederum, pacis, in∣duciarum oratores judicesque essent; viderent sedu∣lo ne ulli foederatae civitati injustum bellum infer∣retur, de Lagatorum judicarent injuriis: Si quid Imperatores contra jusjurandum pecassent, cognosce∣rent & expiarent. Pontifices denique de omnibus causis, que ad sacra, tam inter sacerdotes quam Profanos, judicarent; novas leges de sacris ex sua sententia & arbitratu conderent; sacerdotes omnes examinarent, sacrorum Ministros in Officio contine∣rent; de Deorum Geniorumque cultu, totoque Re∣ligionum ac Caerimoniarum negotio consulentes doce∣rent: Prescripta a se contemnentes pro delicti qua∣litate & magnitudine multarent; nullius potestati essent abnoxii. That each God should have his particular Priests: That thirty Curions or Priests should be appointed to the thirty Ro∣man Curiae or Parishes to offer Sacrifices. Three Priests called Flamines, the first where∣of appointed for Jupiter, should be called Di∣alis; the second for Mars, Martialis, and the third for Quirinus, Quirinalis: That he who was called Tribunus Celerum, should perform the Sacrifices that belonged to him: That the Augures should observe the Signs of Heaven, and distinguish those that have a regard to publick Affairs, from those that belong to pri∣vate Concerns; taking particular notice of all that were evil and direful: That the Vestal Virgins should take care without Intermissi∣on of the sacred Fire: That if any of them suffer herself to be defiled, she should be bu∣ried alive out of the Gate called Collina, and the Man who had debauched her, should be whipp'd to death in the publick place: That there should be twelve Priests called Salit, to Sacrifice to Mars, appoint Gradivas in the Pa∣lace: That the Officers called Feciales should be Judges in Affairs concerning Confedera∣cies, Peace and Truce: That they should take care that no injust War should be car∣ried on against the Confederates of the Ro∣man People: That they should judge of wrongs done to Ambassadours; and if the Generals of the Armies had broke their word, they should make atonement for their faults: That the Pontiffs should be Judges in Affairs concerning Religion, between both Priests and Laymen: That they should make new Laws according to their own mind con∣cerning Sacrifies: That they should examine the Priests, and keep them to their Duty: That they should give reasons for the Wor∣ship of Gods and Genius's, and of all the Religious Ceremonies practised therein, to those that should inquire of them about the same: That those who should despise their Ordinances, should be punished by them, according to their faults; and that they should be subject to none. All these Laws are mentioned by Livy, Plutarch and Florus: And the reason that St. Austin gives for the Multiplicity of these Priests, is, that having so great a number of Gods, they were afraid they should be con∣founded one with another. ANNUS duodecim esset mentium: That the year should be of twelve of Months. Two Months were added to the year of Romulus, viz. January and February. DIES omnes in fastos, nefastosque distribueren∣tur: That the days should be divided in ho∣ly days and working days. UT SI Pater filio concesserit uxorem ducere, quae futura illi juxta leges sacrorum bonorumque omnium particeps, eidem patri postea nullum jus vendendi filium esset: That if a Father has giv∣en leave to his Son to marry, his Wife comes into a common propriety to the Goods with him, and the Father after that cannot sell his Son. UT CONTRACTUS dubii & sine testibus fide ac jurejurando terminaretur, utique Magistratus ac Judices in dubiis causis ex alterius fide & Sacramento suam interponerent sentmeti∣am: That doubtful Contracts made with∣out Witnesses should be certified by Oath, and that the Judges should give Judment in doubtful Causes upon the Oath of one of the Parties.
These were the Laws made by the Kings. Tullus Hostilius the third King of the Romans established a Law, That when a Woman should bring forth three Children at one Birth, they should be brought up at the pub∣lick charges, till they came to Age. UT trigeminis, quoties nascerentur, alimenta ex publico, iisque ad pubertatem darentur. He renewed again the Law of Romulus, concerning the Officers called Feciales: Ut Feciales foederum, belli pacis, induciariumque Ora∣tores Judicesque essent & bella disceptarent. Tarquinius Priscus made these following Laws. UT Regia Romanorum Majestas corena aurea, sceptro, sella eburnea, togapicta, Lictoribus duode∣cim, aliisque ornamentis insignis esset. That Kings should wear a Crown of Gold, with a Scep∣ter in their hand; that they should have an Ivory Chair, with an Embroidered Robe; and that twelve Lictors should walk before them. Ut quisque civis veram bonorum suorum, quae, qualiacumque essent, astimationem Jurejurando pro∣baret, probatamque ad Regem deferret, genus item, aetatem, nomina uxorum, liberorum, familiae que omnis: quae, cujus generis praedia, quis servorum pecudumque numerus, quae qualiacunque fundorum Instrumenta singulatim sine dolo malo profiteretur, quaque urbis in parte, uove extra urbem loco habi∣taret suas que res possideret sancte indicaret; qui secus fecisset, bonis publicatis civitatem amitteret, caesusque virgis sub hasta veniret: That each Citi∣zen should be bound to bring to the King an account of all his Goods whatsoever, and certifie by Oath the truth thereof; as also to declare his Family, and his own Age, the name of his Wife, Children, and all his Fa∣mily; and tell the number of his Fields, and what they were proper for, and the whole without any fraud: That if any fail∣ed therein, he lost the Citizen's freedom, and forfeited his Goods; he should be whip∣ped, and then sold by publick Sale. UT QUISQUE Pater familias pro nascentibus quidem ad aedem Junonis Lucina, pro sumentibus vero togam virilem ad Juventutis; pro desunctis denique ad Libitinae certas stipes pen∣derent, easque quotannis Aeditui in tabulas refer∣rent, ex quibus puerorum, puberum ac mortuorum certus numerus singulis annis cognosceretur: That each Master of a Family should give a cer∣tain sum of Money to the Temple of June Lucina, for new born Children; another to the Temple of Youth, when their Chil∣dren put on the toga virilis, and a third to the Temple of the Goddess Libytina when they died. The Sextons of the Temple were bound to keep Registers of the names of those for whom these presence were made to the Goddesses, that it might be known what number of Children were born, how many had put on the toga virilis, and how many were dead. UTI in Tribus urbanus atque jus civitatis servi ab civibus Romanis manumissi, qui vellent ad sciscerentur; & libertini ad omnia plebeiorum admitterentur munia: That Slaves freed by the Romans might be admitted into the Tribes of the City, if they desired it, and enjoy the freedom of Citizens; and that Freemen's Children should be received in all Offices like the Roman People. NE QUIS ob debitum foenus in vincula traheretur, neve faeneratoribus jus in libera corpora sed debitorum contenti facultatibus essent: That no body should be put in Prison for Debt; and that Creditors should have no right o∣ver free Persons, but should be contented with the substance of their Debtors. We have but this Law of Tarquinius Super∣bus. Uti facrorum causa quotannis semel in moutem Albanum Romani Latinique nomine populi Romani a supreme Magistratu Romano cogerentur: Jovi Latiali consensu communi sacra facturi, ferias & mercatus celebraturi & una epulaturi: That e∣very year the Soveraign Magistrate of Rome should Summons the Romans and Latins up∣on Mount Albanus, to offer unanimously a Sacrifice to Jupiter Latialis, and keep there a Holy-day, a Market and a Feast together. These are all the Laws made by the Kings, which Sextus Papirius a Lawyer has collected into a body, to preserve them to Posterity, which are called after his name Jus Papiri. We must now speak of the Laws made du∣ring the Commonwealth, whereof some were established by the Decemviri, others by the Consuls, Dictators, and Tribunes of the people. The Laws of the Decemviri, comprehend∣ed under the names of the Laws of twelve Tables, were most considerable; for they were collected from the Republicks of Greece, and the most just customs of the Ro∣mans and other Nations to which the Royal Laws were added. This Collection was made with great care and deliberation by the most able Men a∣mongst the Romans: Then the Decemviri cal∣led an Assembly of the Senate, to whom they proposed these Laws to be examined. The Senate, after a serious consideration, u∣nanimously approved of them by a Decree; and the people afterwards confirmed them
by a Plebicitum, in an Assemby of Hundreds. Then they were Ingraved upon Brass Plates, exposed in the publick place. This was done cociii after the Foundation of Rome: And the following year, something being yet wanting for the perfection of the Roman Law, the Decemviri added still two other Brass Ta∣bles, to the ten before mentioned, which made up the number of twelve. Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, Livy and Plutarch speak at large of these Laws, and may be consulted there∣upon, by those who would have a full know∣ledge of them. Finally, Tully prefers these Laws to all the libraries in the World, l. 1. de Orat. Est in duodecim Tabulis Antiquitatis Effi∣gies, quod & verborum prisca vetustas cognoscitur, & actionum genera quaedam Majorum consuetudi∣nem vitamque declarant: Sive quis civilem scien∣tiam contempletur, totam hanc, descriptis omnibus ci∣vitatis utilitatibus ac partibus, duodecim Tabulis con∣tineri videbitis: Sive quem ista praepotens & Glori∣asa Philosophia delectat, dicant audacius hosce ha∣bet fontes omnium disputationum suarum, qui jure civili & legibucontinentur. Bibliothecas mehercle omnium Philosophorum, unus mihi videtur xii. Ta∣bularum libellas, si quis legum fontes & capita vi∣deret, & auctoritatis pondere & utilitatis ubertate superare. These Laws were lost by the misfortune of time, there remains only some fragments thereof, dispersed in the Books of several Authors, which we will insert here for the Reader's sake. PRAECO fonus endeicito: quom fonus ec∣fertor, nei encorumitiato: That the publick Cryer invite to the Funerals; and during the time of the Burial, let no Assembly meet. Fonus instead of funus, endeicito instead of in∣dicito, quom instead of quum, ecfertor instead of est efferendum, nei instead of ne, encomitiato in∣stead of ito in comitium. These were the words used by the publick Cryer, when he invited the People to the Funerals of the Great Men of Rome: OL∣LUS QUIRIS LETO DATUS EST, or L. TITIUS VIXIT, L. TITIO EX∣EQUIAS IRE CUEI COMMODUM EST, JAM TEMPUS EST, OLLUS EFFERTUR: Lucius Titius is dead; those who have time to come to his Burial, 'tis time, they are carrying the Corps out of the House. MOLIERES fa cium nei carpunto, neive cenat radunto; lesum foneris nec habento. These three fragments are found in several Writers. This law ordered the mourning, and pre∣scribed bounds to grief. Molieres is here written instead of mulieres, nei instead of ne, conas instead of genas. This law forbids Women to tear their fa∣ces, and make lamentions. Tully assures us, l. 2. Tuscul. that this law was made by Solon, and collected by the De∣cemviri: Postea quàm, ut scribit Phalereus, sump∣tuosa fieri funera & lamentabilia coepissent, Solonis lege sublata sunt, quam legem iisdem propè verbis nostri Decemviri in decimam tabulam conjece∣runt. ENDO fonere tribos ricinieis, ricâ porporeâ, decemque tibicinebos vetier liceto: hoc plous nei facito. Endi instead of in, fonere instead of funere, tribos ricineis instead of tribus ricinieis, porporeâ, instead of purpureâ, tibicinebos instead of tibi∣cinibus, vetier instead of utier. It was ordain∣ed by this Law, that Women should be dressed with three Gowns of purple colour, and that only ten Pipers should be employ'd in Funeral Pomps. SERVALIS unctura, circumpot atioque, quom fonus exsequiantor, neive respersio fuat; acerras sepolchris aut longas koronas nei endep∣nito. This Law forbad to anoint the Corps of Slaves, and make a Funeral Feast at their Burials, and effusions of Wine, or Crown their Graves with Garlands, or burn Frank∣insence. Servalis instead of Servilis, quom instead of cùm, fonus instead of funus, exsequiantor in∣stend of exsequius ire, nei instead of ne, fuat instead of fiat, sepolcris instead of sepulcris, ko∣ronas instead of coronus, endeponito instead of imponito. MURINAM mertuo nei endito: That they should not make use of that excellent drink at Funerals. Writers don't agree about the composi∣tion of that artificial Drink; but all unani∣mously say, that it was very chargeable: Wherefore the Decemviri, who intended to lessen the great Charges of Persons of Qua∣lity's Funerals, forbad the use thereof. PLUSA fonera unei nei facito, neive plu∣ses lectos endoserto. It was not allowed to have many Beds carried in Funeral Pomps. Notwithstand∣ing, Augustus honoured Marcellus's Funeral with six hundred Beds; and there were six thousand reckoned at the Funeral of Sylla. This was accounted a great honour: As for the common People, their Corps were only carried in Coffins.
Plusa instead of plura, fonera instead of fu∣nera, unei instead of uni, pluses instead of plures, endoserto instead of inserto. AUSUM in fonere nei addito: ast quoi auso denteis vinctei sieut, im cum ole sepelire ure∣reve se fraude liceto. Ausum instead of aurum, ast instead of at, quoi instead of cui, auso instead of auro, den∣teis instead of dentes, vinctei instead of vincti, ole instead of illo. It was forbidden to burn Gold with the Corps of the dead, unless his teeth were tied with golden Thread: For in this case it was not lawful to burn it with the Corps. ROGUM asciâ nei poleito: That the pile of Wood should not be of polished Wood, but of Wood as it grows. HONORATORUM virorum lau∣des endo conscione memorantor, easque naeniae ad tibicinem prosequantor: That the Funeral Speech of Illustrious Persons should be made in publick, and that lamentations should be sung, at the sound of Musical In∣struments. P. Valerius Publicola was the first who made publickly the Funeral Speech of Junius Bru∣tus his Colleague in the Consulat. This custom was afterwards followed by others during the Commonwealth, and in the time of the Emperors. DOMINUS foneris endo ludeis Accenso, Lictorebosque actitor. Endo instead of in, ludeis instead of ludis, Lictorebosque instead of Lictoribusque, octitor in∣stead of utitor: That the President of the Funerals, should make use of the Officers Accensi and Lictores in the Games. Dominus ludorum, the Master of the Games, whom Augustus first named, according to Quintilian Munerarius. This custom of re∣presenting Games to honour the Funerals of great Men, is very ancient, since Homer and Virgil make mention thereof. These Games were solemnized with Fights of Gladiators or Horse-races. HOMINI mortuo osa nei lecito, quo post fonus faciat, extra quam sei quis foris militiaeque mortuos siet. This Law is mentioned by Tully, l. 11. de Legib. HOMINI, inquit, mortuo ossa ne legito, quo post funus faciat: excipit bellicam peregrinamque mortem. And afterward he ex∣plains this Law: Ut posteaquam corpus cre∣matam esset, ossa à cineribus legantur, statimque loco proximo in terram condantur, ne, si alium in locum sepeliendi causâ deportarentur, luctus du∣plicaretur & sumtus; left they would renew the Mourning and Charges. Those who died in the Wars or foreign Countries, whose Bones were brought to Rome, to be laid in the Sepulchre of their Ancestors, were exempted from this Law. 'Tis true that the Bones of those Men, who died in the War or foreign Countries were burned; except one of their Fingers, which was cut off and brought again to Rome, to receive the Funeral honours performed to the dead, as we learn of Festus. Membrum abscindi mor∣tuo dicebatur quum digitus ei decidebatur; ad quod servatum justa ficrent, reliquo corpore com∣busto. HOMINEM mortuum endo urbe nei sepeleito, neve urito: That the Corps should not be neither buried nor burnt in the City. This Law is related by Tully: HOMI∣NEM mortuum, inquit lex duodecim, in urbe ne sepelito, eve urito. Nevertheless, Great-Men, Emperors and Vestal Virgins have been excepted from this Law; for Valerius Publicola and Posthumius Tubertus were buri∣ed below the Capitol, as also the Claudias Family; but the other Citizens were bu∣ried in their own Lands, or in the High-ways of Rome. PATRI endo fidiom qui ex se matreque familias natus est, vitai necisque potestas estod; terque im venundarier jous estod: sel pater fi∣diom ter venomduit, fideos d patre leber estod: That the Father should have power of life and death over his Son, begotten of him and his Wfe in a lawful Marriage: that he might sell him three times like a Slave; but having been sold three times, he became free again, and was no more under his Fa∣ther's Authority. Endo instead of in, fidiom instead of filium, vitai instead of vitae, estod instead of esto, im instead of eum, venundarier instead of venun∣dari, jous instead of jus, sei instead of si, venomdui: instead of venundederit, fidios in∣stead of filius, leber instead of liber. The Father's Authority was great among the Romans; and the Emperor Justinian tells us, that this Right was particular to the Romans: Jus potestatis quod habemus in libe∣ros proprium est civium Romanorum. Nulli enim sunt homines, qui talem in liberos habeant potesta∣tem, qualem nos habemus. Dionysius Halicarnassaeus says, that this sove∣raign Authority was granted to the Fa∣thers by Romulus: Hanc autem potestatem nei recentem fuisse, sed jam inde ab Romulo per∣missam.
In the time of the Emperors, it was not lawful for Fathers to kill their Children, nor to make them Slaves; nor to disinhe∣rit them, but in some cases of great conse∣quence, which they were obliged to declare before the Praetor. PATREI libereis suis quosque habet in potestate cujuscumque sexûs, tutoris testamento dandi jous estod: That a Father might ap∣point Tutors to his Children by his Last Will. SI QUIS tutor pupillum fraudarit rem∣que ejus intervorterit, infamiâ notator peuâque moltator duplionis: If a Guardian defrauds his Pupil and waste his Estate, let him be brand∣ed with infamy, and fined the double of the Trespass. For a Guardian is not only bound to give an account of what he has received out of the Estate of his Pupil, but also of all that he might or could honestly have received, and that with as much and more diligence, than if it was his own affairs; and if he was convicted of having fraudulently dealt in that matter, he was not only bound to a single restitution of what he had taken or converted to his own use, but also to pay the double of the Trespass by Action, cal∣led by the Lawyers, de rationibus distrahendis, and was branded with infamy. SEI Fousiosos esit, adnatorum, genteiliumque endo eo pequniâque ejus potestas estod. Si furiosus est, agnatorum gentiliuque in eo pecuniâque ejus potestas esto. 'Tis enacted by this Law of the twelve Tables, that if a Pupil who is come to age, becomes a fool, or mad, and uncapable of managing his own Estate, he must be left to the Guardianship of his nearest Relations, who are to take care of his Estate and Person. PATER familias, utei soper familiâ pe∣cuniâque souâ lagasit, ita jous estod. That the Master of the Family should have power to dispose of his Estate by his last Will. Utei instead of uti, soper instead of super, souâ instead of suâ, legasit instead of legaverit, jous instead of jus, estod instead of esto. By the Law of the twelve Tables, which is the most ancient Law of the Romans, it was allowed to a Testator to dispose of his Estate which way he thought fit; but most often, when Testators had thus disposed of their wealth in private Legacies, the Exe∣cutors of the Will seeing that there remain∣ed nothing for them, quitted it, and by this means the whole Will was made void, and the Legatees got nothing. Wherefore to prevent this premunire, the Law called Fal∣cidia was made, by which it was enacted, that Testators should have power to dispose by their Last Will, but of three fourth parts of their Wealth, and should be bound to leave the other fourth part to the Heir appointed by their Will. And therefore this Law is called Quarta Falcidia, or only Falcidia, which was made a little time be∣fore the Empire of Augustus, during the Trium-virat. FILII filiaeque familias bonorum paterno∣rum sui suaeque heredes sunto. The Law of the twelve Tables instituted but two kinds of Heirs or Inheritors abiu∣testat, i. e. without making a Will, viz. suorum and agnatorum, of Children and Kin∣dred. The Male line was so much regarded in the ancient Roman Law, and the Female so neglected, that Children did not inherit the Goods of their Mother, and the Mother was no Heir to her Childrens Estate: But afterwards a decree of the Senate was made, setting a mutual Succession, viz. Orficia∣num jus, impowering Children to inherit after their Mother, and Tertyllianum jus, set∣tling the right of Mothers to the Inheri∣tance of their Children. SEI QUA molier post virei mortem in decem proximeis mensebos pariat, quei, quave ex eâ nascatur, souus, suave, in virei familia heres estod. If a Woman is delivered of a Child ten Months after the death of her Husband, let the Child born, either Boy or Girl, be Heir to his Father. Ulpian's opinion is, that a Child born eleven Months after the death of his Father, is not able to inherit, post decem menses mortis natus non admittitur ad legitimain hereditatem: However, the Emperor Adrian has declared, that an honest woman lying in the eleventh month after the death of her Husband, the Child then born, might lawfully inherit his Fathers Estate, grounded therein upon the authority of Physicians and Philosophers. Wherefore Varro says, in a Satyr intitled Testamentum. Si quis undecimo mense  natus, esto heres. Whereupon Cujacius tells us, that this must be understood of the eleventh month began, and not over.
PATREBOS cum plebed counubia nec sunto: That Marriages should be forbidden, between the Patricians and Plebeians, i. e. between the Nobles and the People. By making this Law, which was afterwards repealed, the Deoerviri attempted to breed divisions between the Nobility and the Po∣pulace, and by that means render their Magistracy perpetual. SEI VIR aut molier alter alterei non∣tiom miseit, devortium ested; molier res souas sibei habetod, vir molierei claves adimitod exi∣citoque. Sei for si, molier for mulier, alterei for alteri nontiem miseit for nuntium misit, devortiem for divortium, estod for esto, sonas for suas, sibei for sibi, habetod for habeto, molierei for mulieri, adimitod for adimito, exicitoque for exigito∣que. Divorces were not known to the ancient Romans before the Law of the twelve Tables, neither do we find it to have been put in practice, till one and twenty years after the Law made by Spurius Carvilius Ruga, who put away his Wife because of her bar∣renness in the Year of Rome DXXIII, when M. Pomponius Matho and C. Papyrius Maso were Consuls, for which Valerius blames him, in that he preferred the desire of having Children, before his Conjugal Affection. This was afterwards observed in the Roman Empire, not only during the time of Pa∣ganism and the ancient Oeconomy, but also under the first Christian Emperors, and continued to, and even after the Reign of Justinian; and this was so certain, and looked upon to be so reasonable, that the parties concerned were not allowed to di∣vest themselves of that liberty by a penal agreement, but must be content to undergo the penalties which the Law prescribed, in respect to the person that was the cause of an unjust Divorce. The Divorce was made by a mutual consent of the parties, which they called Bona Gratia, and in this case the same depended wholly upon the Parties a∣greeting, to discharge each other of their Nuptial Rights, and to advance themselves as they thought good, or else by the sole motion and obstinacy of the one, against the inclination of the other; and if there were no lawful cause for it, he who sued was liable to the penalty of injusti dissidii; but if there were just cause for it, then the Husband restored her Fortune to his Wife, took the Keys of his House from her, and sent her away, as Cicero tells us, frugi factus est, mimam illam suam suas res sibi habere jussit ex duodecim Tabulis, claves ademit, exegit. SEI QUIS injuriam altrei fault xxv aris panae sunto: If any man wrongs another, he shall pay him XXV As's in brass Money. The word Injuria, injury, in the Roman Law, comprehended every thing a Man did in prejudice to his Neighbour: An injury was done three ways, by action, when one Man had received more blows and wounds in his body than the other; by words, when one spoke words of another that touch his Reputation and Honour, and by writing defa∣matory Libels and Verses. The first sort of injury was variously punish'd by the Roman Law, for if it proceeded so far as to break a Member, the Laws of the twelve Tables allowed the maimed person to take satis∣faction himself, by laying the same punish∣ment upon the other, that is, to maim him or break the same bone; and this they cal∣led Talio, for the punishment was and ought to be equal to the wrong; and when there was nothing broke, but only a blow of buffet given with the Fist, he was only to pay five and twenty Ai's. As to Wrongs done, and Satyrs made upon the Great Men of Rome, they were punished by a pecuniary mulct or banishment, and sometimes by death it self, as St Augustin relates from Ci∣cero, l. 4. De Repub. Our Laws of the twelve Tables, are very contrary to that, for tho' they are very tender in the point of punish∣ing Offenders with death, yet they enjoyn it in respect to those, who blast the Repu∣tation of another by Verses, or injurious Representations, for which there is great reason; for our lives ought to be liable to the lawful censures of the Magistrates, and not to the unbridled liberty of Poets, and we ought not to be allowed to speak ill of any one, but upon condition that we are able to answer it, and vindicate our selves by Law. QUEI cum telo hominis occidendi cona deprehensos fouerit, kapital estod: He who is found ready to kill another with an Arrow, ought to be punish'd with death. Wilful murther was always punish'd most severely by the Ancients; and this punishment, ac∣cording to the vigour of the Law, was not only inflicted when death ensued, but also when a person was bent upon the execution of an ill design, which he could not accom∣plish; and so that person was punished, who armed waited for, or set upon any one with a design to kill him, tho' he in reality should escape. So also, he that gave another poyson, who bought, sold and prepared it, tho' it wrought not the effect, was punished in the same manner as a murtherer.
QUEI nox fortum faxsit, sei im aliquips occisit, joure caeses ested: Sei loucoi fortom faxsit, tlve se tefenderit, sei im aliquips cum clamore occisit, joure caefos estod: Sei loucei fortom faxsit utque telo se defenderit, sei leber siet, Praetor im vorberarier joubetod, eique quoi fortom factum esit addeicito: Sei servos siet, virgis caesos ex saxo dei∣citor; sei impobes siet, Praetoris arbitratu verbe∣ratos noxsiam sarceito: It was lawful to kill him that stole any thing by night; and if it was day, and that the Thief stood armed upon his defence, it was also lawful to kill him; but if he did not so defend himself, and got away, the Praetor sentenced him only to be whipped; but if he was a Slave, they were, after he had been first whipped, to throw him down head-long over the Tar∣pian Rocks: If the Thief was not yet at age, he was to be whipped and be sentenc∣ed to such Damages as the Praetor pleased. QUEI falsum testimonium dixserit ex saxo dicitor: That he who bore false Witness a∣gainst any one should be thrown down head-long over the Tarpeian Rock. This Law agrees with the Eighth Commandment, which God gave his people, Falsum Testimo∣nium non dices. Plato and other Greek Philo∣sophers had undoubtedly read the Books of Moses, wherein the Decalogue is set down, and took the greatest part of their Laws from thence, which the Decemviri compiled. I shall not in this place set down several Frag∣ments of the Laws of the twelve Tables, concerning the way of judging and order∣ing an Accusation, which will be found under the word Accusatio, jus & judicium: No more than those which refer to the As∣semblies of the people of Rome by Tribes, Centuries & Curiae, which will be found un∣der the word Comitia. But now we come to speak of the particular Laws of the Romans and their Emperours. LEX SULPITIA, The Sulpitian law, made by the Consuls P. Sulpitius Samu∣rius, and P. Sempronius Sophius, in the year of Republick ccccl. NESCILICET quis templum vel aram lajussu Senatus aut Tribunorum plebis majoris par∣tis dedicaret: It was not lawful to dedicate a Temple or an Altar without the consent of the Senate or Tribunes of the people. LEX PAPIRIA. The Papirian Law, Ne quis injussu plebis aedes, terram, aram, aliam∣ rem ullam consecraret: It was not allowed any to consecrate Temples, any piece of Ground, and Altars, without the consent of the people. LEX HORTENSIA. The Hor∣tensian Law required, that the Fairs which were at first kept on Holy-days, should for the future be held on Working-days; where in the Praetor administred Justice by pro∣nouncing these three words, do, dico, addico. This Law was made by Q. Hortensius Dictator in the year of Rome cccclxviii. LEX PUBLICIA. The Publician Law made by Publicius Tribun of the people. Ne quibus nisi ditioribus cerei Saturnalibus mitto∣rentur: That Wax Tapers were not to be sent to any, but those that were rich, at the time of the Saturnalia. It was a custom to make several Presents at this Feast, and particularly of Wax Tapers, to intimate that Saturn had brought Men from Darkness to Light; that is, from an obscure and sa∣vage, to a polite and learned Life. LEX CORNELIA. The Cornelian Law, made by the Consul P. Cornelius Dola∣bella, after the death of Julius Caesar, in the year of Rome dccx. Ut Eidus Julii quibus Cae∣sar interfectus in Senatu est, Urbis natales habe∣rentur: That they should celebrate the day of Rome, s Original, on the Ides of July when Caesar was slain. LEX LICINIA. The Licinian Law, concerning those Plays called Ludi Apollina∣res, instituted in honour of Apollo, determined the day on which they should be represent∣ed, there being no fixed day before appoint∣ed for that purpose. P. Licinius Praetor urbanus legem ferre ad populum jussus ut hi ludi perpetuùm in statam diem voverentur. LEX ROSCIA, The Roscian and Juli∣an Law, of which L. Roscius Otho Tribune of the people was Author; according to Flo∣rus, in the year of Rome dclxxxvi. Ut in The∣atro Equitibus Romanis qui H. S. quadringenta possident, quatuordecim spectandi gradus adsigna∣rentur, exceptis iis qui ludicram artom exercue∣rant quique sive suo sive fortunae vitio rem decox∣issent: That the Roman Knights who were worth 400000 Sesterces, i. e. about 3333 l. Sterling, should have fourteen Steps of the Theater allowed them to see the Plays, ex∣cept those who were turned Buffoons, and wasted all their Fortune by their Debauche∣ries. This is what Tacitus says, Ami. l. 15. c. 5. the Emperour separated the Roman Knights from the people in the Circus, and gave them Seats that were neares to the Se∣nators. For before this they assisted at this Shew confusedly; for the Roscian Law re∣gulated no more than what regarded the Seats in the Theater. LEX CINCIA. The Cincian Law, made for restraining the Avarice of the Ora∣tors, who exacted large Sums of Money for their pleadings. The Calpurnian Law a∣gainst the Bribery of Magistrates, and that which bore the name of Julius Caesar, was
made against the Avarice and Intriges of those who made private Suit for Offices in the Commonwealth. LEX PAPIA. The Papian Poppean Law, made by Augustus in his old Age, to incourage Men to Marry, by imposing a Pe∣nalty upon Batchelours, and thereby to in∣crease the Rvenues of the Commonwealth. LEX AGRARIA. The Agrarian Law, made concerning the distribution of Lands, taken from the Enemies. This Law prov∣ed to be the Seed of great Divisions in the Roman Empire in the time of the Republick. See Agraria. LEX JULIA. A Law made by Au∣gustus against Adultery. It was the first that appointed a punishment and publick Pro∣cess to be made against those who seduced Wives, and Debauched Maidens and Widows of Quality: Not that Adultery was not punished before Augustus his time; but there was no process made against it, and there was no stated Punishment assigned for it: But the Julian Law, which Augustus him∣self had the misfortune to see put in execu∣tion in his own Family, in the person of his own Children, required nothing but banish∣ment for this sin of Adultery; but the Pe∣nalty was afterwards increased by the con∣stitutions of the succeeding Emperors, who punished Adultery with death. LEX SUMPTUARIA, A Sump∣tuary Law, made by Cornelius Sulla the Dicta∣tor, in the Year of Rome DCLXXIII. where∣by the expences of Feasts and Funerals were regulated, and those condemned to pay a certain pecuniary mulct, who transgressed the injunction of that Law. LEX PAPIA, The Papian Law con∣cerning the Vestal Virgins, who looked after the Sacred Fire in the Temple of the Goddess Vesta, she who let it go out, was whipped by the Soveraign Pontiff; and if she suffered her self to be Debauched, she was buried alive in Campus Sceleratus, without the Gate called Portacollina. See Vestalis. LEX PEPETUNDARUM, or DE REPETUNDIS, The Law of Bribery or publick Extortion. LEX AELIA, The Elian Law made concerning the Augurs, by Q. Aelius Paetus the Consul, in the year of Rome dlxxxvii. LEX FUSIA, The Fusian Law, made concerning the time of holding the As∣semblies, which ought not to be held but upon those days called Dii Comitiales. LEX VALERIA, SEMPRONIA, The Valerian and Sempronian Law, made con∣cerning those who had a right to Vote in the Roman Assemblies. C. Valerius Tappo, Tribute of the people was the Author of it, in the year of Rome icxvi. LEX VILLIA, The Villian Law, of which L. Villius Tribune of the people was Author; and whereby the Age of Persons that were to enter upon Offices in the Re∣publick was regulated. 'Twas also called LEX ANNALIS. LEX CORNELIA. The Cornelian Law, which prescribed the Qualifications, Persons ought to have that enter upon Offi∣ces in the Commonwealth. LEX HIRCIA, The Hircian Law, which allowed of none to hold Offices in the Republick, but such as had sided with Caesar against Pompey. LEX VISELLIA, The Visellian Law, which allowed the Sons of Freedmen the right of becoming Magistrates. LEX POMPEIA & CLAUDIA, The Pompeian and Claudian Law, which re∣quired that those who put in for Offices in the Commonwealth should be always pre∣sent. LEX RHODIA, The Law of Rhodes relating to traffick by Sea; this Law required that if it happened a Ship laden with Mer∣chandize, that belonged to several Merchants, in order to avoid Shipwrack, threw the Goods of some of them overboard, and that those of the other were saved, an estimate should be made of all the Merchandize, and that the loss and damage should be sustained by every one of them in proportion to the Effects he had on board, this was made by the Rhodians, and was found to be so just, that it was received by all the Nations that came after them. LIBATIO, A Libation, being a Ce∣remony practised in the Sacrifices of the Pagans, wherein the Priest poured down some Wine, Milk and other Liquors, in honour of the Deity, to whom he Sacrificed, after he had first tasted a little of it. LIBATIONES, Libations of Wine and other Liquors, frequently made by the Heathens to their Gods when they went up∣on any enterprizes. The Deputies which were sent to Achilles to invite him to come to the relief of his Country-men, began to wash their hands before their departure, to fill their Crowned Cups with Wine, and to pour it down upon the ground; in honour of the Gods these Libations were commonly performed, before they went to sleep. U∣lysses after he had got some little advantage over his Enemies, washed himself in the Sea Water, and went to make his Libations to Minerva.
LIBER. This is one of the Epithets of Bac∣chus; either because he procured unto the Baeo∣tians their Liberty; or that being esteemed the God of Wine, he doth by Drinking, give Ease unto disturb'd Minds. The Consulary Medals of the Family of Cassia, represent unto us the Pictures of Liber and Libera, as they are called in Ancient Inscriptions; that is, of Male and Female Bacchus. St. Augustine, Lib. 7. de Civ. Dei, Cap. 21. speaks thus of Liber: As for the Mysteries of Liber, whom they have made to preside over the Seminal Powers of Liquids, I mean, not only over the Juices of Fruits, amongst which Wine has the Preheminence, but also over Seeds of Animals; I am loth to take notice of that Ex∣cess of Infamy they arrived to therein; but yet I must say (in order to confound the arrogant Stupidity of our Adversaries) among other Things, which I am obliged to omit upon this Occasion, because they are too tedious; that according to the Testimony of Varro, the Feasts of Liber were celebrated with so much Licen∣tiousness in some Places in Italy, that in Honour of him, they gave Adoration to the Privy Parts of Man, and that not in Secret to cover their Shame, but publickly to make Wickedness ap∣pear triumphant: For they placed him after an honourable Manner in a Chariot, which was brought into the City after they had first drawn it through the Fields: But at Lavinium they spent a whole Month in celebrating the Feasts of Liber only, during which time, there was all the Impurity of Speech imaginable encourag'd, until the said Chariot had traversed the Market-place, and was brought whither the People design'd to deposite what they carried; after which, the most vertuous Ladies in the City must go and crown this infamous Thing, before the Multi∣tude. In this Manner it was that they made God Liber favourable to Seeds, and expelled Charms and Witchcraft out of the Earth. LIBERALIA; the Feasts of Bacchus. See Bacchanaelia. LIBER; a Book. The Way used by the Ancients in Binding of their Books, was not like unto ours: Books of a Square Form were hardly ever in use, either amongst the Greeks or Romans, till a long time after Catulus. Indeed, King Attalus seeing the Art was found out to make Parchment so well, as to be fit to be writ upon, on both sides, made some of his Books Square-wise; yet the ancient Way, which was to roll their Books in such a Manner, as to give them the Form of a small Column, prevailed so long, that even all their Libraries, in the Time of Cicero, and long after, were composed of these Rolls: The Dearness of Parchment, and Cheap∣ness of the Paper, whereof they made their rol∣led Books, was the Reason there was hardly any other to be seen. As to the Matter of Binding, there was no other Fashion in use, but to paste or glew several Leaves of Paper at full length to the Ends of one another, in proportion to the Bigness of each Book: When one side was filled up, the Work was at end, for they did not write on both sides; they rolled all together, begin∣ning with the last, which they called Ʋmbilicus, whereunto they fixed a Piece of Wood, Ebony, or some such Thing, to keep the Roll tight, and to the other End they glewed a Piece of, Parch∣ment, which covered the whole Volume, and was of use not only to save the Paper, but also to be an Ornament to the Book, because it was painted of a Purple or Crimson Colour. The Title of the Book was written in Gold Cha∣racters on the outside of the Parchment, but the Epistle Dedicatory they wrote on the inside. When the Roll was made, they cut it at both Ends, and upon every Leaf, which was well polished with a Pumice-stone, they laid pieces of Gold, Silver, or Ivory, which they fastned to the Stick placed in the Ʋmbilicus. LIBERALITAS: Liberality; a Goddess worshipped by the Romans, and a Vertue often put in practise by good Emperors; above all by Au∣gustus Caesar, according to Suetonius and Tacitus; Congiarium populo, Donativum militibus dedit: He gave a Largess to the People, which consisted of small Sesterces, and a Donative to the Soldiers, which was a like Sum of Denarii. Marcus Au∣relius caused Medals to be coined, whereon the Picture of Liberality was engraven, like a Ro∣man Lady clad in a long Robe, holding a Tessera in her Right Hand, and round it Liberalitas Au∣gusti: By the Medals of Adrian and Alexander Severus, the Emperor is to be seen mounted upon a little Ascent, and in a sitting Posture, making Signs to a Man that is at his Feet, to give him the Money that was set upon the Brink of the Ascent, with Liberality on the Sides thereof, and a Tessera in her Hand. LIBERTAS. Liberty; a Goddess wor∣shipped by the Romans and Greeks, by the Name of Eleutheria; the Romans had divers Places and several Temples consecrated to the publick Li∣berty: Ovid makes mention of these Places, and of a Day that was dedicated to Jupiter the Victorious, and to Liberty: Occupat Apriles Idus cognomine Victor Jupiter, hac illi Sunt data Templa die. Hac quo{que} ni fallor, populo dignissima nostro Atria Libertas caepit habere sua. The Places were surrounded with Portico's, and it did appear that the People met there: It was a kind of Temple, open at top like unto that at Jerusalem, where stood the Altar for Burnt-Of∣ferings; but besides these Places, the Roman Hi∣storians make mention of several Temples at Rome dedicated to the Goddess Liberty; among others, that built by Claudius, in the Place where
Cicero's House stood, after it had been ruined; and that erected in Honour of Julius Caesar, af∣ter his Death. Dion Cassius mentions both, in Lib. 43. It was to the publick Liberty that the Romans dedicated these Temples. Her Pi∣cture represented her clad like a Roman Lady, holding a Javelin in one Hand, and a Cap or Bonnet in the other: By the Medals that were coined in Honour of Brutus, and by those of C. Caesar, surnamed Caligula, you may observe that the Bonnet or Cap was an Ensign of Liberty; thus when the Romans were about to grant their Slaves their Freedom, they gave them a Bonnet or Cap: From whence comes the Latin Phrase, Dare Pileum, to give one his Liberty, and Vo∣care ad Pileum, to call a Slave to his Freedom. LIBETHRA; a certain Fountain conse∣crated to the Muses, and for this Reason they have been called Libethrides. Strabo in his 10th Book, will have them to have been thus named, from a Mountain in Thrace called Libethrus, at the Foot whereof there stood a Temple dedica∣ted to the Muses by the Thracians. LIBITINA; this was a Goddess, belie∣ved by the Ancients to preside over Funerals: Some consound her with Proserpina; others with Venus; the Moon as well as the Sun preside over Nativities and Funerals, as the general Cause of the Generation and Corruption of all Things; and she has received all these Names and Offices for her self alone, as Plutarch has it in the Life of Numa. In her Temple they kept all Things that were requisite for Funeral Solemnities; whence it is, that Phoedra reproaches a Miser, for cutting off by his Will, all the Charges which should have been expended at his Fune∣ral, for fear lest the Goddess Libitina should get any Thing by his Death. Qui resecas omnem impensam Funeris Ne quid de tuo Libitina lucretur. Those Persons whose Business it was to furnish them with what was necessary for that Purpose, were called Libitinarii, according to Ʋlpian; and at this Day they are known with us by the Name of Ʋndertakers. LIBRA, the Ballance, is one of the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac; when the Sun comes to the Eighth Degree of Libra, it marks the Autumnal Equinox, because it forms Arches equal to those it did before in Taurus; it enters therein in the Month of September, on our 7th or 12th. LIBRA, a Pound. 'Tis a Measure of Weight in respect to all heavy Things that are weighed; the Romans allowed but Twelve Ounces to a Pound Weight, and to a Pound of Length-Mea∣sure: The Weights of a Pound were borrowed by the Romans from the Sicilians, who named it Litra; and the Romans changed the t into b. The Romans had also a sort of Money which they called Libra or Libella, and was the Tenth part of a Denarius, because 'twas the Value of an As, which at first was a Pound Weight of Copper: Scaliger also adds, that they made use of the Word Libra for Money told out; Libra non erat nummus, sed Collectio Nummorum. LICHAS; Hercules his Servant, by whom Deianira his Wife sent him the Shirt that was infected with the Blood of the Centaur Nessus; which Poison made Hercules so outragious, that he threw Lichas into the Seas, and he was trans∣formed by Neptune into a Rock. LICTORES; Lictors, or Ax-Bearers; they were so called, because they carried the Axes, which were fastned to a long Handle, and encompassed with a Bundle of Rods, called Fasces, or Secures: Romulus was the first that made use of them, with a Design to inspire the People with a greater Reverence for their Magistrates: The Dictators had Twenty Four Lictors, who walked before them, the Consuls, Twelve; the Pro-Consuls and Governours of Provinces, Six; the Praetors and City Magistrates, Two only. They also punished such Offenders as were sur∣prized in the Fact at the first Command they re∣ceived from the Magistrates. J. Lictor, Colliga manus, expedi virgas, plecte securi. They were ready to undo their Bundle of Rods, whether it were to whip, or to cut off the Head of the condemned Offender: They were thus called a Ligando, because they bound the Hands and Feet of the condemned Person before his Execution. LIMENARCHAE, or Stationarii; They were Soldiers posted by the Romans in divers Places, to prevent Disorders, and especially High-way-men, and Robbers upon the High-ways, as the Grand Provosts are in France at this Day: They were appointed by Augustus after the End of the Civil War, to hinder the Soldiers that had been disbanded from ravaging Italy: Tiberius in∣creased their Number, as Suetonius in the Life of the said Emperor informs us: The Chief of these Soldiers was called Irenarcha; that is, The Prince of the Peace, because he was instrumental to secure the Peace and Tranquility of the Pub∣lick. LINGUA, Tongue, Speech; they are cer∣tain Expressions which People have conceived to make one another to be understood: The Origi∣nal of Languages came from the Confusion, wherewith God punished the Pride of those who built the Tower of Babel; the Hebrew Tongue is the ancientest Language, and is called the Holy Language, and the Rabbins say, 'tis so; because 'tis so pure and chaste, that there is no Word therein for the Privy Parts, nor for that whereby we ease Nature; there is a Difference between the Hebrew without Points, and that wherein the Vowels are noted by Points. Father Morin pretends, in Opposition to the Modern Rabbis, that Moses wrote without Points, and
without the Distinction of Words: Vossius main∣tains, that besides the Books of Scripture, in the Time even of St. Jerome, there was no other Book in Hebrew, but only in the Greek Tongue, and that it was not before Justinian's Reign, that they began to appear. The Reason which he gives for it, is, that the said Emperor having by an Edict forbidden the Jews to Read the , or their Traditions in their Syna∣gogues, they bethought themselves of Transla∣ting it into their own Language; and this Book, says he, was called Misna. The Points in the Hebrew Tongue were not invented, to signifie the Vowels by, till towards the Tenth Century, by the Massaretes. The Punic Tongue, according to the Autho∣rity of William Postell, was no other than the Phaenician, which he compares with the Hebrew, from whence it proceeded together with the Caldaean and Syriack. The Arabick Tongue is the most Copious of all the Languages; and the Arabs say, they are as Ancient as the Hebrews, as pretending their Descent to have been from Ismael: Their Inge∣nuity and Language have been much commend∣ed: Their ancient Writings have almost all the Letters joined together; but one Elcabil was necessitated to invent and introduce the Points into their Language, for the easier reading of Arabick: Some of them they place above, and others below the Words. Kinslenius in his E∣pistle Dedicatory to the Emperor Rodolphus, speaking of this Costom, seems to be of Opinion, that the Arabs did not admit of these Points into their Writings, till such time as they had Com∣merce with the People of Europe: The Ancient Arabick Character was called Cuphick: The most Ancient is the thickest and largest, the other be∣ing less both ways. That which the Tartars make use of at this Day, appears closer, smaller, and more bended than the others. The Egyptian Language had the Forms of Ani∣mals in it, being mysterious Symbols, that ser∣ved to conceal and involve in Obscurity all the Secrets of their Theology: They called them Hieroglyphicks: And many Obelisks or Tombs are still to be found inscribed with such Cha∣racters, and Hieroglyphical Figures; the Words of this Language express the Nature and Pro∣priety of all Things. The Coptick, which was the Language of E∣gypt before the Greek, is a singular Tongue, and independent of all others, according to the Opi∣nion of Kircher. Salmasius says, That the Word Coptick, comes from a Town called Coptos, whose Inhabitants had retained part of the An∣cient Language: The same Person in another place is of Opinion, That this Name was taken from the Word ; the which is con∣firmed also by Father Vansleb, although he attri∣butes the Origine thereof to Coptos the Grand∣son of Noak; there are still, says he, some of the Descendants of these first Egyptians in be∣ing, who speak this Language: In the mean time, it may be said, that the same hath been lost many Ages ago. A Grammar and Vocabu∣lary were found in the famous Monastery of St. Anthony, written in this Language, whose Characters are somewhat like the Ancient Greek: The Modern Copticks have no other Language than the vulgar Egyptian Dialect, that is inter∣mix'd with Turkish and Arabick: Father Kircher will have the Ancient Coptick to have been al∣tered by the Greek Tongue, from which it hath borrowed divers Words and Characters. The Etrurian Tongue has some Characters that are like enough to the Latin, and the Wri∣ting thereof is from the Right to the Left. Eu∣gubinus has given us an Inscription in this Lan∣guage, which has been found to have been of Fifty Years standing before Sylla's Time; the Romans were very Curious to know this Lan∣guage, and they used all their Endeavour to learn it. The Characters of the Greek Tongue have not changed so much as those of other Langua∣ges; the First and the most Ancient of them are more square, and come near those of their Original, which is the Phaencian or Hebrew; seeing that, according to the Authority of He∣rodotus, the first Characters that were intro∣duced into Ionia, were very near the same. Pliny speaking of the Greek Characters, after he had said that they were like the Roman Letters used in his Time, cites no other Example for it, but an old Inscription upon a Brass Plate, which Vespatian and Titus had given to the Publick Li∣brary: The Ancient Greek Characters, says he, are almost like unto the Latin ones of our Days, witness that old brazen Plate, taken out of the Temple at Delphos, which may be now seen in the Library of the Palace, dedicated by the Em∣perors to Minerva. . This certainly was the Form of the Ancient Greek Characters, whereof Pliny and others speak; for 'tis certain, that the Ancient Greci∣ans knew no other Letters but Capitals; and John Lascary, a Greek by Birth, confirms it in a Preface of his to a Collection of Greek Epigrams, printed at Florence in Capital Letters, in the Year, 1484. The Pointing and Distinguishing of Words, were not in use in those Old Times; which continued in a manner to the 174 Olym∣piad, according to the Testimony of Lipsius and Leo Allatius: Its observed from the most Ancient Monuments, that the Greeks did not divide their Discourses at any time, but for the Perfecting and Compleating of the Sence of them: They
did not put many Words into the same Line, but began another with a new Sentence; as may be seen by the Inscriptions of the Earl of Arundel; insomuch, that they did not write a∣long at all as we do, but by way of Articles: Suidas speaks of a Way of Writing, which they call , Boustrophidon, being as much as to say, done in Lines like unto those made by Oxen when they plough. Pausanias confirms the same Thing in a Description he gives of the Coffer of Cypselus, that was in Juno's Temple, in the City of Elis: There was upon this Chest, says he, some Inscriptions engraved in old Characters and streight Lines: There were also some others done after the Way which the Greeks call Boustrophidon, because the Second Verse immediately follows the First, and joins it in the same Manner as the Races in the Stadia or Circus are redoubled. Some Authors are of Opinion, that the Sentences so distinguished and separated by Lines, have been continued even long after the Use of Accents and Points had been introduced, as may be seen in Diogenes Laertius: Aristophanes, a Grammarian of Bizan∣tium, was the first that brought them up, toward the 150 Olympiad, in the Reigns of Philopater and Euergetes, Kings of Egypt, Two Hundred Years before Christ's Nativity. The Latin Tongue, like the rest, has had its Increase and Revolutions: The same Thing hath befell its Characters, as may be observed from the most ancient Inscriptions, and those which have succeeded them, even before the Destructi∣on of the Empire: As the Characters of that In∣scription of Duilius, published by Father Sir∣mond, do come nearer their Origin, so they have a little more of the Etrurian and Greek in them: They discover the Shaking-hand of a Peo∣ple who did yet but begin: Those Seven Latin Volumes that were found in Numa's Tomb, were not writ in this Character; seeing Quin∣tilian assures us, there were but very few Let∣ters in those early Times, whose Shape and Pow∣er were of a different kind; and the Emperor Claudius procured no small Benefit to himself, in introducing the Eolick Letter  Tacitus in the 10th Book of his Annals, speaking of the Form of the Roman Letters, says, they were like unto the most ancient Greek Characters, which were Capitals. LINUS, the Son of Apollo, and Terpsichore, or of Mercury, and the Nymph Ʋrania, was a famous Musician, and Master to Orpheus: Hercules killed him with his own Harp for ridiculing him: Of this Name was a Theban Poet, that first brought Letters from Phaenicia into Greece. Her∣modorus the Platonick, C. 2. Of his Discourses, says, He wrote a Tract in Verse about the Crea∣tion of the World, the Course of the Sun and Moon, and the Generation of Animals: He was killed with an Arrow shot at him by Apollo. LITARE, and Litatio; Terms used at the Ancient Sacrifices, to intimate, That the Sacrifice was over, and the Gods made propitious. Litare, says Macrobius, L. 3. Saturnaliorum, C. 5. Est Sacrificio facto placare Numen. 'Tis to appease God by Sacrifice. Suetonius also speaking con∣cerning Julius Caesar, that he could not offer one favourable Sacrifice, on the Day wherein he was slain in the Senate, makes use of this Latin Ex∣pression; Dein pluribus Hostiis Caesis cum litare non posset, introiit in Cariam, spretâ Religione; af∣ter he had offered many Sacrifices, and could not find the God's favourable, he gave over and went into the Senate, in Contempt of Religion: The said Author does again make use of the same Expressions in the Life of Augustus; Sacri∣ficio non Litante; that is, not being able to ap∣pease the Gods, nor to make them propitious by his Sacrifices. LITERA; a Letter; Figure, Character, or Stroak of the Pen, which Men have agreed upon to signifie something, and the Joyning whereof makes their Thoughts known to one another: From these Letters, are, as I may say, miracu∣lously sprung a Million of different Words: They may be called the Elements of Speech, the Sacred Atoms, out of which is formed the vast World of Sciences; and the faithful Gar∣dians of what is most precious amongst Men. Without them the Original of the World would have been but confusedly known, and the most celebrated Actions would be buried in profound Oblivion. The Alphabet of every Language is composed of a certain Number of these Letters or Cha∣racters, which have a different Sound, Form and Signification: The English and Greek have each 24 Letters; the Latin commonly 23, and the Hebrew 22 without Points. The Art of Writing has not been perfected all at once, several Ages were required to supply what was defective in those Shapes of Animals, the Ancients used, as may appear by Tacitus. The Egyptians, accord∣ing to his Account, believed themselves to be the Inventers of it; but 'tis more likely that the Hebrews, or as almost all the Ancients call them, the Chaldeans or Phaenicians, were their Masters, as we learn from that Verse in Lucan: Phaenices primi, famae si creditur, Ausi Mansuram rudibus vocem signare Figuris. Whence it was that those Letters were called Phaenician ones by the Greeks. Yet Diodorus Si∣culus reports, that that was certain, and that it was only believed, that they did not invent, but change the Form of Letters; which is not unlikely, since Quintus Curtius says of them, if the Relation is to be believed, that they were the first that invented Letters, and shewed the Use of them: St. Augustine also, with many
others, is of Opinion, that the People of God had learned them of the first Fathers, as of Moses: And that before the Deluge it self, the first Characters, according to Josephus, had been engraven upon Pillars, which Seth caused to be erected in Syria, for the Preservation of the Sciences he had discovered: This agrees with what Pliny says concerning the Assyrian Letters, that they are no other than the Hebrew or Chal∣dean; As for my self, says that Author, I be∣lieve the Assyrian Letters were always in being. Hyginus attributes to the Distinies the Inventi∣on of the following Greek Letters, A, B, H, I, T, Γ. And 'tis for that Reason Martianus Capella calls them the Secretaries of Heaven. Josephus, in the Beginning of his Jewish An∣tiquities, rejecting the Opinion of the Greeks and Egyptians, will have us to believe, that the Gre∣cians came very late to the Knowledge of Let∣ters, that they received them from the Phaenici∣ans, and not from Cadmus, seeing at that time there were no Inscriptions found in the Temples of their Gods, nor in the publick Places; it be∣ing certain, the Greeks had nothing of greater Antiquity, than the Works of Homer; tho' Ci∣cero in his Orator, entituled Brutus, tells us, they had Poets more ancient than Homer, who con∣tented themselves with rehearsing their Poems by heart, because they had not yet found out the Use of Writing, or of Letters. Pliny, Lib. 7. Chap. 6. will have the most ancient Letters to have been the Assyrian, and that Cadmus about the Year of the World 2520, above 250 Years before the Trojan War, brought Sixteen of them from Phaenicia into Greece, viz. A, B, C, D, E, G, I, L, M, N, O, P, R, S, T, Ʋ, to which Palamedes, du∣ring the Trojan War, had added Four, Θ, Ξ, φ, T. Herodotus will have it, That the Phaenicians, who came with Cadmus into Greece, brought Writing Characters thither; which Diodorus Si∣mulus also affirms; but at the same time he shews these Letters were not the same which Cadmus brought with him, seeing they had had them there before the Deluge of Deucalion, and that he did no more than revive the Use of them. Eupolemius attributes the first Invention of Let∣ters to Moses, who gave them to the Jews long before Cadmus his Time, and the Jews to the Phaenicians, who were their Neighbours: Philo the Jew ascribes them to Abraham a long Time before Moses; and Josephus in the First Book of his Antiquities, carries the Matter still farther, as high as Adam's Children, even to Seth, who engraved the Characters thereof upon Two Pillars. Moses his first Characters were not those He∣brew ones used now, which were invented by Ezra after the Babilonish Captivity, but those which were called Samaritan, according to St. Jerome, in his Preface to the Book of Kings: And this is agreeable to the Sentiments of some Rabbins, who ground the same upon the Sama∣ritans, having always the Law of Moses written in the Five Books, called the Pentateuch, in their own Characters, and that the same were inscri∣bed upon ancient Medals of Gold and Silver, which were found in Jerusalem, and divers other Parts of Palesline. But this Opinion is not without its Difficulty; as may be seen by the Talmud, where Marsuka says, that the Law was first given to the Children of Israel in Hebrew Characters, but that afterwards Ezra put it in∣to the Aramean Tongue, and Assyrian Characters. There are some Authors who maintain, that Moses made use of two sorts of Characters, one, which is the Hebrew, for Sacred Things, and the other, which is the Samaritan, for pro∣phane Matters, and of which last the Chaldeans made use, and that the Greek and Latin Cha∣racters were formed of these; the last of which being no other than the Greek Capitals, accord∣ing to the Testimony of Pliny, who proves it by an ancient Inscription engraven upon Brass, and brought from Delphos to Rome. . And he says in Chap. 56. These were Assyrian Letters, or according to some Authors, Syriac: But they are rather Samaritan, which, besides the Aleph and Jod, are so like the Greek and La∣tin ones, if they be considered and taken upside down, that they are almost the same thing. Eu∣sebius confirms the same Matter by the Greeks own Denomination, or Imitation of Caldaism therein, by their adding an A, as in Alpha in∣stead of Aleph, Beta for Beth, Gamma for Gimel, Delta for Deleth, &c. Simonides, Evander and Demaratus were the first that brought Letters into Italy, the one from Arcadia, and the other from Corinth, the last into Tuscany, and the other to that Part of the Country where he settled: In a Word, the ancient Greek Letters were very like ours, but we had but a very few of them at first; the rest were since added. The Emperor Claudins, in Imitation of the Ancients, invented Three Let∣ters, that continued in Use during his Reign, and were abolish'd after his Death: The Form of them are still to be seen in the Temples, and other publick Places of Rome, upon the Copper Plates, whereon the Decrees of the Senate were engraven. The Hebrews made a Division of their Let∣ters into Guttural, viz. ab, cb, gn, Dental z, s, r, Labial b, m, n, p, and those of the Tongue, viz. d, t, l, n. Crinitus says, Moses in∣vented the Hebrew Letters, Abraham the Sy∣riac and Chaldee; the Phaenicians those of Attica, (ighteen whereof Cadmus brought into Greece, and which the Pelasgi carried into Italy) and Ni∣costrates the Latin Letters.
The Egyptians instead of Letters used the Fi∣gures of Animals, and of Birds, which they cal∣led Hieroglyphicks, and were invented by Isis. The Gothick or Toledo Letters were invented by Guesila, Bishop of the Goths. The Letters, F, G, H, K, Q, X, Y, Z, were formerly not known to the Romans, as is proved by Claudius Dausquias in his Orthogra∣phy, wherein he shews the Origin of Letters. The Grammarians distinguish Letters into Vowels and Consonants; into Mutes, double Letters, Liquids, and Characteristicks. They reckon Six Vowels, A, E, I, O, Ʋ, and Y, they are thus called, because they have a distinct Sound of themselves, and can alone form a Syllable, There are Eighteen Consonants, who require the Help of a Vowel in order to the Forming of an Articulate Sound, and Compo∣sing a Syllable. Of the Eighteen Consonants the X and the Z, according to the Ancients Way of Pronouncing them, are properly no more than Abbreviations; the X, being no∣thing else but a C, and an S; and the Z, a D, and an S; and for this Reason, they are called double Letters. King Chilperic had a Mind to introduce all the double Greek Letters into the French Alphabet, that so by one single Character they might express the th, ch, ph, ps; and this was put in Practise during his Reign, according to the Testimony of Gregory of Tours. Of the Sixteen Consonants which remain, there are Four which they called Liquids or Fluent ones, viz. L, R, M, N; tho' strictly speaking, there are no more than the L and the R, which deserve this Name: the other two especially the M, being but very little liquid: There are Ten of them which may be called Mutes, and may be divided into Three Clas∣seles, according to the Affinity they have one to another. Mutes, B, P, F, V, C, Q, G, I, D, T, As for the other two, the S makes a Class by it self, unless the two double ones X and Z be joined thereunto, because it makes up the principal Part of them: As for the H 'tis no more than an Aspiration, altho' for that Rea∣son it ought not to be struck out of the Num∣ber of Letters. Of Vowels in general. There is nothing wherein we have more changed the Pronunciation of the Ancients, than in them, for we do not continue to take Notice of the Distinction between long and short Vowels, whereon depends all the Quantities of Syllables, excepting those who are long by Position; thus in pronouncing of Amabamm and Circumdabam, one may easily see that mā is long in the first Word, and dā short in the se∣cond: But in pronouncing Dabam or Stabem, you cannot conceive whether the first Syllable of either of them be long or short: but the Ancients in their Pronounciation made an ex∣act Distinction between all the long and all the short Vowels, where-ever they met with them. They also observed this Distinction in their Writing, between long and short Vowels, wherein they often doubled the Vowel to de∣note a long Syllable: Which is testified by Quintilian to have continued in Use to the Time of Attius. They also sometimes placed the Letter H between the said double Vowel, to render the Pronounciation thereof the stron∣ger, as Abala was put for Ala; and 'tis for this Reason, that we likewise find among the An∣cients Mehe put for mee or me; and mebecum put for mecum, and the same we do when we say, vehemens for veemens, and mihi for mi and mii of the Ancients. But afterwards in order to abridge the same, they have thought it e∣nough to draw a Line only above the said Vo∣wel, to shew it was long; which being not un∣derstood by the Transcribers, they have taken this Line for the Abbreviation of a Letter, which is the Cause, that we meet with totiens for toties, vicensimus for vicesimus, formonsus for formosus, aquonsus for aquosus, and the like; they being ignorant that among the Ancients the said Line was of no other Use than to de∣note the Quantity of the Syllable. Of Vowels in particular. The Three first, viz. A, E, I, are called o∣pen Vowels, because they are pronounced with a more open and full Mouth than the others. The Three last Vowels are O, V, and the Greek T, and are named close Vowels, because they are pronounced with a closer and smaller Mouth than the foregoing ones. The Dipthongs, which Lipsius calls Bivocales, double Vowels, are pronounced with a double Sound, as their Names do import; altho' both the Vowels are not heard equally or alike, be∣cause the one is sometimes weaker and the other stronger. They reckon Eight of them in La∣tin, viz. Ae, Ai, Au, Ei, Eu, Oe, Oi, Ʋi. Of Consonants. They reckon Eighteen Consonants in all who require a Vowel to be joined to them in order to the Forming of an Articulate Sound and com∣posing a Syllable; they are divided into Liquids and Mutes, into hissing and aspirated Con∣sonants. There are Four Liquid or Fluent Letters, that is, such as pass quickly and easily, viz. L, R, M, N. L and R have so great an Affinity be∣tween them, that those, who would pronounce the R, cannot do it, because 'tis very harsh, and falls naturally into the L: From whence pro∣ceeds the mutual Change that has been between these Two Letters, for 'twas not the Athenians
alone that said  for ; but the Latins used Cantherus for , and con∣slacuit for confracuit. The M has a dull Sound, and is pronounced with the outermost Parts of the Lips, from whence it has been called Mu∣giens Littera; it is drown'd often in Prose, as also sometimes in Verse. In the Law Restitutu' iri is put for Restitutum iri: The N on the Con∣trary was called Tinnieus Littera, because it had a clearer and sharper Sound, and sounded against the allate of the Mouth. Those Consonants are called Mutes, which have a duller and less distinct sound than the rest. The B and the P are so like one another, that in the Opinion of Quintilian, concerning the Word Obtinuit, Reason would have him use a B, but his Ears could hear no other Sound than a P, Optinuit; for which Cause we see both by anci∣ent Inscriptions, and old Glosses, that these Two Letters have been often confounded, as apsens has been put for absens, obtimus for optimus; and the Germans to this Day say, ponum vinum for bonum vinum; these Two Letters have always had that in common, that they often slip in∣to Words without any need of them, as absporto put for asporto. The Letter F was pronounced as the Greek φ, but not with so strong an Aspi∣ration, according to the Testimony of Terren∣tianus. The Vah or V Consonant had a more plain Pronunciation, but with less Respiration than we now use it. The C and the Q are so very like one another, that several Grammarians have been minded to reject the Q as a superflu∣ous Letter, pretending that the C and the Ʋ were sufficient to express what we intend by a Q; but there is no reason why they should reject the Q, as Varro does, according to the Relation of Censorinus, and Licinius Calvus according to that of Victorinus; for 'tis still useful since it serves to join the two Vowels that follow into one Syllable, whereas the C denotes their being divided; and this is that which makes a Diffe∣rence between the Nominative, Qui, and the Da∣tive, Cui. D is nothing but a Diminution of T, as the G is of C, according to Quintilian, and these two Letters are so very like, that by rea∣son thereof, they are often found to be put one for another, as at for ad; which gives Quintilian occasion to laugh at those who make a Scruple of writing one indifferently for the other, as set for sed, haut for haud, atque for adque are to be met with in Inscriptions, and elsewhere. In the French Tongue they write voit with a t, tho' it be derived from the Word Videt, and as often as the D is in the End of a Word, and that the succeeding Word begins with a Vowel, or an H that is not pronounced by way of Aspi∣ration, they sound it as a T; for Example, they pronounce it un grant Homme, tho' they write it un grand Homme. In every Thing else, they, as well as the English, have almost intirely retained the Pronunciation of the said two Let∣ters, saving that they soften the T very much when 'tis joined with an I before another Vowel, where they make it to sound very near like un∣to the S of the Ancients, as Pronuntio is sound∣ed, as if it were written Pronunsio. The S they call an hissing Letter, by reason of the Sound it has. The same has been variously received among the Ancients, some having rejected it very much while others did as much affect it: Pindar in a manner lays it aside in all his Verses: Quintilian says, 'tis harsh, and makes an ill Sound in the Conjunction of Words, whence it came to pass that many times it was entirely rejected: Plautus, Terence, and others using to write in this manner, Dignu' omnibu', and the like: Some of the Latins changed this Letter into a T; in Imitation of the Athenians, using Mertare for Mersare: Whereas others on the Contrary af∣fected the Use of it every where, as Casmenae was put for Camenae, Dusmosae for Dumosae: And Quintilian bears witness, that from Cicero's Time, and so onward, the same Letter was of∣ten doubled in the middle of Words, as may be instanced in Caussa, Divissiones, &c. But be it as it will, 'tis certain, that this Letter is harsh, if it be hissed out too much, or have too great a Train to follow it, and this has obliged the French to soften it to that degree, that when the same happens to fall between two Vowels they pronounce it like an Z. The X sometimes is put with the C, as in the Words vicxit, juncxit, and the like; and many times with S, as you see in Capadoxs, Conjunxs, &c. St. Isidore testifies, that this Letter was not in use before the Reign of Augustus, and Victorinus says, Nigidius would never make use of it; and for the Z it was pronounced much more softly than the X; tho' the said Pronunciation was not altogether the same as it is at this Day, where∣in we give it but one half of an S, as in the Word Mezentius. There has been a Dispute among Gramma∣rians, whether the H should be reckoned in the Number of Letters or no; because, say they, 'tis no more than an Aspiration. It must be confest, the H is no more than an Aspiration, yet that does not hinder it to be a real Letter, which may be seen by what has been said before concerning the H. The Romans made use of the Letters of the Alphabet only to denote their proper Names, and to abridge divers Words in their Inscriptions and ancient Monuments. A alone signified Aulus, from the Verb alo, he having been born Diis alentibus: In Judicial Proceedings it stood for absolvo; I discharge the Person accused: In the Assemblies for antiquo, I reject the Law proposed to be passed. A stood for Augustus: A A for Augusti, &c. C stood for Caius, he being so called from the Joy conceived by his Parents
at his Birth. C was used for Caesar, coming from the Verb Caedo, because his Mother's Body was cut open to bring him forth: C stood also for Consul, and C C for Consules, &c. D signi∣fied Decimus or Decius; that is, one born on the Tenth Day. L stood for Lucius, the Light, because the first Person that bore this Name was born at break of Day. M exprest Marcus, being as much as to say, one born in the Month of March, and this Letter with an Acute marked thus M' or with a Comma thus M' sig∣nifies Manius, that is, one born in the Morning, or rather, one that is all Good; the Contrary whereof is, Immanis, wicked, cruel, &c. N signifies Nepos, a Grandson. P implies Publius, from the Word Pubes, or Populus People. Q stands for Quintus. that is, the fifth Son of the Family, or Quaestor, a Treasurer, or Quirites, Cit∣tizens of Rome. T stands for Titus, from the Word Tueri, being as much as to say, the De∣fender or Preserver of ones Country, and the same Letters also of the Alphabet turned topsie∣turvey denoted the proper Names of the Ro∣man Ladies, W being put for Marca, and C for Caia. They sometimes doubled the Letters of their Alphabet with the same Design, as A. P. signified Appius, which is derived from the Sabine Word Attius; for Attius Claudius was the first that was banished out of his Country that came to Rome, and changed his Name from Attius, to that of Appius Claudius. Cn signified as much as Cneus, that is, Naevus, from some Mark or Mole upon his Body. M F signified Marci Filius, the Son of Marck. M N denoted Marci Nepos; the Grandson of Marcus. P C signified Patres Conscripti; the Senators of Rome. P Q signi∣fied Populus Romanus; the Romans. R P was put for Respubiica; the Common-wealth. S C was used for Senatûs Consultum, the Order or Decree of the Senate. S P stands for Spurius, which denotes somewhat that was base in ones Birth, or that the Person was not legitimate. Ti, is put for Tiberius, as having been born near the Tiber. Cos. is put for Consul. Coss. for Consules in the Plural Number. S. P. Q. R. stands for Senatus, Populusque Romanus; the Senate and People of Rome. It is also found that the same Letter doubled serves to increase the Sig∣nification of a Word, or to signifie a Superlative Degree. Thus B. B. stands for bene bene: F. F. for fortissimè or felicissimè. L. L. for Iubentissimè, &c. The Ancients, before Parchment was invent∣ed, wrote only on one fide, because the Leaves of the Tree, which they called Papyrus, whereon they wrote, were so thin, that the Back-side could not bear Ink: They did the same Thing, when they began to use Parchment, and as the Leaves thereof were very long and large, they were obliged to roll them up, and close them with a Boss made of Bone, Horn, or Ivory, like a Navel: And from thence came the Word Volume, from the Verb volvo, and this other La∣tin Phrase, ad umbilicum opus perductum; that is, a Business finish'd; for the same was closed up with this Boss or Stud: To write otherwise, was so very contrary to Custom; that when they were minded to ridicule any one, who was te∣dious, they said he wrote on both sides, and ne∣ver made an end. This Invention of Parchment is older than some Authors make it to be; since Herodotus relates, that the Ionians, who recei∣ved the Use of Letters from the Phoenicians, cal∣led the Skins of Beasts, Books; because they made use of them sometimes to write upon, and because a Treaty made between the old Ro∣mans and the Gabii, a People of Latium, was written in Antique Letters, upon an Ox his Hide, wherewith they covered a Wooden Shield, as Dionysius of Halicarnassus, informs us; they made use almost of all sorts of Things to write upon, as the Barks of Trees, Boards covered with Wax, or the like: Brass was also used on which the Spartans wrote to Simon, High Priest of the Jews; scripserunt ad cum, saith the Scripture, in Tabulis aereis: They wrote also up∣on Ivory, as Ʋlpian informs us, Libris Elephanti∣nis; upon Goat-skins, and the Entraiis of Animals, according to Herodotus, Cedrenus, and Zonaras; who relate, that there was in the Library at Constantinople, Homer's Iliads wrote in Gold Characters upon the Intestine of a Dragon, an 120 Foot in length. The Lombards, after their Irruption into Italy, wrote upon Wooden Ta∣bles, or Boards, that were very thin, whereon they drew Letters, as easily as upon Wax: Apuleius, in divers places, speaks of Linnea Books, Libri lintei, which were so valuable that they made no use of them but to record the Actions of the Roman Emperors; which were deposited in the Temple of Juno Moneta: They at first made use of a Stile to draw the Letters with; but afterwards Ink came in Fashion and the same was of divers Colours, even of Gold and Enamel. Pliny speaks of a Kind of pecu∣liar Ink for Books, which was mixt with some Wormwood-Juice to preserve them from Rats. The Custom of using Gold is very ancient, seeing a certain Author hath given us an Ac∣count, that one of Pindar's Odes, which was the Seventh, was writ in Gold Characters, and kept in the Temple of Minerva: Silver was also in Use; but Purple was reserved for the Em∣perors only. LITHOSTROTON; a Pavement of Mosaick-Work, which begun to be in Use in Rome in Sylla's Time, who made one thereof at Preneste in the Temple of Fortune, about 170 Years before our Saviour's Nativity: This Word signifies only in Greek a Stone Pavement; but by it must be understood, such Pavements
as are made of small Stones joined together and as it were enchased in the Cement, representing different Figures by the Variety of their Co∣lours and Ordering: At last the same came in Fashion in Rooms, and they wainscoted the Walls of Palaces and of Temples therewith: there is at Lyons an old Church dedicated to St. Ireneus, that is all paved with Mosaick-work, where may be still seen Images, of Rhetorick, Logick and Prudence. The Pieces whereof Mosaick-work was made, M, Perrault says, in his Commentary upon Vitruvius, should be cubi∣cal, or come near unto a cubical Form, that so they might joyn exactly one with another, and be able to imitate all the Figures, and Shado∣wings of Painting; every small Stone used there∣in having but one Colour, as well as the Stitches of Needle-work Tapestry. LITUUS; this was a Staff belonging to the Augurs, bending inwardly at Top, some∣what like a Bishop's Crosier, but shorter: It was the Ensign of their Office. LIVIA; was of the illustrious Family of the Claudii, who by several Adoptions had pas∣sed into that of the Livii and Julii; for her Fa∣ther was adopted into the Family of the Livii, and her self into that of the Caesars: She was first married to the Emperor Tiberius his Fa∣ther: But Augustus being smitten with her Beau∣ty would have her for his Wife, and tho' she∣were then with Child, forced her away from her Husband: By her first Marriage she had Tibe∣rius and Drusus. Historians accuse her of poi∣soning Augustus, in order to raise her Son Tibe∣rius to the Throne: She died at a great Age in the Consulship of Rubellius and Fusius surna∣med Geminus. LIXA; a Town in Mauritania, where, ac∣cording to the Fable, stood the Palace of Ante∣us, whom Hercules squeezed to Death between his Arms; as also the Gardens of the Hesperides, where grew the golden Apples that were guard∣ed by a Dragon. LUCARIA; was a Feast which was cele∣brated at Rome on the Eighteenth of July, in Memory of the Flight of the Romans into a great Wood near the River Allia, where they made their Escape: Plutarch says, the Actors were paid that Day, the Money which arose from the Felling of Wood. LUCINA; Ovid derives her Name from Lucus, or rather Lux, because 'twas by her Help they believed Infants were brought forth. Cratia Lucinae, dedit haec tibi Nomina Lucus; Aut quia Principium tu Dea Lucis habes. The Poets attributed to Diana the Functions of Lucina, and they thought 'twas she that was invoked under the Name of Lucina: Martial confounds the one with the other, and so does Horace. Ritè maturos aperire partus Lenis Ilithyia, tuere Matres; Sive tu Lucina probas vocari, Seu Genitalis. Diva, producas Sobolem.— The Women cried to her, when they were in Labour, because she presided over Lyings-in; Juno Lucina, fer Opem. Ter. LUCRETIA; the Daughter of Spurius Lucretius, who married Collatinus; her extraor∣dinary Beauty made Sextus Tarquinius, attempt to ravish her in the Absence of her Husband: But this vertuous Lady being not able to bear that Indignity, went to her Father and the People of Rome to have Justice done her, then stabbed her self with a Dagger, that she might not survive the Disgrace: This Sight did so af∣fect the Romans, that they cried out for Liberty, and drove King Tarquin out of Rome, and erected a Sort of Government that had something both of Aristocracy and Democracy in it; for which End they created Two Consuls to govern the Commonwealth. LUCTA; was one of the bodily Exercises used among the Athenians, being an Encounter between Two Men only, for a Trial of Strength, and wherein each endeavoured to give the other a Fall: This sort of Combating, and the Prize appointed for the Conqueror, they had in the Olympick Games. Lucian in his Dialogue con∣cerning the Exercises of the Body, brings in A∣narcarsis, a Scythian, speaking thus to Solon, concerning the said Exercise, where he deter∣mines how it should be done. Anacarsss. Why do these young Men give one another the Foyl, and tumble in the Dirt like Swine, endeavouring to Stifle, and hinder each other to take breath? They anointed and sha∣ved one another at first very friendly; but sud∣denly stooping their Heads, they butt at each o∣ther like Two Rams: Then one of them hoist∣ing up his Companion, throws him violently down upon the Ground, squeezing his Throat with his Elbow, and pressing his Body with his Knees, insomuch, that I have been afraid he would have choaked him, tho' the other clapp'd him on the Shoulder, to desire him to let him go, as acknowledging himself overcome. LUCULLUS, an illustrious Roman, who defended the Republick, and overcame Mithri∣dates in Two pitch'd Battles: He had the Mis∣fortune to contract the Hatred of his Followers and the Soldiery, by his contemptible Usage of them: He received the Honour of Triumph, wherein never was such vast Riches seen: Mi∣thridates his Statue all of Gold, and Six Foot in Height, was carried before him, with his Buck∣ler all covered over with precious Stones. He had several Mules laden with Ingots of Gold and
Silver, and a great many rich Moveables. After he had triumphed, he retired from publick Af∣fairs, and lived the rest of his Days a delicious and voluptuous Life: He built Gardens, and stately Houses, every-where, but more particu∣larly on the Sea-side: His Magnificence and luxu∣rious Living appear'd by his Table, he having Halls on purpose for the Feasts he made, where∣in was expended more or less, according to oc∣casion; but among others, there was one which they called Apollo's Hall; where the Entertain∣ment he made cost Five Thousand Crowns: He erected a stately Library, well furnish'd with Books, that was free for any Body's perusal: Sometime before his Death he was disturbed in Mind, and put under the Care of his Brother; 'tis thought Calistenes, his Freed-man, gave him Poison, which thus distempered his Brain. LUDI, Games or Plays, in the Plural Num∣ber; A Term used for the Shows, and publick Representations made by the Ancients, such as the Olympick and Pythian Games were among the Greeks; and those of the Circus among the Romans: Ausonius has observed the following Difference between the Four famous Games of Greece, that Two of them were dedicated to the Gods, and Two to Heroes: Ancient Au∣thors give an Account of Three sorts of Diver∣sions, which they named Races, Combats and Shows; the First were called Iudi Equestres sive Curules, which were the Races made in the Cir∣cus, dedicated to the Sun and Neptune; the Second they called Agonales or Gymnici, which were Combats and Contests, as well of Men as Beasts, performed in the Amphitheater, and de∣dicated to Mars and Diana; the Third were named Scenici, Poetici and Musici; which con∣sisted of Tragedies, Comedies, and Balls, that were acted at the Theaters, dedicated to Venus, Bacchus, Apollo and Minerva. There was an old Decree of the Senate of Rome, that enjoyn'd the publick Plays, should be consecrated and united to the Service of the Gods: Constantine was the first who put down the Sanguinary Plays of the Amphitheater, after he was baptized: See an Ac∣count of these different sorts of Plays under their particular Heads in the Alphabet. LUGUDUNUM, according to Dio, Lug∣dunus by Corruption, when the Goths, in the Fourth and Fifth Centuries, ravaged the Roman Empire, and Lugdunum by way of Abbreviation; is the City of Lyons, in Gallia Narbonensis, con∣cerning which, Dio, who wrote the Roman Hi∣story in the Reign of Alexander Severus, speaks in this manner: The Senators, says he, when they understood that Syllanus sided with Mark Antony, and were afraid left Lepidus and Lucius Plancus, should take to the same Party, they sent Deputies to them, to let them know, that the Republick had then no occasion for their Arms, that so they might contrive no ill De∣signs, and not begin any hostile Act. They re∣ceived the Senate's Orders about building a Ci∣ty for such as the Allobroges had before drove out of Vienna (a City in the Province of Nar∣bonne) and who had withdrawn themselves to a Place scituate upon the Confluence of the Rhosue and the Saone; so that fixing themselves there, they built Lyons, formerly called Lugudunum. It was in the Year, DCCXI, from the Building of Rome, which according to the exactest Chro∣nology answers the Year XLIII. before the Co∣ming of our Saviour, that the said City was built, according to an old Inscription, by Lucius Munatius Plancus, Son of Lucius, Grandson of Lucius, Great Grandson of Lucius, Consul, Cen∣sor, and declared General of the Army a second time, one of the Seven Officers appointed to take Care of the Banquet of the Gods, who triumphed over the Rhetians, built the Temple of Saturn with the Spoils of his Enemies, made a Distribution of the Lands about Beneventum to the Soldiers, and settled Two Collonies in Gaul, one at Lyons, and the other at Aost or August, Five Leagues from Basil. L. Munatius L. F. L. N. L. P. Plancus. Cos. Cens. Imper. Iter. VII. Vir Epul. Triumph. Ex Rhoetis. Aedem Saturni fecit de Manubiis, Agros Divisit in Italia Beneventi, in Galliam Colonias Deduxit, Lugdunum & Rauricam. Plutarch seems to say, that Lyons is older than Plancus; his Words are these: Adjoining un∣to the Soane, says he, there is a Mountain called Lugdunus, which took its Name upon this Occa∣sion; when Momorus and Atepomarus were expel∣led the Kingdom of Seserone, and were about to build a City upon this Hill, and by Order of the Oracle had laid the Foundation thereof, seve∣ral Ravens appeared unto them all on a sudden, with extended Wings, and covered all the neighbouring Trees, from which Sign, Momo∣rus, being skilled in the Art of Augury, na∣med the Town Lugdunum; because that a Ra∣ven in their Dialect was called Lugum, and an high Place Dunum, as Clitophon witnesseth, in L. 13. concerning the Founding of Cities. Nothing certain can be offered concerning the Etymology of the Word Lugdunum: Some will have it, that the Place was named Lugdus, in Memory of one of the Kings of the Celtae; others, in Remembrance of a Legion under Julius Caesar that was called Lugda, and was wont to winter-quarter in this Country: Be∣canus deduces it from a German Word that sig∣nifies Fortune, Glukdunum, being as much as to
say, a fortunate Mountain: As for the Word Dunum, it is agreed, that in the ancient Gaulish Tongue it signified a Hill or Mountain: Some ancient Authors there are, who say, the Word Lug signified a Raven, in the Language of the Celtae; and that because the Mount of Fourviere, which some have thought to have been once called Corviere, was a Place frequented by Ra∣vens, the City which had been built upon the said Mountain, retained the Name thereof, af∣ter the Roman Eagles had chased them away: Some there are who say, that Lugdunum or Lucdunum, as 'tis sometimes found written, signifies as much as Lucii Dunum; the Prae∣nomen of Plancus. Lastly, Others having read in Eusebius, that at first when Lyons was built, there was a great Steel-mirrour pla∣ced upon Mount Fourviere, which by the re∣flected Rays of the Sun, taught those who came from Savoy, the Way to Lyons, which was not yet become a beaten Road; they have thought it Cause enough to affirm, the Place was so cal∣led quasi Lucis Dunum: It is true, some others who are not so credulous, but doubtful of the Truth of this Report, yet retain the same Etymology; tho' they deduce it from Mount Four∣viere's being opposite to the Sun-beams, when it rises. As the Romans were the Fathers of this City, they also were the People who from Time to Time took Care for the Beautifying of it; Au∣gustus who saw it begin to flourish in the Time he was projecting to set up his Monarchical Au∣thority, resided there for Three Years; during which Space, it's Inhabitants received many Fa∣vours from him, as well as the rest of Gaul, who as a Mark of their Acknowledgement built him a Temple at the Joint-charge of Sixty Gaulish Nations, with as many Statues appertaining thereto as bore the Titles of each of the said Na∣tions; and this Temple, according to Strabo, was scituated before the City of Lyons, at the Place where the two Rivers meet. Three Hun∣dred Augurs, and Sixty Haruspices, or South-sayers served there, as may be gathered from the ancient Inscriptions still remaining: It was in this Temple that the Emperor Caligula set up those Academick Plays, of which Suetonius makes mention, whither so many Orators and Poets came from several Parts of the World, to set forth their Eloquence: It was ordered, that he that did not win the Prize, should be plunged into the Saone, if he had not rather chuse to blot out his Writings with his Tongue. This gave Juvenal Occasion to make the Fear of an Orator who went to make an Harangue before the Altar at Lyons to be exceeding great. Palleat, ut nudis pressit qui calcibus anguem, Aut Lugdunensem Rhetor dicturus ad aram. In this City was established not only the Ex∣chequer of the Gauls, but almost of all the Ro∣man Empire, and there was a Mint for the Coi∣ning of Money set up there, that circulated through the whole Empire. LUNA, the Moon according to the Fable: Here take what Lucian writes concerning her in one of his Dialogues entituled Icaromenippus; he brings in Menippus, saying, that having been one Day transported into the Globe of the Moon, she called to him with a clear and feminine Voice, and desired him to make a Representa∣tion unto Jupiter of the impertinent Curiosity of the Philosophers, who would know all she had within her, and give a Reason for her various Changes: For one said, She was inhabited, as the Earth was; another, That she hung in the Air, like unto a Mirrour; a third, That all her Light was borrowed from the Sun: Nay, they, were so bold, as to go about to take Measure of her, as if they would make her a Suit of Cloaths. The same Lucian tells us in another Place, That the Moon is a round and bright Island, hung in the Air, and is inhabited, of which Endymion is King. Apuleius calls the Moon the Sun of the Night, Lunam solis aemu∣lam, noctis Decus, and says, She shines in the midst of the Stars, as their Queen, whence comes that Saying of Horace, Syderum Regina bicornis The Scripture says, God made Two great Lights or Luminaries; the one to rule the Day, and the other the Night. Aristotle tells us, the People honoured the Moon as if she were another Sun, because she participates and comes most near unto her: And Pliny informs us, that Endymion spent Part of his Life in observing this Luminary, from whence sprung the Fable of his being ena∣moured on her. Vossius sets forth at large, that the Moon is the same as Venus Ʋrania, or Venus Caelestis, that was first famous amongst the Assy∣rians afterwards the Worshipping of her was introduced into Phaenicia and Cyprus, from whence it was brought to Greece, Africa, Italy, and the remotest Nations of Europe. Diana was also the Moon; for the Name Diana, seems to have come from Diva Jana. Thus the Sun was cal∣led Janus, and the Moon Jana, according to Varro: Nunquam audivisti rure, Octavo Janam Lunam, &c. Et tamen quaedam melius fieri post octavam Janam Lunam: Diana was made to pre∣side over the Exercise of Hunting, because she chased away the Night by the Favour of the Moon's Rays. St. Jerome says, Diana of E∣phesus was pictured with many Breasts, which is proper enough for the Moon, in or∣der to the common Nurture of Animals: Dia∣na presided over Child-bearing; because 'tis the Moon that forms the Months, and regu∣lates the Times of Women's Lying-in: Thus Cicero speaks of it, Lib. 2. de Nat. Deor. Alhi∣betur ad partus, quod ij maturescunt, aut septem
nonnuquam, aut plerumque novem Lunae cursibus. Plutarch says, The Elizian Fields were the upper part of the Moon; that that Part of the Moon which looked towards the Earth, was called Pro∣scrpina and Antichthon; that the Genii and Doe∣mons inhabit the Moon, and come down to de∣liver Oracles, or to assist at Festival Days; that the Moon does upon no other Account incessant∣ly turn about in order to rejoyn the Sun, but from a Motive of the Love she bears this com∣mon Father of Light; and that undefiled Souls fly about the Globe of the Moon, which is the same as Lucina and Diana. The Moon, at Caran in Mesopotamia was e∣steemed for a God, and usually called Lunus, and not Luna. Thus Spartian speaks of it: As we have made mention, says he, of the God Lunus, you must know, that the Learned have left it to us upon Record, and that the Inhabi∣tants of Caran think to this very Day, that such as believe the Moon is a Goddess and not a God, will be their Wives Slaves as long as they live; but that those on the Contrary who e∣steem her to be a God, will ever be Masters of their Wives, and will never be overcome by their Artifices: Wherefore, continues the same Author, tho' the Assyrians and Egyptians call her by a Feminine Name; yet in their Mysteries of Religion, they take Care to reverence her continually as a God. And there are still re∣maining several Medals of the Nysaeans, Magne∣sians, and other Greek Nations, who represent the Moon to us in the Dress, and under the Name of a Man, and covered with an Armenian Bonnet. The Moon is one of the Seven Planets, and the nighest to the Earth: She goes round the Zodiack in 27 Days, 7 Hours, and 41 Minutes, and does not overtake the Sun in less than 29 Days, 12 Hours, and 44 Minutes. The first Motion is her Periodical Course; the second is, the Synodical or Course of Conjunction; there is a third they call a Course of Illumination, during which she appears to us, which is for 26 Days and 12 Hours. The Moon is a spheri∣cal and dark Body, which has no other Light than what is reflected upon her from the Sun: Her Spots proceed from the Unevenness of her Surface: The Arabians and Egyptians attribu∣ted 28 Houses to her, which are explained in the Oedipus of Father Kircher: The different Ap¦pearances of the Moon's Light, according to the Scituation thereof in respect to the Earth and Sun, are called Phases: She is called the new Moon, when she proceeds from under the Rays of the Sun, or its Conjunction with it: The old Moon, when she is upon the Decline or in the Wam: the full Moon, when she is in its Opposition. The Ancients were superstitiously guilty of ma∣king great Lamentations during the Ecclipse of the Moon, and the Romans made many mourn∣ful Noises upon the said Occasion. LUPERCI and Lupercalia: The Luperci were the Priests of Pan, God of the Arcadians, surnamed Lycaeus, the Son of Mercury and Pene∣lope, and God of Shepherds. Authors do not agree concerning the Manner of instituting these Priests, nor their Sacrifices and Ceremonies ob∣served at Rome in Honour of God Pan. Some refer it to Romulus, and others with more Like∣lihood to Evander King of Arcadia, who having been miserably driven out of his Country, came into the Territories of the Latins, where he was not only favourably entertained by Faunus, who was then King there, but also received Part of his Territories from him, so as that he was free to settle himself towards Mount Palatine, where he built a small City and Temple, which he dedicated to Pan the Lycaean, at the Foot of the said Mountain, with a Statue erected in Honour of him, which was covered with a Goat's skin, like the Dress of the Shepherds of those Times: There he appointed Sacrifices to be offered, and constituted a Number of Priests called Luperci from Lupus, Lycaeus being the same thing as Lupus with the Latins. And this makes it evidently appear that the instituting of those Priests and Festivals, is to be attributed to none but Evan∣der; and not to Romulus: Thus when Numitor's Men seized on Remus, they surprized him, as he was offering Sacrifice to the God Pan, at the Foot of Mount Palatine, according to the Re∣port of Dionysius of Halicarnassus, and Aelius Tubero, L. 1. of the Roman Antiquities; which also does suppose, that the said Sacrifices were before instituted by Evander, unless any should say, that Romulus increased the Ceremonies and Magnificence of these Feasts (after he had built Rome) the Foundations whereof had been laid by Evander. And here note, that in the Solemni∣ties used at this Feast, which was celebrated at Rome February 15th, the Priests met together early in the Morning in the Temple of this God; where after they had made the usual Prayers, they sacrificed white Goats to him, in whose Blood when they had dipt two Knives, they marked two young Men in their Faces therewith, then they wiped them with Wool steeped in Milk; after which they provided themselves with Thongs made of these Goat-skins, and run stark naked about the City, slapping the Wo∣men with them, who willingly received them, because they had an Opinion these Blows would make them fruitful: Some have held, that this Ceremony was added by Romulus, because that finding the Sabin Women which he had ravished, became barren, he consulted the Au∣gurs thereupon, and they made answer, that in order to remedy the said Evil the Woman must offer Sacrifice to Juno on a Mountain of Rome called Esquiliae, each being covered with a Goat∣skin, which is interpreted to be the Skins of the Goats the Luperci sacrificed.
The Custom of these People's running naked, came from Pan's running so after his Flocks: Ipse Deus nudos jubet ire ministros. Ovid. or ra∣ther for preserving still some Remains of the Savage Life which the first Inhabitants of the Earth led, before some extraordinary Men were raised up to polish and civilize the Savages and of whom afterwards they made Gods. This Feast lasted a long Time among the Romans, and Augustus himself reformed several base Abuses that had crept into it, and forbad the Youth of the City that exceeded the Age of Fourteen, to run naked thereat. Lupercali∣bus vetuit currere imberbes, says Suetonius in the Life of Augustus, and this makes Cicero in his se∣cond Philippick to reprove Antony, that when he was Consul he had run about stark naked at this Feast: Ita eras Lupercus, ut te esse Consulem memi∣nisse deberes. LUSTRATIO; was a Ceremony or Sa∣crifice made by the Romans, after they had done numbering the People which was performed eve∣ry Five Years. LUSTRUM; that is to say, the Space of Four or Five Years. The Romans numbred their Peo∣ple by Lustra's: The Word comes from Luo, ac∣cording to Varro, which signifies, to pay; because that at the Beginning of every fifth Year they paid the Tribute, laid upon them by the Cen∣sors: Their Charge, which afterwards became Annual, having been established at first for this Space of Time: Servius was the first that pu∣rified the People in this manner: He put them into Battle-array; and made a Bull and an He-goat, which he sacrificed, to pass round them three Times, and that was the first Lustrum of the Romans, and the first Tax, which was conti∣nued from Five Years to Five Years. LUTETIA; or Paris; some Authors be∣ing not able to discover the Original Institution of the Arms of Paris, which are a Ship, have gone so far to enquire after the same as Isis, as well as for the Name of this Illustrious City: For many have thought the Name of Paris to have been Greek, and to come from , that is, near the famous Temple of the Goddess Isis: It must then be supposed, as it has always been thought, that there was a Temple there dedi∣cated to the said Goddess, within the Bounds of the Ground which belong now to the Abbey of St. Germain des Prez: This Temple stood till the Time that Christianity was established in France, and when it was demolished, Curiosity led some to preserve the Idol of Isis that had been wor∣shipped there, and the same was put into a Corner of the Church of St. Germain des Prez, when it was built by Childebert, and dedicated to St. Vincent, to serve as a Trophy that Idola∣try was subdued: The said Idol was preserved to the Year 1514. when Cardinal Briconnet, who was then Abbot of the Place, coming to under∣stand, some silly Women through Simplicity and Superstition, had burnt Candles before the said Idol, caused the same to be taken away and cut into Pieces. This City at first bore the Name of Paris, which it took from its Proximity to the Temple of Isis, and communicated it to all the Country round it, whereof it was the Ca∣pital City, but received that other Name of Lucotecia or Lutetia, from the Greek Word , which signifies Whiteness, because of the Whiteness of the Plaister the Masons used in the Building thereof; and none ought to wonder why the Name of Paris should be taken from the Greek, considering the Affinity there is between the French and the said Language, of which di∣vers Authors have treated: The Word Paris therefore extended it self throughout the Coun∣try, as it does still to this Day, the same being called Parisis, and the City Lucotecia or Lutetia Parisiorum: They are Names even to be met with in Caesar's Commentaries, Strabo and Pto∣lomy. LYAEUS, an Epithet given to Bacchus, from the Greek Word , which signifies to chase away; because Wine, of which he was the God dissipates the Vexations of Men's Minds. LYCAEUS, a Mountain in Arcadia conse∣crated to Jupiter and Pan the God of Shepherds, from whence it is, that they have given him the additional Epithet of Lycaean; they solemni∣zed some Festivals there in Honour of Pan, which Evander carried into Italy, and were cal∣led Lupercalia. LYCAON, was a Tyrant of Arcadia, who was thunder-struck by Jupiter, and changed into a Wolf, because he had sacrificed a young Child upon his Altar, according to the Testimony of Pausanias in his Arcadicks: Ovid gives another. Account thereof, L. 1. Metamorphosis, he re∣lates, that Jupiter being not able any longer to bear with the horrible Cruelties exercised by Lycaon towards his Guests, took upon him Hu∣mane Shape, and went into the Palace of this Tyrant, who being desirous to make Tri∣al whether he were a God, or no, laid Humane Flesh before him at Table, with which Jupiter being incensed, he transformed him into a Wolf. LYCEUM; a famous Place near Athens, where Aristotle read Philosophy to his Disciples, as Plato did in his Academy: His Disciples were called Peripateticks, because he taught them walking. LYCIUS, a Surname of Apollo, who was worshipped in the City of Patara the Capital of Lycia, where he had a Temple famous for the Oracles delivered there by him: Et Lyciae sor∣tes, Virg. 4. Aeneid. LYCURGUS; the great Legislator of the Lacedaemonians, formed his Republick, according to the Model of the Stars, says Lucian, and for∣bad
his Citizens, to go forth to Battle before the Full Moon, because then their Bodies were in greater Vigour: That his Laws might obtain the greatest Authority, he pretended to have had them from Apollo at Delphos; he died when he was Fourscore and Five Years old. LYNCEUS; was one of the Argonauts, who went with Jason to the Conquest of the Gol∣den-fleece; the Poets made him to be so quick∣sighted, that he could see through Trees and Walls, and that because he had found out Mines in the Bowels of the Earth. LYNCUS; a very cruel King of Scythia, who would have put Triptolemus (whom Ceres had sent to teach Men the Use of Corn) to Death, but the Goddess abominating so much Cruelty, changed him into a Lynx which is an Animal spot∣ted with divers Colours. LYRA; a Lyre, or Harp; an old musical Instrument, which we find painted in the Hands of Apollo; 'tis almost of a circular Form, and has a small Number of Strings, which are touch∣ed with the Fingers, some have thought the Grecian Lyre to have been the same with our Cüitarre; others say, it was an Instrument made of a Tortoise-shell, which Hercules excavated and bored Moles in, and then strung it, as Horace bears witness, and so they came to call it Testudo: You may see it bears several different Forms on the Monuments and Medals of the Ancients: Some attribute the Invention of this Instrument to Orpheus; others to Linus, some to Amphion; others again to Mercury and Apollo, as may ap∣pear by those Dialogues of Lucian concerning the Gods, where he brings in Apollo to speak thus: He hath made an Instrument of a Tortoise-shell, whereon he plays to that Perfection, as to make me Jealous, even me who am the God of Harmony. The Harp is also a Coelestial Sign, composed of Ten Stars, that rise at the Sign of Libra; the Scituation whereof makes as it were a kind of Harp: The Fables of the old Astronomers, would have the same to be Orpheus his Harp, which he received from Apollo, to whom Mer∣cury had made a present thereof; and that the Muses placed it among the Stars. LYSIMACHUS, was one of the Succes∣sors of Alexander the Great; by a Medal of his, was to be seen on one side, the Form of his Head, with his Crown on, and two Horns at both ends; and this he bare, faith Appian, because he held a mad Bull by the Horns, that had forced him∣self loose out of the Hands of the Sacrificers, and had killed them; and in Testimony of his Con∣quering of him, he bore the said Horns. Upon the Reverse of the Medal sits Victory, holding a Victim in her Right Hand. M. M Is a Consonant, and the Twelfth Letter of the Alphabet that has a very dull Sound, and is pronounced with the outermost Part of the Lips, whence it comes to pass that 'tis called Mugiens Littera. It's sunk often times in Prose, as 'tis also in Verse, Restitutu iri, you meet with in the Law, Saltu for Saltum, in Vet. Gloss. Quintilian says, That the M often ended Latin Words, but never Greek ones, and that in such Case the Greeks changed it into an N, because the N had a more pleasing Sound, tho' it was rare in the Latin Tongue to meet with any Words ending with this Letter. M alone stands for Manius; Marcus, Manes, Manibus. M being a Numeral Letter, stood for a Thousand among the Ancients; and when a Stroak was drawn above it, it made a Million. MACHINA, a Machine, or Engine, being no other than the Setting together of several Pieces by Mechanical Art, so as to serve for the Increasing of the Force of moving Powers: The Name of Machine has been given in general to every Thing that hath no other Motion but what comes by the Art of Men; the Ancients had a Multitude of Warlike Machines, consisting of Rams, Slings, Scorpions, Cross-bows, Cata∣pultes, &c. for the Beating down Town-walls, Shooting of Arrows, Flinging of great Pieces of Stone, and the like. MACHINAE VERSATILES; They are strange Inventions to Change Scenes, make Flights in the Air; to move Ani∣mals, and for other Artifices, that both sur∣prize and prove an agreeable Diversion to the Spectators: Clocks, Pumps, Mills, Organs, and the like Things which operate by the Help of Wind and Water, are Water or Aery Machines, otherwise called Hydraulick or Pneumatick ones. MACTUS HOC VINO INFE∣RIO ESTO: 'Twas a Form of Speech u∣sed at the Sacrifices offered by Pagans to their Gods, being as much as to say, Magis auctus; may your Glory be increased by the powring out of this Wine; and the following Ex∣pression also has the same Derivation, Macte nova Virtute Puer; Pretty Boy, increase in Vertue. MAGIA; Magick; the Scripture it self gives us an Account of the Antiquity of Ma∣gick in Egypt; when it speaks of the Magici∣ans used by Pharaoh, in Opposition to Moses, who also by their Enchantment, performed some of the Miracles, which God wrought by his own Divine Power: But that is not the first Place, perhaps, wherein the Magick of the E∣gyptians is spoken of: 'Tis most certain, that as Egypt was the Mother of Fables, so was she also the Mistress of Magick: Among those Magicians
who withstood Moses, there were Two who sig∣nalized themselves above the rest, to wit, Jamnes and Mambres, of whom St. Paul makes menti∣on, according to the Tradition of the Jews: Pliny had Knowledge of these Two Egyptian Ma∣gicians, but he puts Moses, their grandest Ad∣versary, in the same Rank with them. Est & alia Magices factio à Mose, & Jamne & Jotape Judaeis pendens, sed multis millibus annorum post Zoroa∣stren. Zoroaster, whom Pliny makes so much ancienter than Moses, was, according to Justin, King of Bactra, and the Inventer of Magick. Rex Bactrianorum, Zoroaster, qui primus dicitur Artes Magicas invenisse. It was against this Zoroaster, Ninus made War: It follows from hence, that Magick, as well as Magicians, took its Origin at Babylon, or in the East, before it was spoken of in Egypt: Suidas also places Zo∣roaster in Media or Persia, and makes him to be the Chief of the Magi or Magicians. Zoroaster Perso-Medus Astronomorum peritissimus & Princeps Magorum nominis apud ipsos recepti. Divers Au∣thors make Zoroaster to be of a more Modern standing, and put him no higher than the Times of Darius Histaspes: But 'tis like they may have confounded several Zoroasters together; and that this having been a common Name among the Ma∣gi, they attributed to the last of them somewhat that appertained to the first. Varro the learnedst Man in the Roman Empire in his time, and one who had a clearer Sight than any of them, doubt∣ed not but all that Homer hath related concern∣ing Circe, and the Transformation of Ʋlysses his Companions into Beasts, was no other than the real Effects of Magick: He makes the same Judgment of what was said concerning the Ar∣cadians, who in swimming cross a Pond, were changed into Wolves; and if they abstained from the Use of Humane Flesh, they should become Men again in Nine Years time, by once more swimming over the said Pond: And 'tis upon this same Account that Varro thinks Jupiter and Pan were called Lycaei, in Arcadia, because they transformed Men into Wolves. St. Augustine speaking of Magical Transformation, says, He cannot believe the Devils are able to make any real Change, either in the Minds or Bodies of Men, tho' they may disturb their Imagination, and by phantastical Apparitions, make them see either themselves, or others in the Form of some Animal, in the same Fashion as those Visions are formed in Dreams: It was therefore in this Manner that the Arcadians were transformed in∣to Wolves, and Ʋlysses his Companions into other Animals by Circe. As to what relates to Dio∣medes his Companions, who were changed into Birds, without any remedy; It must be said, that the Devils carried them quite away, and brought strange Birds to stand in their places, in the same Manner as the Daemons substituted a Hind in the room of Iphigenia, who was not trans∣formed into such an Animal, because she ap∣pear'd afterwards, and exercised the Office of Diana's Priestess at Tauris, from whence she also fled, and retired with her Brother Orestes to Aricia in Italy. MAGIA, Magick; Pliny describes the O∣riginal and Efficacy of all pretended Enchant∣ments thus: He says, 'That upon all the Oc∣casions that had been offered him in this kind, he had discovered, and was convinced of the Vanity of Magick, calling it the most deceitful of all Sciences: He shews how after having its Original from Physick, it had borrowed Strength from Religion; wherein, said he, Mankind saw no Relish for to gain the Super∣stitious by; that the same was supported by the Mathematicks, that is by Astrology, for attracting the Curious unto it; and that out of those Three Sciences, one was made, which with this Triple Cord bound up the Sences of Men, and she became so much a Mistress over them, that in the East she commanded Kings themselves. The same Author speaking of the Chelony, which is a Stone resembling the Form of an Eye, that is found in the Shell of the Indian Tortoise, he says, If we will believe the Lyes of the Magicians, it has exceeding great Vertue, that after you have washed your Mouth with Honey, you shall no sooner put it on your Tongue, but you'll be able to foretel Things to come. Where he treats elsewhere of the Vervein used by the ancient Gauls, when they were minded to give Answers to such as came to consult them; he speaks thus: But the Magicians are still more foolish and mad, in say∣ing, that such as rub themselves with the said Herb, obtain all they can desire, expel Fevers, make themselves to be beloved by whom they please, and cure all manner of Diseases. Aug. L. 26. C. 4. In setting forth the Vanity of Magicians, speaks of a wonderful Herb: Cast it, says he, into Ponds or Rivers, it drys them up; make it but to touch the strongest Places, it opens them. He says of another; That if it be but thrown into an Army drawn up in Battle-Array, they will be terrified and flie away: At length he concludes with ano∣ther Herb, which the King of Persia gave his Embassadors, whereby they might be able to find, wherever they passed, Plenty of all Things necessary for the Furtherance of their Jour∣ney; afterwards he grows very pleasant, and asks, Where that Herb was, which put Armies to the Rout, when Rome was pressed upon by the Cimbri and Teutones? Why did not the Magici∣ans of Persia make use thereof against Lucullus, when the said General cut their Armies in pieces without Mercy? It must be a Matter of Wonder, that other Roman Generals, rather than take upon them the Care of having so many Com∣missaries, for providing their Armies with Vi∣ctuals,
had not stocked themselves with the Herb, which had the Vertue to cause their Tables to be furnished with all Necessaries for the Support of Life, where ever they were. Lastly, He quar∣rels with Scipio for having made use of so many Warlike Engines and Soldiers to take Carthage, since one Herb was able to open its Gates for him; and he reproaches the Senate, that they did not make use of the Herb called Ae∣thiopidis, for drying up the Marshes of Italy. In C. 2. L. 30. He says, He had learned from one Ostanes, that there were several sorts of Magicians, some of which were made so by Water, others by the Spheres, Air, Stars, Lanthorns, or Flambeau's, Basons and Axes. He afterwards speaks of the particular Favour Nero had for Magicians, because they had Power to command the Gods. Tiridates to make his Court to the Emperor, brought him many Ma∣gicians, and was rewarded by Nero for it, with the Kingdom of Armenia: And so he ends thus: We must then absolutely believe, that the Ma∣gick Art is not supported by any valuable Testi∣mony whatever. MAGISTER PEDITUM; General of the Infantry. MAGISTER EQUITUM; General of the Horse, or Lieutenant General of the Cavalry. MAGISTER MILITUM UTRI∣USQUE MILITIAE; General of the Ar∣my: They attribute the Constituting of these Officers to Constantine the Great, at the Time that he took away the Command of the Armies from the Prafecti Praetorio. MAGISTER SCRINII MEMO∣RIAE; a Secretary and an Officer of the Empire, to whom his Prince gave a golden Girdle at his Creation: His Business was to reduce into a few Words the Answers the Emperor made to the Petitions and Requests made unto him, and afterwards to enlarge upon them in the Letters Patent or Briefs that were granted: He had under him other Officers who were called Scriniarii Memoriae, or Memoriales: Tis thought this Office was instituted by Augustus, and that the same was exercised by Roman Knights. MAGISTER SCRINII EPISTO∣LARUM; the Secretary who wrote the Em∣peror's Letters; Augustus writ them himself, and then gave them to Mecaenas and Agrippa to correct, says Dio; other Emperors usually dictated them, or told their Secretary what they would have writ, and then did no more than subscribe them with the Word Vale; un∣less it were that they had a Mind to keep a Bu∣siness secret: This Secretary had Thirty Four Officers under him which they called Episto∣lares. MAGISTER SCRINII LIBEL∣LORUM; Master of the Requests, the Per∣son who represented to the Prince the Requests and Petitions of particular Persons, and recei∣ved his Answer, which was reduced into Wri∣ting by his Clerks who were Thirty Four in Number, and were called Libellenses: This may be seen in the Notitia Imperii. Cognitiones & preces Magister Libellorum tractabat, & Acta Li∣bellenses scribebant. We have still in being the Form of a Petition that was presented to the Emperor Antoninus Pius, in these Words. Cum ante hos dies conjugem & filium amiserim, & pressus necessitate corpora eorum fictili sarcophago commendaverim, donec quietis locus quem eme∣raem aedificaretur, viâ Flaminiâ, inter milliare se∣cundum & tertium euntibus ab Ʋrbe, parte laevâ, custodia Monumenti Flam. Thymeles Amelosae M. Signii Orgilii: Rogo, Domine, permittas mihi in eodem Loco, in marmorco sarcophago quem mibi mo∣do comparavi, ea corpora colligere, ut quando & ego esse desiero, pariter cum eis ponar. This was a Petition presented by Arrim Al∣phius the Freed-man of Arria Fadilla the Empe∣ror's Mother, importing his Desire to have Leave given him to gather up his Wife and his Sons Bones to be laid in a Marble-Coffin, which before he had put in an Earthen-Vessel, till such Time as the Place which he had bought to raise a Monument for them, was ready; to whom Answer was given in this Manner. Decretum fieri placet; Jubentius Celsus pro∣magister subscripsi. III Non. Novemb. MAGISTER SCRINII DISPO∣SITIONUM, was the Person who gave the Emperor an Account of the Sentences and Judg∣ments past by the Judges of the respective Pla∣ces, and who examined them, to see if they had judged aright or not, and thereupon sent the Answer to his Prince: He had Courriers appoin∣ted on purpose to carry these Answers, who were called Agentes ad Responsum, and a Fund to pay them called Aurum ad Responsum. MAIA; the Daughter of Atlas and the Nymph Pleione, on whom Jupiter was enamoured, who bore him Mercury. MAIUS, May; the fifth Month in the Year, reckoning from the first of January, and the third in counting the Year to begin with March, as they anciently did: the Sun enters now into Gemini, and the Plants of the Earth flower: This Month was called Maius by Romulus in re∣spect to the Senators and Nobles of his City, which were named Majores; as the following Month was named Junius, in Honour of the Youth of Rome, in Honorem Juniorum, who ser∣ved him in the War. Others will have it to have been called thus, from Maia the Mother of Mercury, to whom they offered Sacrifice on that Day: This Month was under the Protection of Apollo, and therein also they kept the Festival of Bona Dea, that of Goblins called Lemuria,
and the Ceremony of Regifugium, or the Expul∣sion of Kings. On the first Day was celebrated the Anniversary of the Dedication of an Altar erected by the Sabines to the Lares or Houshold Gods, praestitibus Laribus; because they took a faithful Care of whatever was in the House: These Lares had a Dog represented at their Feet, because this Animal also took Care of the House. And this is the Reason which Ovid gives of it, L. 1. Fast. At canis ante Pedes saxo fabricatus eodem Stabat, quae standi cum Lare causa fuit? Servat uterque domum, domino quoque fidus uterque est, Compita grata Deo, compita grata cani. The Roman Ladies on this same Day, offered Sacrifice to Bona Dea, in the Chief Pontiff's House, whereat it was not lawful for Men to assist; they also covered all Mens Pictures and Statues, as they did those of other Animals of the Male Kind. On the 9th was celebrated the Feast of Apparitions or Goblins, called Lemuria or Remuria, instituted by Romulus, for appeasing the Ghost of his Brother Remus, that appeared to him in the Night. See Lemuria. On the 12th came on the Feast of Mars, surna∣med Ʋltor, or the Avenger, to whom Augustus consecrated a Temple on that Day. On the 15th, or Ides of the Month was performed the Cere∣mony of the Argians, whereon the Vestal Vir∣gins threw Thirty Figures made of Rushes into the Tiber, above the Wooden Bridge. The same Day was kept the Feast of Traders, which they celebrated in Honour of Mercury; they of∣fered unto him a whole Sow, and went to a Foun∣tain called Aqua Mercurii, at the Gate named Capena, and there sprinkled themselves with a Lawrel-branch, praying that God to favour them in their Gains, and to pardon the exorbitant Prizes they sold their Goods at, in the Way of their Occupations. On the 21st came on the Feast named Secunda Agonia, or Agonalia, whereof I have spoken under Agonalia. On the 24th was another Ceremony called Regifugium, which same was often repeated in the Compass of the Year. See Regifugium. Plutarch asks why the Romans did not marry in the Month of May; and says, it was either because that in that Month they made several Expiations, with which Marriage did not agree, or because the Month of May took its Name from aged Persons, Majores, for whom Marriage was not suitable; but that the Month of June deducing its Name from Juniores, Marriages were re-assumed therein. A little farther he asks, why Virgins never married on Festival Days, or such as the Publick Assembly were held on, but that Widows affected to marry at those times: He answers, that Virgins are married with Grief, and as it were by Constraint, which is not suitable to Festival Days, an causa est ra∣tio, quam affert Varro, virgines nubere invitas & tristes, festo autem die nilil agi debet cum molestid. But as for Widows, they married the rather on Festival Days, because they could do it then much more retiredly, the Feast having drawn all the People thither; and they thereby with Rea∣son exprest their Shame for their Second Mar∣riages. MAMURIUS, surnamed Veturius, whose Name is famous in the Hymns of the Salians, for having made Eleven Shields or Bucklers, so like unto that which Numa pretended to have fallen down from Heaven, that it could not be distinguished from them. MANCEPS, A Farmer of the Publick Re∣venue. MANCEPS, is one who sells an Estate with a Promise of keeping the Party harmless; he is likewise one that buys an Estate by Out∣cry. MANCIPARE, is to sell or divest one self of any Possession, and to invest another with it, according to the Roman Law. MANCIPATIO, is the Selling or Alie∣nating of some Lands by the Ballance, and Five Witnesses, which took no place but among Ci∣tizens of Rome, in respect to certain Estates situ∣ate in Italy, or among such as were priviledged to be Roman Citizens. MANCIPIUM, & MANCUPIUM; A Sale, or Alienation which took place among no other than Citizens of Rome only. Mancipi∣um was a peculiar Right of Propriety, which the Citizens of Rome, and those to whom it was granted, in respect to some Lands in Italy, enjoy∣ed alone, wherein were observed some Formali∣ties relating to the Ballance and Tale of Money-Multae sunt domus in hac Ʋrbe, atque haud scio, a pene cunctae, jure optimo; sed tamen jure privato, jure haereditario, jure auctoritatis, jure mancipî, jure nexi. There are divers Houses in Rome, which are, perhaps, Free-hold, but this Fran∣chise is founded upon a particular Right, not a publick One, upon a Right acquired by Succes∣sion of Inheritance, by Way of Prescription, by Right of Purchase; the Sale of such Houses ha∣ving passed with a Clause and Condition that is express and formal, in respect to such Franchise and Prerogative. MANDRAGORA, Mandrake; there is a Male and Female of it, and there is another that is a kind of Solatrum Soporiferum, whose Root is white and hollow, and a Cubit high: This Plant has strange Properties, for if the Quantity of a Dram of it be given any one to drink, he will presently think himself as handsome as that Metius we read of in Domitian's Court: And if three times as much of it should be ad∣ministred, it would render such an one as
extravagantly foolish as can well be thought of. MANES; the Manes, or departed Souls. Serim in his Commentary upon the Third Book of the Eneids, informs us of the various Opini∣ons the Ancients held concerning this Word: The Manes, says he, are Souls separated from Humane Bodies, which have not yet entred in∣to other Bodies, and delight to do Mischief unto Men, being so called by an Antiphrasis; for Ma∣num in the old Latin signified Good. Some will have this Word Manes to come from Manare, to flow or come forth, because all the Air between the Earth and Circle of the Moon is full of Manes, who come out of their Mansions to tor∣ment Mankind: Some there are who distinguish the Manes from the Infernal Gods; others who say, that the Coelestial Gods are the Gods of the Living, and the Manes the Gods of the Dead: And Lastly, Many believe the Manes are No∣cturnal Dieties, who reign between Heaven and Earth, and preside over the Moisture of the Night, which has given occasion to call the Morning Mane. Apuleius in his Book concerning the God of Socrates, which we have already related under the Word Lemures, tells us, that as 'tis uncer∣tain whether Souls separated from Bodies are of the Number of the Lares or Larvae, they have been called by the Name of Manes, and in a Way of Honour they have the Title of Gods gi∣ven them. Festus says, the Manes were invoked by the Roman Augurs, because they believed them to be favourable unto Men, and that they were also called Superior and Inferior Gods; and the Etymology of the Word seems to arise from the Verb Manare, quòd ii per omnia aethaerea, terrenaque manare credebantur. Thus as the Manes were made to be propitious Dieties, and had this Name given them by way of Honour, if Apuleius may be credited, we may say with Vossius, and other learned Men, that this Word comes simply from the old Word Manis, which signified Good: Wherefore 'tis certain, Manes was taken diversly among the Ancients; but in the first place in general, for departed Souls, as appears by an Inscription be∣ginning thus, Manibus gentis suae, which was de∣dicated by some Roman to the Manes of his Fa∣mily; and in Virgil: Manesque vocabat Hectoreum ad tumulum. And in another place: Id cinerem aut Manes credis curare sepultos. In the second place, the Word Manes is by a Metonomy taken for Hell, that is for those Sub∣terranean places, whither the Souls of Men, both Good and Bad, were to go, from whence the Good were sent to the Elysian Fields, and the Wicked to Places of Punishment, called Tartata. Haec Manes veniat mihi fama sub imos. And elsewhere: Manesque profundi. Which cannot be interpreted in respect to the Souls themselves, but to the Places where they were. Lastly, The Manes are taken for Infer∣nal and Subterranean Gods, and generally for all Deities whatever, that have the Charge of, and do preside over the Graves of the Dead, in which Sence, the Word Manes, in the old Glossarie, is interpreted in Gr. , i, e. Daemons or Genij, Subterranean Gods: 'Tis in this Sence that Epitaphs are dedicated to them in these two Words Diis Manibus, which are sometimes exprest by halves only Dis Men, and most often by two Letters D. M. and among the Primitive Romans, who made their Epi∣taphs in Greek, were used  that is, . The Romans had a great Veneration for these sorts of Gods, and they were of Opinion they could stop the Hands of any one that attempted to commit Sacrilege, by putting him in mind of these Gods, in an Epitaph exposed to the View of all the World, whereof take an Example: NE TANGITO O MORTALIS. REVERERE MANES DEOS. That is, have a Care, O Man, do not touch me, and have a Respect for the Dii Manes. MANIA; was taken by the Ancients to be the Mother of the Lares, or Houshold Gods; they offered Sacrifice to her at certain Feasts called Compitalia, instituted by Brutus, wherein the Slaves intermix'd with their Masters, as in the Saturnalia, eat and drank with them, and diverted themselves in the Cross-ways. It was a Custom at first to Sacrifice little Children to her for the Preservation of the whole Family, in Obedience to the Oracle, but Brutus having expelled Tarquin, gave the Oracle of Apollo ano∣ther Interpretation than it had before, and or∣dered that instead of Mens Heads, they should use those of Poppy and Onions, they also placed as many of the Effigies of Men and Women, stuffed with Flax or Chaff, before the Doors of their Houses, and in the Cross-ways, as there were Free Persons in each House, and as many Balls of Wool, as there were Slaves there, that so neither Mania, nor the Houshold Gods her
Children, might do any Mischief to the Living, as Festus informs us: Quibus tot pilae, quot capita servorum; tot effi∣gies, quot essent liberi, ponebantur, ut vivis par∣cerent, & essent his pilis & simulachris contenti. MANIPULUS, was a small Troop or Com∣pany of Soldiers among the Romans; there was a small Maniple, which was a Band or File of Ten Soldiers, and the great Maniple, which Elian makes to be 256 Men, and Vegetius 100 only; for the Word Manipulus properly signified an Handful of Herbs or Hay, which they tied to the End of a Pole for a Cognizance or Flag, before they assumed the Eagles for their Arms; hence comes that Saying, still continuing amongst us; An Handful of Men. MANIPULARES; the Soldiers in the Company. MANLIUS, surnamed Marcus, and by Pliny, Titus, was a great and generous Captain, who performed many famous Exploits, and amongst other things saved the Capitol, when it was be∣sieged by the Gauls, whereby he obtained the Surname of Capitolinus; he was accused of Aspi∣ring after a Tyrannick Power, was convicted and condemned to be thrown down Head-long over the same Rock which he had prevented the Gauls from surprizing: His House was pul∣led down; and all of his Name were for the future enjoined not to use the Praenomen of Marcus. MANLIUS, surnamed Torquatus, because he had killed a Gaul of prodigious Stature, and took from him a Chain in Latin called Torques; from whence he afterwards took the Surname of Torquatus, which made a Distinction between his Descendants and the other Manlii. He gave an Example of inflexible Severity in the Person of his own Son, whom he put to Death, because he had fought against his Orders, and killed a Gau∣lish Captain that insulted the Romans; from whence hath proceeded this Proverb, to denote a severe Command, Manliana Imperia. MANLIUS, named Lucius, was a famous Painter, who made answer to Semilius, that won∣dered to see so good a Painter have such hard∣favoured Children; In luce pingo, in tenebris singo. MANUBIAE, the Spoils of the Enemy, or the Money made of the Booty taken from the Enemy. MARATHON, a City in the Territory of Athens, and distant from it about Ten Miles. Its a Place very famous not only for the Death of King Icarus, and the Overthrow of the Mara∣thonian Bull by Theseus, but more particularly up∣on account of the famous Victory won by Mil∣tiades, the Athenian General, over 600000 Per∣sians, commanded by Darius. MARCELLUS, M. CLAUDIUS, af∣ter several gallant Actions performed by him in the Wars against Hannibal, was killed va∣liantly fighting; the Romans called him their Sword. MARCUS ANTONIUS, Mark An∣thony, had a long and full Face, and a double Chin, which was a Sign of his being a Lover of Pleasure and good Cheer: He had an Eagle's Nose, which denoted Courage; but the Love he bore unto the fair Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt, sullied his Glory, and was the Cause of his Ruine. MARCUS AURELIUS. See Aurelius. MARIUS CAIUS: He brought the War against Jugurtha to an happy Period, and tri∣umph'd: He brought into the publick Treasury 3007 Pound Weight in Gold, and 5775 of Sil∣ver in Ingots, without reckoning the vast Quan∣tity of Gold and Silver Coyn he also got them. He afterwards defeated the Teutones, who in one Battle lost 100000 Men, slain and taken Prisoners. Marius, who could not be sa∣tiated with Wars nor Triumphs, sollicited for a Commission to make War upon Mithridates, and obtained it; but Sylla, who was Consul, and concerned at this Commission, could not bear the Affront: He came to Rome with an Army, and obliged the Senate to declare Marius and his Adherents Enemies to the People of Rome: He withdrew into Africa, and after having esca∣ped a Thousand Dangers, shut himself up in Preneste, which he defended as well as he could: But seeing no hopes of Relief, and no way of Escape, he killed himself, for fear he should fall into Sylla's Hands. MARS; the God Mars, which the Poets feign to have been born of Juno, without Co∣pulation with any Man, but by the Smell of a single Flower, which the Goddess Flora had shewed her, as Ovid informs us. They make him to be the God of War, and of Armies, and represented him armed with Rage and Fury, and with flaming Eyes as well on Horse-back as in a Chariot, drawn by Two Horses, named Ter∣ror and Fear, and drove by his Sister Bellona: Terrorque Pavorque Martis Equi. Val. Max. L. 3. de Ar. There are some who make him to be accompa∣nied with Terror, Fear and Fame. He was ve∣ry familiar with Venus, Vuscan's Wife, who sur∣prized them in the Act; as Lucian says in his Dialogue of Apollo and Mercury. Apoll. Mercury, What do you laugh at? Mer. Why should not I laugh, Apollo, at so pleasant an Adventure? Apoll. Tell me, that I may laugh in my turn. Mer. Mars has been caught lying with Venus. Apoll. How was that? Give me a Relation of the Adventure.
Mer. Vulcan has been long jealous of their Familiarity, and watched his opportunity to sur∣prize them, for which End he placed Nets round his Bed, but so as not to be seen, then went to his Forge: The Gallant laying hold of the Op∣portunity of the Husband's absence, went to lie with his Mistress; but the Light discovered them, and informed Vulcan how it went, inso∣much that he took them both in the Fact, and folded them in his Nets. What gave occasion to this Fable, of Mars and Venus committing Adultery together, and the Manner how they were discovered, was ta∣ken from the Art of Astrology, where these two Planets are made to be frequently in Conjun∣ction. The Ancients represented the Picture of Mars upon their Medals, compleatly armed, holding a Javelin in his Hand, called Quiris by the Sabines, from whence he has obtained the Name of Quirinus pater. Augustus Caesar built him a Temple at Rome, of a round Form, which he consecrated under the Name of Mars the Aven∣ger, because he had been Assistant to revenge the Death of Julius Caesar; Templa feres, & me victore vocaberis Ʋltor. Voverat, & fuso letus ab hoste redit. Ovid. Its probable the Mars of the Assyrians was the most ancient of any, for Diodorum Siculus testi∣fies, they gave unto him the Name of Mars, who invented the Use of Arms, and first began a War: Qui fabulas ad historiam referunt, bi Mar∣tem aiunt primum fuisse qui universam fabricarit armaturam, ac milites armis instruxerit, &c. But he who gave a Beginning to Arms and War, (ac∣cording to the Scriptures) was Nimrod, the same as Belus of the Heathens, or his Son Ninus, of whose being so Justine bears a Testimony. As the Empire of the Assyrians was the first of all the rest, and that Empire has been no otherwise set up than by Force of Arms; its not to be doubted but the first Kings of Babylon or Assyria, were deified by the Name of Mars, in those an∣cient Times, wherein Kings were so honoured after their Deaths. Cedrenus also informs us, that Mars and Belus were the same God of the Assyrians; and so the Greek Name  is not only derived from the Hebrew Word Arits, which signifies, fortis, terribilis; but the same is also common in the Persian Tongue. This is a Summary Account of the Chymerical Divinity of Mars in Assyria and Persia: The Egyptians placed him in the second Degree among the Demi-Gods that reigned with them; and this may be observed from the Dynasties related by Syncellus. Julian the Apostate makes men∣tion of Mars of Edessa, who was called Azizus. Now all the Nations of the Earth having a  not be without one. History and the Greek Fa∣bles tell us, that Mars having killed Halirrho∣thius, Neptune's Son, for having violated the Chastity of his Daughter Alcippe, Neptune ac∣cused him before the Tribunal of Twelve Gods, where he was acquitted: The Place in Atheus where this Judgment was pronounced, has been since called , because 'twas an Eminence or a Rock; and the Judges from thence took the Name of Areopagites: This Action of Mars might very well induce the Greeks, to attribute unto him what the most An∣cient and Eastern Nations had already published concerning the God of War. Dionysius of Ha∣licarnassus, says, that the Sabins and the Romans gave the Name of Quirinus to the God Enyalius, being in some doubt, whether he were God Mars himself, or another God who presided over Mi∣litary Adventures. MARS, in Astrology, is the Fifth Planet, be∣ing between the Sun and Jupiter; its a mischie∣vous Planet, which the Astrologers call Little Misfortune; she finishes her Course in a Revo∣lution of 322 Days, and goes round about the Sun. Fontana has observed a Spot in the middle thereof, which he believes to be a Satellite, as in Jupiter. MARTIUS; March, the Third Month in Year, according to our Way of Reckoning. It was formerly the First amongst the Romans, and is still so in use in some Ecclesiastical Computa∣tions. Its no longer than since the Edict of Charles IX, in the Year 1564, that they have used in France to reckon the Year from the Beginning of January; for before it began with March: Astrologers make it also the first, because 'tis then that the Sun enters into Aries, by which they begin to reckon the Signs of the Zodiac. The Calends of this Month was anciently very remarkable, because of its being the first Day of the Year, whereon divers Ceremonies were per∣formed: They kindled a new Fire upon the Al∣tar of Vesta with the Sun-beams, by the Help of a Burning-glass, in the same Manner almost as they kindle it in the Popish Church on Easter-Eve: Hujus diei primâ ignem novum Vestae aris accendebant, ut incipiente anno, cura denuò ser∣vandi novati ignis inciperet. Macr. L. 1. C. 12. Saturn. They took away the old Lawrel-branches and Crowns, as well from the Door of the King of the Sacrifices, as from the Courts and Houses of the Flamines, and the Axes of the Consuls, and put new in the room of them; and this was called Mutatio laurearum. And this Macrobius also informs us, Tam in Regiâ, curiisque atque Flaminum domibus laureae veteres novis laureis mutabantur. Ovid tells us the same Thing, in Lib. 3. Fast.
Laurea Flaminibus quae toto perstitit anno Tollitur, & frondes sunt in honore novae: Adde quòd arranâ fieri novus ignis in aede Dicitur, & vires flamma refecta capit. The Magistrates took Possession of their Places; which continued, says Ovid, till the Carthaginian War; for then they altered the Custom, and enter'd thereon the First of January: The Roman Ladies celebrated a particular Feast then, which was instituted by Romulus, and called Matronalia, of which by and by. On the Calends of this Month of March began the Feast of Shields or Sacred Bucklers, Ancy∣liorum dies, which continued Three Days, where∣at the Salii carried small Bucklers: This Festi∣val ended with splendid Feasting and great Mer∣riments, which is the Reason of giving the Name of Coena Saliaris to sumptuous Entertain∣ments. See Ancylia. On the 6th, which is the Day before the Nones, in Latin called Pridie Nonas, there were some Solemnities performed in Honour of Vesta. On the 7th, or Day of the Nones, called Nonis, was celebrated the Anniversary of the Dedicati∣on of the Temples consecrated on such a Day to Ve-Jupiter, in both the Woods of the Asylum; as also a Feast to Juno, called Junonalia. See Ju∣nonalia. On the 13th there was an Horse-race near the Tiber, or upon Mount Caelius, when that River overflowed. On the 15th, or the Day of the Ides, came on the Feast of Anna Perenna, of which I have spoken in its proper place: This Day was called Parricidium, because Julius Caesar was then assassinated by Brutus, and the rest of the Conspirators. On the 16th was another Feast called Liberalia, for then it was that Chil∣dren took upon them the Virile Robe. On the same Day also they made Processions called Argei, or Argea in some Places, the which had been consecrated by Numa in Commemoration of some Grecian Princes that had been buried there. See Argei and Argea. On the 19th, or 14th of the Calends of April, began the great Festi∣val of Minerva, called Quinquatria, either because it fell out on the Fifth Day after the Ides of March, or because it lasted Five Days. See Quin∣quatria. The 24th was marked with those Letters in the Calender, Q. R. C. F. Quando Rex Comi∣tiavit, Fas; it being as much as to say: 'Tis law∣ful for the Praetor to keep his Seat, as soon as the King of the Sacrifices has done his Business in the Assembly and is withdrawn. On the 25th was held the Feast called Hilaria, which was in∣stituted in Honour of the Mother of the Gods and of Atys: On the 26th came on the Feast of Washing the Grand-mother of the Gods, Lava∣tio Matris Deûm, being instituted in Commemo∣ration of the Day wherein she was brought from Asia, and washed in the River Almo. Vid. La∣vatio. There were several Feasts kept on the 30th, viz. to Janus, Concord, Health and to Peace. and next Day there was one to the Moon cele∣brated on Mount Aventine, to which they sacri∣ficed a Bull. MARSYAS, the Son of Oeagrus, who was a Shepherd, and one of the Satyrs, and having taken up a Flute which Minerva had made of a Deer's-Bone, and thrown away in Anger, he learnt of himself to play upon it, insomuch that he ad∣ventured to challenge Apollo, the God of Her∣mony to play with him: The Muses were the Judges of this Tryal of Skill between them, and they gave the Victory to Apollo, who presently caused Marsyas to be tied to a Tree, and stead alive by a Scythian, and cut into Pieces. MATRIMONIUM, Marriage, there was a formal Betrothing and Contract went be∣fore it, as may be seen in Plautus and Terence; for he that was minded to have a Virgin in Mar∣riage, made his Application to her Relations, and demanded their Consent to it. Quid nunc etiam mihi despondes filiam, illis legibus Cum illâ dote quam tibi dixi; M. Sponden' ergo, spondeo. Then the Contract was drawn and signed with the Relations Seal, wherein the Terms and Ar∣ticles of Marriage were writ, which gave Ju∣venal Occasion to say, Si tibi legitimis pactam junctamque tabellis Non es amaturus. Veniet cum signatoribus Auspex. The Bridegroom sent to her that was to be his Wife a Ring as a Pledge of their future Marri∣age; which Tertullian informs us, who calls the said Ring Annulus pronubus. Aurum, inquiens, nulla norat praeter uno digito quem sponfus oppignerasset pronubo annulo. De cultu faeminarum. And Isidorus Hispalensis, Lib. 11. de div. off. Cap. 15. Quod in primis, ait, nupti annulus à sponso sponsae datur, fit nimirùm vel propter mu∣tua dilectionis signum, vel propter id magis, ut eo∣dem pignore eorum corda jungantur: unde & quarto annulus digito inseritur, ideò quia in eo vena quae∣dam, ut fertur, sanguinis ad cor usque perveniat. And this is confirmed by Aulus Gellius, Ma∣crobius and Appian, and particularly by these Verses of Juvenal. Conventum tamen & pactum & sponsalia nostra Tempestate paras, jamque à tonsore magistro. Pecteris, & digito pignus fortasse dedisis.
This Ring was made of Iron and without any Stone in the Time of Pliny the Historian, as wee read in L. 33. Nat. Hist. There were no Constitutions at first made for regulating the Age of such as were to be betro∣thed, and the Articles of Betrothing might have been made by both Parties at the Age of Seven Years: But afterwards Augustus ordered they should not be done till Two Years before the Consummation of the Marriage, that is, at Ten Years of Age: Maidens might lawfully contract Marriage at Twelve Years old: See how Dio speaks, L. 54. Quoniam autem, ait Dio, quidam infantes puellas despondentes, praemiis quidem conjugum fiuebantur, caeterum effectum rei & conjugum opus now praestabant, ea sponsalia vires nullas habere constituit, post quae doubus transactis annis sponsa duci minime posset: hoc est ut omnimo decennis virgo desponderetur, duodecimo namque anno virgo matura viro & nubilis existimatur. The Articles of Agreement being made, there was a Day appointed for solemnizing the Marri∣age: All the first Days of the Months, as well as the Month of May were accounted unhappy for Marrying. Macrobius L. 1. C. 25. makes an Enumeration of all the Days whereon the Romans would not marry. Nec hoc praetermiserim, ait, quòd nuptiis copulandis Calendas, Nonas, & Idus religiosas, id est devitandas censuerunt; hi enim dies praeter Nonas feriati sunt, feriis autem vim cui∣que fieri piaculare est: Ideo tunc vitantur nuptiae in quibus sieri vis virginibus videtur. They were very sollicitous about consulting and receiving good Omens before Marriage, as appears by that Verse in Plautus. Ʋltrò ibit nuptum, non manebit Auspices. And Tacitus Lib. 11. speaking of the Wedding of Messalina, says, That her Marriage to Silius was performed with all the Ceremonies, Sacrifi∣ces, Testimonies, Auspices, Feastings, Kissings and Embraces imaginable, nay, with all the Freedom of Man and Wife: And in L. 15. where he speaks of Nero's Marriage with Pytha∣gora, he makes mention of the Omens: The Marriage was performed with all the usual Cere∣monies: Money was consigned into the Hands of the Augurs: She had the Vail on, which Brides used to wear. There was a Wedding-bed pre∣pared; and the Flambeau's of Hymen were lighted. The Bride had an old Man's Hair on her Head, says Sextus Pompeius, which was curled with the Spear of a Javelin that had struck in the Body of a Gladiator that had been slain, to the End that in like manner as the Spear had been united to the Body of the Gladiator she might also be to her Husband; or else because Women were under the Protection of Juno Cùritis, who was called Curis in the Language of the Sa∣bines, being as much as to say, a Javelin, or Spear. Sive quòd hasta Curis priseis est dicta Latinis. Ovid. Lib. 11. Fast. The Bride wore a long Vest which had been wrought by the Hands of Caia Caecilia, according to Pliny, L. 7. Hist. Nat. and at her Entrance into her Husband's House, she had the Keys presented to her, whereby she was constituted Mistress of the whole House, and the Manage∣ment of the Family was left to her; whereas on the Contrary, when the Husband divorced his Wife, he took the Keys from her, as may be seen by that Passage in Cicero, in Anton. Act. 2. Mimam exegit, claves ademit, res suas sibi habere jussit. When this Ceremony was over, they laid her upon a Sheep-skin with the Wool on, to put her in mind that Men were formerly clad with the Skins of Beasts, and farther to intimate it was her Duty to imploy herself in Spinning: After this they fell to Feastings, and other Di∣versions. At the Marriages of the Greeks they sung the Hymenaeus, but at those of the Romans they per∣formed the Talassio, both by Instrumental and Vocal Musick: Now this Custom of Per∣forming the Talassio comes, says Livy, from an Adventure that happen'd when the Romans ra∣vished the Sabine Women, for there was one of the most beautiful of them who was forced by Talassio's Soldiers, and, who as they were carry∣ing of her towards their Commander, for fear left any should take her away from them, they cried that they reserved her for Talassio; and this Word was afterwards found to be a good Omen by the Augurs, and has remained till now. This Eusebius also informs us: Sabinae, ait, rapte anno ab urbe conditâ tertio, & una virginum pul∣chertima cunctorum acclamatione rapientium Talassio duci Romuli decernitur; unde in nuptiarum solem∣nitatibus Talassio vulgò acclamitant, quò scilicet talis nuptasit, quae Talassium habere mereatur. Varro gives this Word another Interpretation, and will have it to signifie a Pannier to put Wool in. The Husband threw Nuts to the Boys, Spar∣ge marite, nuces, Virg. Eclog. 8. intimating he gave himself up to all the Diversions of Chil∣dren, and to hinder the Hearing the Bride's Cry, when she lost her Virginity: They sung wanton and smutty Songs, called Versus Fescennini, because the first of the Sort were made in the City of Fescennia. Fescennium, says Servius, is a City of Campania, where Songs pro∣per for Weddings were invented: Fescennium est oppidum Campaniae, ubi nuptialia carmina sunt inventa. Lastly, The Wedding-Bed was pre∣pared, which by the Ancients was called Lectus or Torus genialis, and then they invoked the Ge∣nius of the Husband, and the Bride was put to
Bed. Next Day the Husband made a Feast at his House called Repotia, and had Presents made him; and both Husband and Wife offered Sacri∣fices to the Gods. Festus speaks of this Custom in the following manner: Regillis, inquit, tunicis albis textis pridie nuptiarum indutae cubitum ibant ominis causâ: There was a Girdle given to the Bride, which the Bridegroom united at her go∣ing to Bed, and this Girdle was made of Sheeps Wool: Cui mea virginitas avibus libata sinistris, Castaque fallaci zona revincta manu. Juno, who presided over Marriages, took divers Names according to the divers Actions perform∣ed thereat: First from the Conjunction of Man and Wife they gave her the Epithet of Juga; from the Conduct of the Bride in her Husband's House, she was called Domiduca and Iterduca; from the Woman's Girdle Cinxia; and from the Perfumes they anointed her with she got the Name of Ʋnxia. St. Aug. Lib. 6. de Civ. Dei. Cap. 11. Laughs at the Superstition of the Gentiles, for introducing so many Gods into the Ceremony of Marriage: The God Jugatinus, says he, pre∣sides over the Habitation of the Man and Wo∣man: Another God called Domiducus, is requi∣red to conduct the Bride to her Husband's House: The God Domicus his Office is to keep her there, whereunto they also added the God∣dess Munturna, to make her continue to dwell with her Husband. They likewise filled the Room with a Company of Gods, when the Pa∣ranymphs came thither: In short, the Goddess Virgo, Father Subiguus, Mother Prima, Par∣tunda, Venus and Priapus assisted hereat: The Goddess Virgo was to be present to undress the Bride, God Subiguus, in order to put her to Bed; the Goddess Prima, to hinder her from re∣sisting the Carresses of her Husband. Priapus must be there also, and in pursuance to a most Civil and Religious Custom of the Roman Ladies, they made the Bride sit in the Lap of this in∣famous Diety, under a Pretence of preventing thereby the Power any Charms and Witchcrafts might have over her. The Bride had a Flame-coloured Vail, called Flam∣meum, on, and under it wore a Crown of Vervein, which she had gathered her self: Flammea tex∣antur sponsae. And Tacitus, C. 15. Annal. speak∣ing of Nero, says, They vail'd him with such a Vail as Brides wore. The Hymenea Torches were lighted; and these were made of white Thorn or Pine; by the Light whereof the Bride in the Evening was conducted to her Husband's House: Mopse, novas incide faces, tibi ducltur uxor. The Bride amongst the Greeks and the Egyptians was conducted to her Husband's House in a Cha∣riot; but among the Romans she was lead by the Hand, and the Doors of the House were adorn∣ed with Garlands of Flowers and green Boughs. The Bride's Toilet was carried by a Lad in a Basket that was covered: And when she came to the Bridegroom's House, the Bride was asked who she was, to which she presently answered Caia, as Val. Maximus informs us; Allusion be∣ing thereby made to Caia Caecilia, Tarquinius Pris∣cus his Wife, who was the Mother of a most ex∣emplary Family, and who spent her Life in Spin∣ing. This being over, the Bride put some Wool at the Door of the Bridegroom's House, and sprinkled it with Oil or Wolf's Grease; as Pliny observes; Novas nuptas adipe lupino postes inungere solitas: And Servius upon the 4th Book of the Eneids writes to this Purpose; Moris erat ut nubentes puellae simul ac venissent ad limen ma∣riti, postes antequam ingrederentur, ornarent la∣neis vittis & oleo ungerent: When this was done, she jump'd over the Threshold, and was very careful not to touch it; which otherwise would have been a very ill Omen, according to Lucan: Translatâ vitat contingere limina plantâ. Servius upon the 8th Eclogue of Virgil, says, That the Bride in going into her Husband's House, took care not to touch the Threshold, for fear of becoming guilty of Sacriledge, by touching the Place that was consecrated to Vesta. Ideò Sponsas limen non tetigisse, ut ne à sacrilegio inchoarent, si rem Vestae calcarint. MATRONALIA; they were Feasts in∣stituted by Romulus, and celebrated by the Ro∣man Ladies. Ovid gives divers Reasons why they were instituted: 1st, Because the Roman Ladies interposed between their Husbands and Relations in the Battle with the Sabins, and al∣so terminated the Difference between them for having stole them; in Commemoration of which Action Romulus would have the Day of the said Pacification, which was the First of March, celebrated as a Festival. 2dly, In or∣der to pray unto Mars that he would fa∣vour them to bring forth Children as happily as Ilia, on whom he had begot Romulus. 3dly, Because in this Month the Earth began to bring forth and grow fertile. 4thly, Because on that Day a Temple had been dedicated to Juno Lucina (upon the Mount called Esquiliae) who presided over Women's Lying-in. 5thly, Because Mars was Juno's Son who presided over Marriages: This Feast was remarkable, upon Account that the Men sent Presents to the Wo∣men, as they did again to the Men at the Satur∣nalia: Sicut Saturnalibus, says Suetonius, dabat viris apophoreta, ita & Calendis Martii faeminis: And inasmuch as the Men treated their Slaves at the Saturnalian-Feasts, and made them their
Companions, so the Women did the same thing now in respect to their Slaves, and served them at Table; for which Reason the said Day was cal∣led Saturnalia faminarum. Batchellors did not assist at these Feasts; which gave Horace occasion to tell Maecenas, that he would be surprized to find that he who was not married, celebrated the Calends of March: Martiis caelebs quid agam Calendis, Quid velint flores & accerra turis Plena, miraris, positusque carbo in Cespite vivo. MATUTA; Break-of-day, a Goddess cal∣led Leucothoe by the Greeks. MAUSOLUS, was a King of Caria, born at Mylasa, who built a stately Palace in Halicar∣nassus, adorned with Proconnesian Marble. His Queen Artemisia erected a stately Funeral Mo∣nument for him, and called it according to his Name Mausoleum, the which in ancient Times passed for one of the 7 Wonders of the World. MAXENTIUS, was Maximian's Son: Hercules Victor says, That Eutropia his Wife had put a suppositious Child upon him: When he understood that Constantine was chosen Empe∣ror; he got himself also declared so at Rome by the Pretorian Bands, whom he corrupted with large Donatives: He was infamous for his Cruel∣ties and Vices, and was defeated by Constantine, near unto Pons Milvins, or the Milvian Bridge upon the Tiber, which breaking under him, he was drowned, after he had reigned Seven Years. MAXIMINUS was a Person of a mean Birth, but succeeded Alexander Severus in the Empire: He was of a Gigantick Stature, being Eight Foot and a Half high, insomuch that his Wife's Bracelet served him for a Thumb-ring: He was robustick and strong as if he were ano∣ther Milo, which made every Body dread him, so that Balbinus trembled when he heard but his Name mentioned. He had a long and sharp-pointed Chin, which is a common Sign of a fierce and cruel Nature; and so indeed he was violent and cruel to the highest Degree, that being his Maxim, that he could not maintain himself in the Empire but by Severity. Moreover, as he was a Person of an extraordinary Size, and had a large Mouth, as great Eaters usually have, 'tis the less to be wondered at what Historians write, that he sometimes did eat in one Day Forty Pounds of Victuals, and drunk as many Pints of Wine. He was killed together with his Son by the Soldiery, having reigned only Three Years. MECOENAS, a Roman Knight descended from the Kings of Etruria, which made Horace, speaking concerning him, say, Mecaenas atavis edite Regibus. He was the Patron of learned Men, and had a singular Kindness for Virgil and Horace: He was a Favourite of the Emperor Augustus, and of a very healthy Constitution: All the Patrons of learned Men are at this Day called Mecca∣nas's. MEDEA; the Daughter of Aetes, King of Colchos, who by her Magical Art assisted Jason to take away the Golden-Fleece; she married him afterwards, and had Two Children by him; but that did not hinder him from wedding Creusa, the Daughter of Creon, King of Corinth, whither had retired. Creon banished Medea, scarce al∣lowing her a Day's Respite, the which she im∣proved to make enchanted Presents to Creusa, whereby she was destroyed: Creon afterwards died embracing of his Daughter: Medea killed her own Children, and in a Charriot drawn by winged Serpents made her Escape to Athens, where she married King Egeus, by whom she had a Son named Medus: But going about to poison Theseus the eldest Son of Egeus, her De∣sign was discovered, and she was forced to fly to Asia with her Son Medus, who left his Name to the Country of Media. MEDICINA, Physick; it is an Art, ac∣cording to Galen, to preserve present Health, and to restore that which is lost; and according to Hippocrates, 'tis an adding of that which is wanting, and a retrenching of what is superstu∣ous; in Herophilus his Sence, 'tis a Knowledge of such Things as are conducive to Health, or noxious thereunto. This Art was not introdu∣ced to Rome, till about 600 Years after the Buil∣ding thereof, as Pliny says; wherein he is mi∣staken, unless he means, that it was not practi∣sed in Rome by Forreign Physicians till such a Time. The Art is divided into Anatomy, Pa∣thology, Therapeutick, Chymistry, Botanism, and Surgery: Julian the Apostate made a Law concerning Physicians, which is printed among his Greèk Letters, and runs thus in English. It being known by Experience, that the Art of Physick is beneficial to Manking; 'tis not with∣out Cause that the Philosophers have given out, it came down from Heaven, seeing that by it the Infirmities of Nature, and accidental Sick∣nesses are removed, wherefore in Pursuance to the Rules of Equity, and the Decrees and Authority of the Emperors our Predecessors, we of our good Will and Pleasure require and com∣mand that you who profess Physich be dispen∣sed with, and discharged of all Offices and Charges laid by the Senate. MEDICUS, a Physician, is one who pra∣ctises the Art of Physich in Curing of Diseases and Wounds, for of old, Physicians practised Chyrurgery; some Authors pretend, that Phy∣sick
was practised by no other than Slaves and Freedmen; but Causabon in his Comments upon Suetonius refutes this, and so does Drelincourt, Professor of Physick at Leyden; and the same may be farther justified by old Inscriptions. Dio∣scorides, a Grecian of Anazarba, coming to Rome, was made a Citizen thereof, and became the in∣timate Friend of Licinius Bassus, an illustrious Roman. The Physician who view'd the Wounds of Julius Caesaer, was called Antistius, and conse∣quently was a free Citizen of Rome; for Slaves had only a Surname, without any Name for their Family. Pliny who seems not to treat well of Physick, says, That the Quirites, as much as to say, the Romans, practised it; and 'tis well known that no Roman Citizens were Slaves: Those who are acquainted with History, must know what Esteem Physicians were in of old at Rome, and elsewhere, since Princes themselves disdained not the Study of it. Mithridates, King of Pon∣tus, did himself prepare a Remedy against Poy∣son. Juba, King of Mauritania, writ a Book of Plants; and Evax, King of Arabia, according to the Testimony of Pliny, dedicated a Book to Nero concerning the Medicinal Vertues of Simples. Its true, Suetonius in the Life of Caligula speaks of a Slave that was a Physician: Mitto tibi praeterea cum eo ex servis meis Medicum; I al∣so send you one of my Slaves, who is a Physician with him. There might have been some Slaves who were Physicians; but it does not follow that there were no other but Slaves that were Phy∣sicians. Its farther pretended, that they were banish'd out of Rome in the Time of Cato the Censor, according to the Sentiments of Agrippa, in his Book concerning the Vanity of Sciences; but for this there is no other Foundation than the Misunderstanding of the following Passage in Pliny: This Art of Physick is subject to a Thousand Changes, and a Thousand Additions, so lyable are our Minds to change upon the first Wind that blows from Greece; and there is no∣thing more certain among such as practise it than that he who abounds most in Words, be∣comes uncontroulably the Arbiter of Life and Death, as if there were not a Multitude of People who live without Physicians, tho' indeed they should not be without Physick, and this may be observed concerning the Romans them∣selves, who lived above 600 Years without them; tho' otherwise, they were not a People flow to receive good Arts, but manifested the Inclination they had for Physick, till having had Experience thereof, they condemned it, ex∣pertam damnarunt.However, they did not condemn the Art of Physick it self, but the Male Practice thereof, non rem, sed artem. Cassius Hemina, an old Author, says, That the first Physician who came from Peloponesus to Rome, was Archagatus, the Son of Iysanias, when L. Aemilius and M. Livius were Consuls, in the Year DXXXV, after the Building of Rome; that they made him a Citizen, and that the Govern∣ment bought him a Shop in the Cross-street of Acilius: 'Tis said they gave him the Title of Healer of Wounds, and that he was at first very much made of; but soon after, his cruel Ope∣rations which went so far, as to the Cutting off and Burning of some Parts of the Patient's Body, procured him the Nickname of Hangman, and made the People out of conceit both with Phy∣sick and Physicians. And to go a little farther with this Matter, take the Words of Marcus Cato the Censor to his Son; says he, I'll tell thee now, my dear Son Mark, what my Thoughts are of these Greeks, and what I desire you to learn during your Stay at Athens: Take care to inform your self of their Customs, but learn them not: They are a wicked and indocible People, which I cannot endure. Believe it, as if it came from a Prophet, that when this Na∣tion communicates her Sciences to others, she corrupts the whole, and especially if she should send her Physicians hither to us: They are bound to one another by Oath to kill all Bar∣barians with their Physick..... They call us Barbarians, nay, and give us more opprobri∣ous Names: I forbid you therefore above all Things to have to do with the Physicians. We ought not to rely upon what Pliny says, in respect to the Romans having no Physicians for above 600 Years, seeing he contradicts him∣self, when he says that Archagatus came thither in the Year 535. So that he misreckons near 100 Years. But to shew you more exactly how he is mistaken; we must observe what Dionysius of Halicarnassus says upon the Year CCCI, Hist. Rom. wherein he shews that a Plague breaking out at Rome, it swept away almost all the Slaves and half the Citizens, there being not Physicians enough to attend so many sick Per∣sons: So that here is at least a Rebate of 300 Years in Pliny's Account, seeing according to the Testimony of the said Dionysius, who was an Author of good Credit, there had been Physici∣ans at Rome from the Year 301. In the succeed∣ing Age, viz. in the Year CCCCLXI, the Plague raged again in the City of Rome, and the Art and Care of the Physicians being not able to withstand the Contagion; the Romans sent De∣puties into Greece to setch Esculasius the God of Physick thither, who at Epidaurus had done Wonders in the Curing of Diseases. In the 6th Century Archagatus was the first that came from Greece to Rome. Terence adapts a Comedy to the Year DLXXXVIII, wherein he brings Phy∣sicians upon the Stage; which he would have taken care not to have done, if they had none of them at Rome, or if they had been banish'd thence. Plautus before him, in his Mercator, brings in a discontented Man, who said, that
he would go for some Poyson to a Physi∣cian: Ibo ad Medicum, atque me ibi toxico morti dabo. Herophilus came in the 7th Century, who, as Pliny says, resisted the Principles of Erasistratus, and settled the Differences between Diseases, according to the Rules of Musick. Asclepiades towards the End of the said Century flourished, and after him his Scholar Themiso; and the fa∣mous Craterus, of whom Cicero speaks often in his Epistles to Atticus, and indeed, he was a Person of very great Reputation, as Horace wit∣nesseth: Non est cardiacus, Craterum dixisse putato, Hic Aeger. It is of him Porphyric speaks, who having a Per∣son for his Patient that lay ill of an extraordina∣ry Distemper, wherein his Flesh fell away from his Bones, he cured him, by feeding him with Vipers dressed like Fish. In the 8th Age, besides the famous Antonius Musa, Augustus his Physici∣an, and Eudemus; Celsus, Scribonius Largus, and Charicles flourish'd also at Rome in the Reigns of Augustus, Tiberius, and Caligula; Vectius Valens, and Alco lived under Claudius, and so did Cyrus, Livia's Physician. During the 9th Century there flourish'd at Rome Statius Annaeus, Nero's Physician, old Andromachus, the Inventer of the Theriaca An∣dromacha; Thessalus, who got himself the Name of Iatronices, i. e. Conqueror of Physicians, because he boasted he had overthrown their Principles; Crinas of Marseilles, and Charmis of the said City, who being desirous to go beyond their Brethren, condemned the Use of Hot Baths, and made their Patients bath in cold Water, even in Winter time. In the 10th Century, after the Building of Rome, Galen, a Native of Pergamus, was in Request at Rome, he being Physician to the Em∣perors Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Verus. In the 11th Century there were divers famous Physici∣ans in the Empire and at Rome; but the 12th was fertile in them, among whom were Zeno of Cy∣prus, Ionicus of Sardis, Magnus of Antioch, and Oribassius of Pergamus, who were his Disciples. This was the last Age of the Roman Empire, which according to the Appearance of the 12 Vultures to Romulus, was to last but so many Centuries. MEDIMNUS, or MEDIMNUM; it was a Measure among the Greeks, containing Six Roman Bushels, which is about Lifty English Quarts. MEDITRINALIA, were Feasts insti∣tuted in Honour of the Goddess Meditrina, à Medendo, because the Romans then began to drink new Wines, which they mixed with old, and that served them instead of Physick: It was celebrated on the 30th of September. MEDUSA, the Daughter of Phorcus, who dwelt in one of the Islands of the Aethiopian Sea, with her two Sisters Euryale and Sthenion, who were called Gorgons. Modusa was exceeding beau∣tiful beyond her Sisters, and had the finest Head of Hair in the World. Neptune enjoy'd her in the Temple of Minerva, who resenting so base an Action, turn'd the Hairs of Medusa's Head into so many Serpents, and made her Aspect so terrible, as to transform all that looked upon her into Stones. Perseus rid the Earth of so horrible a Monster, and by the Help of Mercury's Wings, and Minerva's Shield, cut off her Head, the which Pallas fixed to her Shield, and with which she petrified all her Enemies. MEGAERA, was one of the Furies of Hell, the Name being derived from the Greek , Odiosa, and who by Virgil is placed in Hell, with her Head drest with Serpents, and a frightful Aspect, which punishes the Guilty. MEGALESIA; they were Feasts institu∣ted in Honour of Cybele the Grand-mother of the Gods; and the same was solemnized on the Nones of April, i. e. the Fifth Day, with Plays and Rejoycings: The Priests of this Goddess, who were called Galli, carried her Image along the City with the Sound of Drums and Wind-musick, in order to imitate the Noise they made, who were entrusted by this Goddess with the Education of her Son Jupiter, that so they might hinder Saturn from hearing the Child's Cry, and not devour him, as he had done his other Children. MELAMPUS, the Son of Amithaon the Ar∣gian, and of Doripe; he was an Augur and a very experienced Physician; he had the Art perfectly to imitate the Volces of all Sorts of Animals: There were Temples erected for him, and Di∣vine Honours paid him; Proetus gave him his Daughter Iphianassa in Marriage, whom by his Art he had brought to her right Senses. MELANTHO, the Daughter of Proteus, who was wont to divert her self in the Sea ri∣ding upon a Dolphin's Back; but Neptune being taken with her Beauty, assumed the Shape of a Dolphin, and after he had carried her on his Back for some Time in the Sea, he took her off and enjoyed her. MELEAGER, the Son of Oeneus King of Calydonia, and of Althaea: Diana being angry that this King had forgot her at a Sacrifice, sent a furious Boar into his Country, which he with the Help of Theseus killed; from whence came the Proverb, Non fine Theseo: This Victory proved fatal to Meleager, for having made a Pre∣sent of this Animal's Head to his Mistress, the Jealousie of some Persons who were present, occa∣sioned a Quarrel, wherein his Two Uncles were killed, and whose Death Althea their Sister, and the Mother of this Prince, revenged upon him in a very strange Manner: For Althea percei∣ving, at the Time that Meleager was born, that
the Destinies had limitted the Life of the said Child so long as a Firebrand should last, she took care to put the Fire out, and to preserve that Firebrand very carefully: But being now desi∣rous to revenge the Death of her Brothers upon her Son, she threw the Firebrand into the Fire, and presently the unhappy Meleager felt a ter∣rible Burning throughout his whole Body, and died with miserable Torments: His Sisters la∣mented him, and were transformed into Turky-Hens. Lucian also relates this Fable in his Dia∣logue concerning Sacrifices: All the Evils which formerly fell out in Etolia, and all the Calami∣ties of the Calydoneans with the Murdering of them, and the Death of Meleager, came from the Displeasure of Diana, who was angry she had been forgotten at a Sacrifice. MELICERTES, the Son of Athamas and Ino, who with his Mother threw himself down headlong over the Rocks called Scironides, and was carried by a Dolphin to Corinth, where he was turned into a Sea-God by the Name of Pa∣lemon. They celebrated Games in Honour of him, called the Isthmian-games, near Corinth, with great Expence. MELPOMENE, one of the Nine Muses, said to have been the Inventress of Tragedies, Odes and Songs. MEMNON, the Son of Tithonus and Au∣rora, who came to the Relief of King Priamus at the Siege of Troy, and was killed by Achilles in a Duell: He was changed into a Bird by his Mother, when his Body was laid upon the Fu∣neral-Pile: The Egyptians erected a Statue for him, which made a Noise at Sun-rising, when the Sun darted it's Beams upon it, and the same in the Evening had a mournful and complaining Tone, as if it were concerned for the Loss of it's Presence: This is the Account Philostratus and Tacitus give thereof. MENANDER, an Athenean famous for his Comedies, of whom Phaedrus speaks in the 5th Book of his Fables: He was courted by the Kings of Egypt, and more particularly in Favour with Demetrius, who admired the Excellency of his Wit. MENIPPUS, a Cynick Philosopher, whom Lucian in his Dialogue entituled Icaromenippus, makes to take a Journey into Heaven, by the Help of a Couple of Wings, one being a Vul∣ture's and the other an Eagle's; and the Reason which he makes Menippus give why he undertook so great a Journey, is that after he had observed the Frailty and Inconstancy of Humane Things, he began to despise Grandeur, Wealth and Pleasures, and to apply himself to a Contempla∣tion and Search after Truth, for which End he consulted the Philosophers, but that he found so much Contradiction and Uncertainty in what they said, that he was resolved to go and en∣quire after it into Heaven. MENOECEUS; the Son of Creon King of Thebes, who was willing to die for the Preser∣vation of his Country, for when they came to know by the Oracle, that the Thebans should obtain the Victory, if the last of Cadmus his Race devoted himself to the Infernal Gods, he slew himself with his own Sword, after he had so de∣voted himself. MENSIS, a Month, the Space of Time that the Sun takes to run through one Sign of the Zodiac, which makes the 12th part of a Year: Cicero derives this Word from Mensura, or Metior, Qui, quia mensa spatia conficiunt, menses nominantur. Months, properly speaking, are no other than the Time which either the Moon takes to run thro' the Zodiac (called by Astrologers a Periodical Month) or to return from Sun to Sun, (which is distinguish'd by the Name of a Synodical Month) but yet this Name has been also given to the Time the Sun is a running through the Twelfth Part of the Zodiac; two Sorts of Months, viz. the Lunar and the Solar being hereby distingui∣shed: The Lunar Synodical Month, which is that alone that People mind, is a little above Twenty Nine Days and an Half: The Solar is usually accounted to consist of some Thirty Days Ten Hours and an Half: The Month is again di∣stinguished into an Astronomical and Civil Month; the first is properly the Solar Month, and the Civil is that which is accommodated to the Customs of People and particular Nations, every one in their Way, some using the Lunar, others the Solar Months. The Jews, Greeks and Romans formerly made use of Lunar Months; but to avoid all such Fra∣ctions in Numbers as would happen, they made them alternatively to consist of Twenty Nine and Thirty Days, calling the former Cavi, and the other Pleni: The Egyptians used Solar Months, and ordered all of them to consist of Thirty Days only, adding to the End of the Year Five Days which were made up of the Supernu∣merary Hours, and neglecting the Six Hours, or thereabouts, that arose from the Half Hours; and this made their Seasons in the Revolution of every Four Years go backward One Day: We now make use of these Months, tho' we render them unequal, and at the same Time reserve the Six Hours to make up a Day from Four Year to Four Year; and this has been explained under the Word Annus, which may be seen for this Purpose. Romulus made his Year at first to consist but of Ten Months, the first of which was March, then April, May, June, Quintilis, (July) Sextilis (Au∣gust) September, October, November, December. But Numa Pompiltus who had a very particular Converse with Pythagoras, of whom he had lear∣ned divers Things in the Astronomical Art, of which he made good Use, especially upon this Occasion, added Two Months more to Romulus's
Ten Months, by taking a Day off from April, June, August, September, and December to which Romulus had allowed Thirty Days, leaving Thir∣ty One Days to the rest as they had them; then adding those Six Days to Fifty One that were wanting in Romulus his Year which consisted of 304 Days, in order to perfect his own of 355 that made 57 Days, the which he divided into Two other Months, viz. into January which had 29 Days, and February 28. which he placed before March. He was not concerned that the Days in this last Month consisted of an e∣ven Number, because he designed it for the Time to offer Sacrifices in to the Infernal Gods, to which this Number, as being unhappy, ac∣cording to the Egyptians Superstition, seemed to belong. He constituted the Month of January, which he appointed for the Winter-Solstice, to be the first Month in the Year, instead of March which was so before, and which Romulus had put for the Vernal Equinox. The Romans made use of Three Words to reckon the Days of their Months by, to wit, the Calends, Nones and Ides: The first Day of every Month was called Calends; the Four following Days were the Nones (except in March, May, July and October, who had 6 Days of Nones;) then came the Ides, which contained Eight Days: And the rest of the Month was reckoned by the Calends of the following Month: We now make use of the Roman Months, and only reckon the Days therein by 1, 2, 3, 4, &c. See what has been said upon Calendae and Calendarium. MENSORES; Harbingers, whose Busi∣ness it was to go and fix upon Lodgings for the Emperors, when they were minded to go to any Province; and when they intended to encamp, they marked out the same, and assigned its Post to every Regiment. MENSURA; Measure, being that which serves to make known unto us the Greatness, Extent and Quantity of some Body. Josephus, the Jewish Historian, attributes to Cain the In∣venting of Measures: Eutropius in the Beginning of his History ascribes it to Sidonius, in the Time that Procas reigned in Alba, some 300 Years af∣ter the Destruction of Troy: But the Holy Scrip∣tures shew us that Measures are much more an∣cient, since 'tis said, Lev. 19. Ye shall do no Ʋn∣righteousness in Judgment, in Mete-yard, in Weight or in Measure. The Ancients had a Custom, and the same is still in being in some Places, to lay up the Original Measure in their Temples, that Recourse might be had thereunto, when they were minded to try whether the others were right or no; and this is that which is to be un∣derstood by the Measures of the Sanctuary so of∣ten mentioned in Scripture: For 'tis not to be believed, that these Measures or Weights of the Sanctuary were different from those in common Use, since this would but confound all manner of Trading: But these Weights were only more exact than others, and therefore it is that the Scripture always refers us to them, when it would point out unto us the greatest Exactness, and strictest Justice. We read in Fannius, that the Amphora, which was a very ancient Measure, was by the Romans consecrated to Jupiter, upon Mount Tarpeius, where the Capitol stood: Quam ne violare liceret, Sacravere Jovi Tarpeio in monte Quirites. And the Emperor Vespasian, after the Civil Wars with Vitellius were ended, having repaired the Capitol, put also the Original Measures therein. There are Three sorts of Geometrical Mea∣sures, viz. the Line, the Superficies, and the Solid Body. Line-Measure refers only to Length; as a Road is measured by Paces, a Rope by the Fathom, a Beam, or some other Piece of Wood by the Foot; in the same Manner are measured the Height of a Tower, the Depth of a Pit, or the like. The other Way of Measuring is superfi∣cial, and consists of Length and Breadth, whose Lines crossing each other, and the Sides being multiplied by one another, shew what the Con∣tent of its Compass is, which is commonly called the Area: As supposing one of the Sides be 7 Foot, and the other 4, the Area of the Superfi∣cies will be 28 Foot, for 4 times 7 makes 28. By this Way are Acres of Land, Woods, Waters and Meadows measured; so likewise Hangings, and Panes of Glass, which ought to be taken as su∣perficial Squares. The Third Way of Measuring is Cubical, or a Solid Body in all the Parts and Dimensions of Length, Breadth and Depth, such as are Feet in Mason's Work, which should be like a Dye ; so as that having but 6 Feet in Length, it should have 36 in the Area or Super∣ficies, and 216 solid Body. But for the better Understanding, and exacter Rating of Measures, you must know that as the As or Pound, which were Synonymous Terms amongst the Romans, were divided into 12 Ounces; these Terms have also been very often applied to a Total divided into 12 Equal parts; and the Name of their Aliquot parts, has been also applied to the Parts of those other Things: Wherefore it will be proper here to see the Di∣vision made under the Word As, and the Names of its Parts; of which take this Abridgment. As or Libra 12 Ounces, or a Pound, or a To∣tal divided into 12 Parts. Deunx, 11 Ounces, or 11 Parts. Decunx or Dextans, 10 Ounces, or 10 Parts. Dodrans, 9 Ounces, or 9 Parts. Bes or Bessis, 8 Ounces, or 8 Parts. Septunx, 7 Ounces, or 7 Parts. Semissis, 6 Ounces, or Half a Pound, or Half the Total.
Quincunx, 5 Ounces, or 5 Parts. Triens, 4 Ounces, or 4 Parts. Quadrans, 3 Ounces, or 3 Parts. Sextans, 2 Ounces, or 2 Parts. Sescunx, 1½ Ounce, or 1 Part and an Half. Ʋncia, an Ounce, or one Part of the whole. Hence it is that the Roman Sestier being di∣vided into Twelve Cyathae, they were marked likewise by the Parts of the As called Aliquots, as you have it in Martial, Sextantes, Calliste, duos infunde Falerni: Fill me; Callistus, Two Sextans of Falernian Wine. That is Four Cyathae, for the Word Sextans which signified Two Ounces, or the Sixth Part of an As is taken here for Two Cyathae, which make the Sixth Part of a Roman Sestier, and in another Place. Poto ego Sextantes; tu potas, Cinna, Deunces. I drink Two Cyathae, but you, Cinna, drink Eleven. And hence also it comes to pass, that the Foot being divided into Twelve Inches, it obtained the Name of a Pound, as each Inch did the Name of an Ounce: And this has been the Cause we meet with such sort of Expressions, Quincuncialis herba in Pliny, a Plant Five Inches high, Ʋnciales litterae in St. Jerom, Capital Let∣ters of an Inch high, and in the Holy Scripture it self Crassitudo trium unciarum, Three Inches thick. What we are more particularly to distinguish in this Place are those Two Sorts of Librae we meet with, whereof the one is divided into Twelve Ounces, and the other is a Measure di∣vided into Twelve Inches, that so we may unra∣vel all the Difficulties that may arise upon this Occasion. Now this Distinction of a Libra into Weights and Measure is to be met with in the Works of Galen; who says, That the same Name was given by the Romans to a Pound Weight, whereby solid Bodies were weighed, and to a Pound of Measure which was made use of for Liquids: The same Author in another Place taking upon him to reprove some Physicians, who did not specifie the said Difference, says, They would have done better to have noted more carefully what Ounces and Pounds, they meant, should be used for Liquid Remedies, whether they were those of Weights or Mea∣sures. And in another Place he informs us, that the Inches were marked on those Measures by certain Lines, and that those Inches were called Ounces. The Romans, said he, had a Measure which they used to sell Oyl by, that was distinguish'd by certain Lines, whereby the Whole was divided into Twelve Parts, and they called it a Pound of entire Measure, and the Twelfth Part thereof an Ounce. This Use of the Libra and the Parts thereof for Weights and Measure was formerly so com∣mon, that those who made it their Business to give it the clearest Explication, added there∣unto the Word Pondo for Pondere, in order to the avoiding of all manner of Equivocation, when they would have it understood they meant Weights: For Example, Plautus says, Laserpitii libram pondo diluunt. They steeped a Pound of Benjamin; Pisoium nullam unciam pondo cepi, I have not taken this Day an Ounce of Fish, Colu∣mella's Expression is, Sextarius aquae cum dodrante pondo mellis, a Pint of Water with Nine Ounces of Honey. Livy also says, Paterae aureae fuerunt 176, libres fere omnes Pondo, there were 176 Gold-Cups, that weighed almost each of them a Pound. Its certain that this Equivocation con∣cerning the Pound of Weights, and that of Mea∣sure has often introduced Confusion into Authors, as may be justified by Galen, who speaking of the Contest there was in his Time concerning Mea∣sures noted by Authors that were not fully ex∣plained, informs us, that some thought they ought to take the Term Cotyla according to the Measure of the Atheneans, and others, ac∣cording to the Italian, which was more. There were Two Sorts of Measures, one flat or long, and the other round and hollow, for dry Things and Liquids: Long-Measure is a Barley-Corn, which in Geometry makes the 12th part of an Inch, otherwise called a Line. The Inch contains 12 Lines or Barley-Corns; the Romans called it Ʋncia. Its the 12th part of a Foot, and contains 3 Fingers, each of which takes up the Breadth of 4 Barley-Corns or Lines. The Foot is 12 Inches; a Geometrical Pace 5 Foot; a Geometrical Perch 10 Feet, and in some Places 22; a Spar 8 Inches; a Cubit (a Jewish Measure) a Foot and an half; a Furlong 125 Paces; the Funiculus, an Egyptian Measure, 40 Furlongs; a Mile 8 Furlongs; a Parasange (a Persian Measure) 30 Furlongs and more; the E∣gyptian Schoenas 30, 40, and 120 Furlongs; a League 3 Miles, more or less, according to the Places or Countries you are in. Measure, in respect to Coelestial Distances, is half the Diameter of the Earth, being 15000 Leagues or thereabouts: The Ell is a Measure for Stuffs: The Reed, called Kenech by the He∣brews, contained 6 Cubits, i. e. 8 Feet, a Digit and an half. A Rod, Fathom, &c. differ accord∣ing to different Places. As for Surfaces, an Acre consists of an 160 Perches Square; a Day's-work is as much as one can plough in a Day: The Cubical Foot is a Measure for solid Bodies. Round and hollow Measures are such as serve to measure Corn and Liquids with: Those used for dry Things are the Litra, Bushel, Minot, Sestier, and Muid. For Liquids, a Tun, Muid,
Pipe, Calens, Amphora, and Barrel: And for Retail, Hemina, or the Half Sestier, Sestier, Quart, Pottle, Pot, Congius, Cotyla, Cyathus, and Acetabulum. And for the Measure of Herbs in Physick, that's done by Bundles, Handfuls and Pugils, most of these Terms shall be explained in their proper Places. MERCATORUM FESTUM; the Feast of Merchantile People, which fell out May 15, or the Ides of the said Month, and were kept in Honour of Mercury; for on that Day a Temple was dedicated to him in the great Circus, when Appius Claudius, and P. Servilius were Consuls: They sacrificed to that Deity a whole Sow, and went to sprinkle themselves with the Water of a Fountain named Aqua Mercurii, which stood near unto the Gate Capena, praying unto Mer∣cury, that he would prosper their Trade, and forgive their Cheating. Thus Ovid describes it, L. 5. Fast. Sive Deum prudens alium Divamve fefelli; Abstulerint celeres improba dicta Noti: Et pateant veniente die perijuria nobis, Nec curent ent Superi si qua locutus ero. Da modò lucra mibi, da facto gaudia lucro: Et face ut emtori verba dedisse juvet. MERCURY, according to the Fable, was Son to Jupiter and Maia, the Daughter of At∣las, who Lay in of him upon Mount Cyllene, near Tegaea, in Arcadia; they also called him the Tegean, Cyllenian, and Grandson of Atlas, as Horace calls him, Mercuri facunde nepos Atlan∣tis. Lucian informs us of his Qualities and Of∣fices, in the Dialogues of the Gods, where he brings in Vulcan and Apollo speaking in this Man∣ner. Vulc. Apollo, Have you seen little Mercury? What a fine Fellow he is, and how he laughs at all the World: He discovers plainly, what he will be one Day, tho'he be but a Child. Apoll. Do you call him a Child? He who in Malice is older than Japetus. Vul. What Harm could he do? He is yet but new born. Apoll. Ask Neptune, from whom he has taken away his Trident, and Mars whose Sword he has got; to say nothing of my self, whom he has robbed of my Bow and Arrows. Vul. What! An Infant do this, who is yet in Swadling-Clouts? Apoll. Thou will see what he can do, if he comes near thee. Vul. He has been at my House already. Apoll. And has he taken nothing away? Vul. Not, that I know off. Apoll. See every-where. Vul. I cannot see my Pinchers. Apoll. I'll warrant you, thou wilt find it in his Clouts. Vul. How! Is this little Thief already so ex∣pert? I believe he hath learnt to steal in his Mo∣ther's Womb. Apoll. He has a great many other Qualities, and you'll see them when there is occasion: He will in time be a great Orator, and also a good Musician, if I mistake not, for he hath already foiled Cupid: And as the Gods laughed at it, and that Venus took him to kiss him, he stole away her Girdle, and would have deprived Jupiter of his Thunderbolt, if he had not been too hot and eager; but he took his Scepter from him. Vul. He is a bold little Spark. Apoll. He is also a Musician. Vul. How so? Apoll. He hath made an Instrument of a Tor∣toise-shell, whereon he plays to great Perfecti∣on, insomuch that he makes jealous, of him, who am the God of Harmony: His Mother says he does not sleep a Nights; and that he goes as far as Hell to get any Booty; for he has a Rod endued with great Vertue, wherewith he brings the Dead to Life again, and conducts the Living to their Graves. His Offices are also described in another Dia∣logue, where he brings him in talking with his Mother. Mer. Is there ever a God in Heaven more un∣happy than I? Maia. Ah! My Son, talk not at this rate. Mer. Why not? Since I have alone as much Business upon me, as all the rest of the Gods be∣sides. In the first place, I must get up at break of Day, to clean the Hall where they Feast, and the Place of their Assembly: Then I must be at Jupiter's Levy to receive his Orders, and to car∣ry them backward and forward. At my return, I wait upon the Master of the Houshold, and sometimes the Cup-bearer: At leastwise, I did this Office before the Coming of Ganymede: But what disturbs me most, is that in the very Night, when every Body is at rest, I must go and con∣voy the Dead to Hell, and there assist at their Condemnation, as if all the Day were not long enough for me to act the Offices of a Sergeant, Champion, Orator, and many more, &c. He has been taken for the God of Traders, and that he presided over Trade: He was called Mercurius, à Mercibus, or à Mercium curâ; and this makes Plautus in the Prologue of Amphytrion bring him in speaking, Ʋt vos in vostris voltis mercimoniis Emundis, vendundisque me laetum lucris Afficere. He is usually painted with Wings at his Sides and Feet, a Caduceus or Rod twisted round with Two Serpents in his Hand, wherewith he per∣forms many Wonders; and a great Cap, called Petasus, on his Head, whence he was named Mer∣curius
Petasatus. The Cock was under his Pro∣tection, which intimates that a Man that Trades ought to be vigilant, and rise early. He is also the God of Thieves, and the Messenger of the Gods, and the Arbiter of Peace; and this made the Roman Embassadors carry a Caduceus with them to proclaim a Peace. Apollo gave him that Rod, and taught him the Vertue of it; and Mercury first tried it upon Two Serpents that were fighting, between which when he threw it they were pacified; from whence forward he carried those Serpents who twisted themselves about the said Rod, along with him. MERCURY, in the Art of Astrology, is a Planet, that is hardly ever separated from the Sun, and so is rarely seen, as being as it were al∣ways buried under the Beams thereof, or else appears like a black Spot upon the Body of the Sun it self: 'Tis for that Reason, perhaps, that the Ancients sometimes confounded it with the Sun, and said it was the Soul or Understanding thereof. Thus they made him the Master of Wisdom and Knowledge; from whence it came to pass that he was to preside over Mens Dis∣courses, which is nothing else but an Effusion of Thoughts or Wisdom. You may see how Por∣phyry speaks upon this Occasion, who seems to attribute to the Moon, that Mercury or Genius which regulates Discourse, as he appropriates to the Sun that which directs Argumentation and Reasoning: Mercurius orationem exhibet, &c. Hence it appears, that the Pagans looked upon these Stars as living and intelligent Beings, and such as communicated their Influences with their Knowledge: For Horace calls learned Men, Mercuriales viri, as being Persons more abun∣dantly furnish'd with the Gifts and Influences of Mercury. Hesychius says, that the Babilonians called the Star Mercury, Sechez: Mercurii stella Babylonii Sechez: And the People of Edessa gave Mercury the Name of Monimus, who together with Mars, they would have to be the Two Assistants of the Sun; hence it appears the Eastern People were much addicted to the Worship of Mercury: The Eastern Nations were no less of Opinion, that Mercury was the Star that had the Government of Reason and Speech: The Gauls, of whom Cae∣sar speaks in his Commentaries, minded more the fabulous History of Mercury, than the Na∣ture of the Star, that bare his Name: And 'twas for the same Reason that the ancient Represen∣tations of Mercury, had neither Legs nor Arms, that we may know, if we believe Plutarch, that a Person by the Application of his Understand∣ing, and a prudent Conduct alone may compass all Things, without the Assistance of the Mem∣bers of the Body. As Mercury presided over High-ways, they gave to Mens Heads that were cut upon Square Stones there the Name of Mercu∣ry; and all Passengers in order to make the Place yet the more remarkable, taking upon them to add also another Stone each, it made a Heap at last, which they called Acervus Mercurii: This was an ancient Custom, seeing we read of it in the Proverbs of Solomon; Sicut qui mittit lapidem in acervum Mercurii. Homer also in his Odysses speaks of these Mercuries, or Heaps of Stone. MERCURY (according to History) the most famous of all those that bore the Name of Mercury was he of Egypt, whose Commentaries, Philo Biblos (according to the Relation given us by Eusebius) says, were with utmost Care sought after by Sanchuniathon, that thereby he might be able to compose his Treatise of Pagan Theo∣logy, as knowing well he was the Person that first found out the Use of Letters, and that he was called by different Names as Thoh, Thoyth, Tautes: Porphyry bears the same Testimony of Taautus, and Sanchuniathon forgets not the Ge∣nealogy of Taautus, amongst those of the other profane Deities of the Phoenicians and Egyptians. 'Tis not to be doubted but the Ancientest of all the Mercuries, and he that was the Inventer of Letters, was he of Phoenicia, and he passed from thence to Egypt, and so from Egypt to Greece: Eusebius also proves out of Diodorus Siculus, that the Egyptians presented to their ancient King Osiris a Mercury very like unto him of the Phoe∣nicians: Apud eum summo in bonore Mercurium fuisse; quòd in excogitandis iis quae vitam homi∣num juvarent, ingenii solertiam ostenderes planè sin∣gularem: quippè qui litteras invenerit, Deorum sacrificia ritè instituerit, lyrae cantum invenerit, Graecosque homines , hoc est, elo∣cutionem docuerit: quam ob causam , id est, Mercurius ab iisdem fuerit appellatus; denique oli∣vae plantam invenerit. Clemens Alexandrinus speaks of this Aegyptian Mercury, as of a Man whom they had deified there after his Death: Cicero would have it, that there were Five di∣stinct Mercuries, of which Three were Greeks, one the Son of Nilus, and the last he of Egypt: The great Glory of the Aegyptian Mercury was, that he was the Inventer of Letters, Sciences and Laws, according to Jamblicus his Testimony of him. It will be some Difficulty to reconcile what Pliny says with the most received Opinion, That the Invention of Letters was found out in Assyria; Litter as arbitror Assyrias fuisse: sed alii apud Egyp∣tios à Mercurio, ut Gellius, alii apud Syros repertas volunt. But this Contrariety may be accommo∣dated in this manner: That whereas the Begin∣ning of all Things proceeded from Assyria, other Nations affected to have the Honour thereof: Indeed it may be said, that Letters were in Use before the Deluge, and Noah preserved the same in his Family, and to his Posterity, but after the Flood when People began to be scattered in∣to all the Parts of the World, and almost fell in∣to
meer Barbarism; there was as it were a Ne∣cessity for a new Creation of all Arts and Scien∣ces, to bring them back from the said Barbarism, and the profound Ignorance they had plunged themselves into: Wherefore 'tis true, that Let∣ters were originally the Assyrian's Invention, or rather found among them, since Noah and his Family dwelt in Assyria; but in Process of Time and after the Multiplying of divers Colonies in the World, the Phoenicians were the first who re∣ceived the Use of Letters by the Means of Taau∣tus; next to them the Egyptians got them, and had their Taautus or Mercury also; which gave Sanchuniathon Occasion to say, That Mercury was Saturn's Secretary, . The Egyp∣tians represented their Mercury, with a Dog's Head, and sometimes confounded him with Anu∣bis, because of the Sagacity of a Dog: See how Servius speaks of it: Latrator Anubis, Mercurius capitus anino pingitur, ideò quia nihil est cane sagacius. But besides this first Mercury, who lived a lit∣tle after the Deluge, there was a second Mercury the Son of Vulcan who reigned in Egypt long af∣ter, and wrote Books (which he deposited in their Temples) concerning the Writings of the first Mercury, which he found graven upon Pil∣lars, and this Manetho said, according to the Ac∣count Syncellus gives us of it. Ex stelis positis in terrâ Syriadicâ, & exaratis sacrâ dialecto & hiero∣glyphicis litteris à Thoth, qui est Mercurius pri∣mus, secundus Mercurius Agathodaemonis filius, Tatipater, libros traduxit, quos in templorum ady∣tis Aegypti reposuit. Ammianus Marcellinus gives a Description of those Subterranean Places, where for Fear of another Deluge those Secrets which they were desirous to transmit to Posterity were writ on the Walls in Hieroglyphicks: It was this second Mercury that was called Trismegistus, ac∣cording to Syncellus and Manetho: Clemens A∣lexandrinus makes mention of 42 Books of Mer∣cury, that were carried in Pomp by the Egyp∣tians when they were solemnizing the Mysteries of their Religion, and wherein were contained all the Divine and Humane Sciences entertained by that Nation, as their Hieroglyphicks, Geo∣metry, Cosmography, Astronomy, Laws of Sacrificing, and all Divine Worship: Its ma∣nifest, that it was from these Two Egyptian Mercuries the Greeks and Romans borrowed all those Accomplishments, wherewith they endued their fabulous Mercury: For the Greeks could not deny but that the Egyptian Mercury was the most famous of all of them, and therefore they made it their Business to give out he was a Greek by Birth; and whereas it is certain, that the Greeks received their Letters from the Phoenicians, as we have already shewed, they endeavoured all they could to perswade the World, that they were originally found out in Greece, from whence they had been carried into Phoenicia: Such a Likeness was found to have been between the Egyptian and Grecian Mercury, that it may be easily judged the One is but a Copy of the O∣ther. Strabo calls a Child which he saw was born without Arms , according to Mercury's Name. Thus Mercury was usually pictured, to let Men understand, says Festus, that Discourse does eve∣ry Thing, without the Assistance of the Arms: Cyllenius dictus, quòd omnem rem sermo sine mani∣bus conficiat; quibus partibus corporis qui carent,  vocantur: But Pausanias says, the Athe∣nians were the first that gave Mercury's Name to such as were lame in their Arms: Primi mutil∣os Hermas vocarunt: For before Daedalus his Time all their Statues had but one Foot, and either no Arms at all, or else they were joined to, or hung by their Bodies: He was the first that made them with Two Feet, and set the Arms a little off from the Body: The Statues of Mer∣cury might be left in the same Posture as an∣ciently. MERCURY (according to Macrobius) is the same as the Sun or Apollo, and the Reason why Wings are given to Mercury, is to denote the swift Motion of the Sun. Apollo presides over the Quire of Muses, and Mercury is the Fa∣ther of Eloquence and good Literature. The Sun is the Mind and Understanding of the World, which agrees well with Mercury, whose Name is derived  ab interpretando: Mercury is the Messenger of the Gods, being often sent by the Coelestial to the Infernal Dei∣ties; because the Sun in its Course passes thro' the Superior and Iuferior Signs: Mercury killed Argus, who had 100 Eyes to watch Io, that was transformed into a Cow: That is, that the Sun ecclipses the Light of the Stars and the Hea∣vens by its Presence, these Stars having been as so many Eyes in the Night, to watch and mind the Earth which by the Egyptians was represen∣ted by the Symbol of a Cow: Lastly, Mercury's Caduceus which was beset with Two Serpents twisted together and kissing one another, signi∣fied the Four Deities that presided over the Na∣tivities of Mankind, viz. the Sun, Moon, Love and Necessity. The Two Serpents are the Sun and Moon; the Knot is Necessity, and their Kissing denotes Love: Mercury may also be seen pictured sitting upon a Cray-fish, holding a Caduceus in his Right hand and one of the Claws of the Fish in the other: Farther; He is grawn on Medals, like a beardless Youth with Wings, and holding a Purse in his Left-hand, and a Cock upon his Fist. He has an He-goat at his Feet, with a Scorpion and a Fly. The Germans adored him as the Sovereign of the Gods; and as Tacitus reports, offered Humane Sacrifices to him: Dev∣rum maximum Merturium colunt, cui certis diebus
humanis quoque hostiis litare fas habent. The Greeks and Romans sacrificed a Calf unto him; they made him an Oblation of Milk and Honey, as unto a God of Sweetness, by Reason of his Elo∣quence. Callistratus and Homer say, it was a Custom to present him with Neat's-Tongues, by throwing them into the Fire, and sprink∣ling a little Wine thereon, because he was the God of Speech, whereof the Tongue is the Organ. See Hermes, which is Mercury. MERCURIUS (Dies is understood) is Wednesday, the Third Day of the Week, being so called, because the Planet Mercury reigns in the first Hour thereof, according to the Opini∣on of those who allow of Planetary Hours. MERETRIX; a debauched Wife or Mai∣den. A Bill was wont to be fixed over the Door of Common Women, according to the Testimo∣ny of Aurelius Fuscus, and Seneca, Controv. 1. Meretrix vocata es, in communi loco stetisti, su∣perpositus est Cellae tuae titulus, venientes accepisti. Tertullian in his Book de Pudicia, calls these In∣scriptions the Bills of Lewdness, Libidinnm tituli. Portius Latro says the same Thing; Es in lupa∣nari, accepisti locum, titulus inscriptus est; you are in an ill Place, you have a Room there, a Bill is set on the Door. The Custom also was for them to change their Names, as soon as they had told the Aediles, that they would lead a dis∣solute Life; as we are informed by Plautus, in his Comedy, entituled, Poenulus, Act. 5. Sect. 3. Ver. 20. Namque bodiè earum mutarentur nomina, Facerenique indignum genere quaestum corpore. They changed their Names, in order to drive a Trade, which became not their Birth and Condition. But when they forsook this infa∣mous Profession; they also laid aside that Name of Reproach they had assumed, and reassumed that of their own Family. At the same time says Tacitus in his Ann. I. 2. C. 24. The Lewdness of Women was restrain∣ed by the Senate's Authority, and such of them whose Grand-father, Father or Husband had been a Roman Knight, were forbid to make a publick Profession of their Lewdness: For Ve∣stilia, who was of a Praetorian Family, had made her Declaration, before the Magistrates, according to the Custom of our Ancestors, who thought such debauched Practices were suffici∣ently punish'd with the Disgrace of such a Con∣fession. MEROPS, was one of the Gyants, who went about to drive the Gods from Heaven; but this Name ought rather to be given to those who assisted at the Building of the Tower of Ba∣bel, because of the Confusion of Languages that ensued thereupon; seeing the Word Merops comes from  dividere, and  vox. METELLUS; the Surname of the Fami∣ly of the Caecilii, from whom were descended many illustrious Persons, among the rest L. Cae∣cilius, a brave Commander, and learned Ora∣tor; who going one Day to his Home, was stop∣ped by Ravens, who flapped him with their Wings; whereat he was amazed, and went back again to Rome, where finding the Temple of Vestae was on fire, he delivered the Image of Pallas, called Palladium, from the Flames; and in so doing became blind, but that Goddess after∣wards restored to him his Sight. METRA, the Daughter of Erisichthon, who obtained as a Reward from Neptune, for the Loss of her Virginity, a Power to transform her self into what Shape she pleased; wherefore, in or∣der to supply the Necessities of her Father, she sometimes took upon her one Form, and some∣times another, under which her Father sold her again and again, as he had occasion. METRETES; it was an Athenian Mea∣sure, that contained 40 English Quarts, i. e. 72 Sestiers. MIDAS, King of Phrygia, the Son of Gor∣dius, and the Goddess Cybele, he received into his Court Silenus, one of Bacchus his Captains, that had straggled in his Way to the Indies; in acknowledgment whereof Bacchus gave him his Choice to ask him what Kindness he would. And his Request was, that whatever he touched might be turned into Gold; but having experi∣mented the same divers times, he was surprized to find, when he went to drink or eat, that all was transmuted into Gold; wherefore he had recourse to Bacchus again, who bid him go and wash himself in the River Pactolus in Lydia, to which the Property was communicated to reme∣dy him in this Case; and so upon washing there∣in the Gold Scales presently fell off. Sometime after having adjudged the Victory to God Pan against Apollo, this Deity grew angry thereat and presently changed his Ears into those of an Ass. Midas concealed this Misfortune, and dis∣covered it to none but his Barber, with a Charge he should let no other know it; the Barber made a Pit in the Earth, and entring therein, said, Midas has Asse's Ears; and so covered the Pit again, as believing he had by that means hid the Secret very well; but Reeds coming to grow up in the said place, and being shaken by the Wind, repeated the Words, King Midas has Asse's Ears. Plutarch in his Treatise concerning Superstition, says, that Midas towards the latter part of his Life, was so extreamly afflicted with Melancho∣ly, occasioned by frightful Dreams that broke his rest, that he could not remedy the same, and that drinking some Bull's Blood, he died upon it. MILLIARE, and MILLIARIUM; a Mile; 'twas a certain Space that contained 1000 Paces among the Romans, who distinguish'd their
Miles by the Marks they set: The small League in France contains 2000 Paces, the common League 2500, and the greatest 3000. MILO. A Crotonian, was a Man of vast Strength; he carried a Bull of Two Years old upon his Back at the Olympick Games, for the Space of a Furlong, then killed him with his Fist; and 'twas said, eat him all in one Day. He held a Pomegranate so firmly in his Hand, that no Body could take it from him: As he was one Day in a Wood, and went about to break a Tree off with his Hands, which was a little slit, the same closed again, and both his Hands were catched between, so that he could never pull them out, and in that Condition he became a Prey to the Wolves. MINA or MNA, Greek Money worth 100 Drachmas, and is somewhat more than Three Pounds Sterling. Sixty Mina's were required to make up an Attick Talent. MINERVA; of whose Nativity Lucian gives an Account in his Dialogue of the Gods, where he introduces Vulcan and Jupiter speaking of it in this manner: Vul. Lo, I bring thee a very sharp Hatchet; What wouldst thou have us do with it? Jup. Cleave my Head in two presently. Vul. Thou shalt see whether I am such a Fool as to attempt it: Tell me seriously, what thou wouldst imploy me in. Jup. To cleave my Head in the middle; I am in earnest; and if thou will not obey, thou shall see how it will be taken; strike only with all thy Might, for my Head is split with Pain, and I endure the same Misery, as if I were in Labour like a Woman. Vul. Have a Care that we do not commit some Folly; for I cannot lay thee so easily as a Midwife. Jup. Strike thou only, and fear not; leave the rest to me. Vul. It must be so in spight of me; But who would do it? I must obey: O ye Great Gods! I do not wonder at thy having a Pain in thy Head, since thou hadst a Woman within it, and even an Amazon, with a Lance and Shield: 'Tis that which made thee so impatient. Cicero, L. 3. de Nat. Deor. speaks of Five Mi∣nerva's: The 1st, which he says was the Mother of Apollo: The 2d brought forth by the Nile, which the Egyptian Saites worshipped. Plu∣tarch in his Treatise of Osiris, says that the Image of Minerva or Pallas was in the City of Sai, with this Inscription: , I am all that was, is, and is to come; and my Vail no Mortal hath hitherto uncovered. 3d, Is she that came'out armed from Jupiter's Brain. 4th, Was the Daughter of Jupiter and Corypha, the Daughter of Oceanus, who invented Chariots with Four Wheels. 5th, Was the Daughter of Pallantis, whom she killed, because he would have ravish'd her: This last they made to have Wings to her Feet, in the same manner as Mercury. Arno∣bius pursues the same Distinction: We may with certainty conclude, that the Second of these Minerva's, is the ancientest and first of any of them. Plato in his Timaeus, speaking of the City of Sai, says, that Minerva was worshipped there, and called by the Name of Neith. Syncellus in∣timates, that the Name of Queen Nitotris, which includes that of Neith, signified as much as Victorious Minerva. Plutarch speaks also of the Minerva of Sai, and says that some made no distinction between her and Isis. The Phoenicians, according to the Relation given us by Sanchuniathon, had their Minerva also, and they made her to be the Daughter of Saturn, and attributed the Invention of Arts and Arms unto her: This is what Eusebius says of her: Saturnus liberos procreavit, Proserpinam & Minervam; ac prior quidem Virgo diem obiit; Mi∣nerva autem Mercurioque auctoribus falcem exferro hastamque conflavit. It was from the Egyptians or Phoenicians, that the Greeks borrowed their Minerva, and Cecrops was the first who taught the Athenians to worship Minerva and Jupiter, as Eusebius says. The Conveniency of Neigh∣bourhood made Minerva pass from Egypt into Lybia before Cecrops went over into Greece. He∣rodotus assures us, the Lybians made her to be the Daughter of Neptune, and the Lake Triton, tho' afterwards upon the Account of some Misun∣derstanding between her and her Father, she went to Jupiter, who adopted her for his Daugh∣ter. Pausanias assures us, the Athenians were much devoted to the Worship of the Gods, and that they were the first who gave Minerva the Name of , operaria, machinatrix. He says elsewhere, they built a Temple to Minerva, , Machinatrix, as being the Goddess that had introduced Arts and Inventions into the World: He speaks moreover of a Statue of Minerva that fell from Heaven. He says Mi∣nerva aided Perseus in his Conflict against Gor∣gon, near the Lake Triton, for which Reason that Country was consecrated to her. Lastly, The said Author declares, the Baeotians affected to give the Name of Triton to a Brook that run near Minerva's Temple, from which she had been named Tritonia. As for Minerva, says St. Augustine, L. 18. C. 9. de Civ. Dei, She is much more ancient than Mars or Hercules, and they said she lived in the Days of Ogyges, near unto the Lake Triton, from whence she was named Tritonia: She was the Inventress of many rare and useful Things; and Men were so much the more inclined to believe she was a Goddess, because her Original was not known;
for, as to their saying that she came out of Jupiter's Brain, 'tis rather a Poetical Fiction, or an Allegory, than Truth of History. Minerva was worshipped by the Athenians for a Goddess, before Cecrops his Time, in whose Days Athens was founded or rebuilt: 'Tis a Name taken from Minerva, whom the Greeks called . An Olive-Tree happening all of a sud∣den, in a certain Place, to spring out of the Ground, and a Spring of Water in another, these Prodigies amazed the King, who presently de∣puted Persons to go to Apollo at Delphos, in or∣der to know what the same meant: The Oracle made answer, that the Olive-Tree signified Mi∣nerva, and the Water, Neptune, and that it lay upon them to chuse, according to which of the two Deities Names they should call their City; hereupon Cecrops calls all the Citizens, both Men and Women together, for the Women were wont to have Votes in their Deliberations: When the Suffrages were taken, all the Men were for Neptune, but all the Women for Miner∣va; and because they exceeded the Men by one Voice, Minerva carried it, and Athens was called according to her Name. Phornutus going about to give the Moral and Allegorical Interpretati∣on of Minerva's proceeding from Jupiter's Brain, says, That the Heathen Philosophers made her to be a Divine Emanation, which they called the Intellect of the great God, that differed no∣thing from his Wisdom, which in him is generated of his Brain, which is the principal Part of the Soul. This St. August. L. 7. C. 28. de Civ. Dei, says, was the Opinion Varro had of the Poets, that according to their Custom in obscuring Phi∣losophy with Fictions, they meant no other than the Idea or Exemplairs of Things, under the Name of Minerva. Painters and Statuaries represented her like a beautiful Virgin, armed with a Curass, a Sword by her Side, a Helmet on her Head, adorned with Feathers, holding a Javelin in her Right Hand, and a Shield in her Left, whereon Medu∣sa's Head beset with Serpents was represented: This Shield was called Aegis, and was covered with a Goat-skin, or that of the Monster Aegi∣dis, which she killed. The first who erected Temples and offered Sacrifices to her were the Rhodians, whom she taught to make Colossus's: But because that at the very first Sacrifice they offered to her, they forgot to make use of Fire, she left them in Anger, and went to the City, which she called Athens, to whom the Athenians built a stately Temple, under the Name of , wherein they set up her Statute made of Gold and Ivory by the Hands of Phydias, which was 39 Foot high: Upon her Pantoufle was gra∣ven the Fight between the Lapithae and the Cen∣taurs; upon the sides of the Shield, the Battle between the Amazons and the Athenians; and within it the Gods fighting against the Gyants. There were several Temples and Chappels e∣rected for her at Rome; whereof the most An∣cient and Famous of all was that upon Mount Aventine, of which Ovid speaks: The Olive and the Owl were under her Protection, as may be seen by the Athenian Money, on one side of which stood the Head of this Goddess armed, and on the other an Owl with these Greek Cha∣racters AOHNA, and upon the Reverse there was an Owl flying, who held a Lawrel between her Claws, as a Sign of Victory. MINERVALIA, or Quinquatria, were Feasts instituted in Honour of Minerva, and ce∣lebrated March 19. the same lasting for Five Days: The first Day was spent in Prayers made to this Goddess; the rest in offering Sacrifices, seeing the Gladiators fight, acting Tragedies upon Mount Alban, and reciting Pieces of Wit, where∣in the Conqueror had a Prize given him, accord∣ing to the Appointment of the Emperor Domi∣tian: The Scholars had now a Vacation, and carried their Schooling-money, or rather Pre∣sents to their Masters, which was called Miner∣val: Hoc mense mercedes exolvebant magistris, quas completus annus deberi fecit, says Macrobius. MINOS, the Son of Jupiter and Europa, was King of Candia after he had outed his Bro∣ther Sarpedon. Aristotle, L. 1. Polit, says, He was the first that gave Laws to the Candiots; his Wife's Name was Pasiphaé, a Daughter of the Sun, by whom he had Three Sons and Two Daughters: He had great Wars with the Athe∣nians, in order to revenge the Death of his Son Androgeus, whom they had slain; and he grant∣ed them a Peace upon Condition they should send him every Year Seven young Men of the best Rank in their City, to be devoured by the Minotaur that his Wife had brought forth, as we shall shew presently: He exercised the Place of a Judge in Hell with Eacus and Rhadamanthus, because he was a very just Prince. Plato informs us, That Jupiter left the Office of passing Judg∣ment upon the Dead to Three of his Sons: Ra∣damanthus was to judge the Asiaticks; Eacus the Europeans; and for Minos, he was to determine any Difficulties that might occur; so that he was above the other Two. MINOTAURUS; the Minotaur, was a Monster, being half Man and half Bull, brought forth by Pasiphaé, Minos his Wife, after she had engendred with a Bull, by the subtle Means of Dedalus, who made a Wooden Heifer, wherein he inclosed her that she might be covered by the Bull: This Monster was put into the Labyrinth, and by Minos his Order fed with Man's Flesh, but he was at last killed by Theseus, who had been sent thither to be devoured by him. Lu∣cian unravels to us the Fabulous part of this Story; saying, That Pasiphaé hearing Daedalus discoursing concerning Taurus, which is one of the Twelve Signs, was mightily taken with what
he said; which gave the Poets occasion to say, that she was in Love with a Bull, whom by his means she enjoy'd. Diodorus Siculus says, that Taurus was one of Minos his Captains, who had to do with Pasiphaé, and whose Amours were countenanced by Daedalus, that she was brought to Bed of Two Children, one of which resem∣bled Minos, and the other Taurus, and that they were both called by the Name of Minotaur; that from the said Taurus his using of the Athe∣nians very severely, in the War which Minos declared against them, to revenge the Death of his Son Androgeus, they feigned that he fed up∣on their Flesh. Philochorus relates that the Mi∣notaur was a very cruel Officer under Minos, who in wrestling overcame all those that came against him at those Funeral Games, instituted by Minos to the Ghost of his Son Androgeus, and that he won the Prize which consisted of some Tribute-Children, from hence came the Fiction of the Poets, that he was fed with the Children sent yearly from Athens to Creet, by way of Tribute, for killing Androgeus. MITHRA; this a Name which the Persi∣ans, Parthians, and several other Eastern Na∣tions gave to Apollo, because of the Ornament about his Head, wherewith they represented him: He was also reverenced among the Romans, as appears by several Inscriptions: Soli invicto Mithrae. Numini invicto soli Mithrae. They celebrated the Ceremonies used at his Worship in Caves and Subterranean Places, and they usually sacrificed a Bull to him. Socrates and Sozomen say, That in the Reign of Julian the Apostate and Theodosius, the Cave of Mithra, that was at Alexandria, was opened, that they found it full of Mens Sculls, that had been there sacrificed unto him: This Worship of Apollo Mithra is one of the ancientest used among Men, and the Maltese Greeks learnt it of the Phoenici∣ans, who before them were Masters of the I∣sland. Eustathius derives the Word Mitre from the Greek , which signifies a Weaver's Woof, being a broad Welt, wherewith they tied his Head: Vossius derives it from , which signifies to tie; because the Mitre was an Or∣nament which they tied round the Head: But Scaliger deduces it from a Syriack Word, that sig∣nifies a Band or Line; and others from the Word Mithri, which is Syriac, and is as much as to say Lord: And in Conformity to this Sentiment, the Mitre was a Sign of Dominion or Royal Ma∣jesty. MITHRIDATES; a most potent King of Pontus, who was incomparable as well in Re∣spect to the Strength of his Body, as to the En∣dowments of his Mind; but of a cruel and bloo∣dy Disposition. Pharnaces his Son, having raised a Rebellion against him, he out of Despair stab∣bed himself, when he found the Poison, which he was wont to take, would not do his Business. MNEMOSYNE; the Mother of the Nine Muses, which she bore to Jupiter; and the said Word among the Greeks signifies Memory. MODIUS, a Bushel; being a Measure in use among the Romans for all sorts of Grain: It contained about Nine English Quarts. MOLA SALSA; is a kind of roasted Wheat which was afterwards peeled and steeped in Wa∣ter with Salt and Frankincense; and then sprin∣kled between the Horns of the Sacrifice before he was killed. MOLOC, was the God of the Ammonites, and 'tis to him they sacrificed their own Chil∣dren in the Valley of Tophet, which signifies a Drum, for they beat then the Drum, to hinder them from hearing the Cries of the Children, which they threw into the Fire. MOMUS, was the Son of Somnus and Nox, he was the God of Liberty, being a Deity that spoke his Mind freely, and controul'd every thing, even the Actions of the Gods themselves, as may be seen in a Dialogue of Lucian concerning Ju∣piter Tragicus. MOMUS; I was always afraid of the Mis∣fortune that has befallen us: they do Epicurus and his Disciples an Injury, for what Opinion can Men have of us, when they see how disorder∣ly we manage the Affairs of the World, where Vice triumphs over Vertue, where the Innocent endure the Punishment due to the Guilty, and where nothing can be heard but cheating Ora∣cles, Complaints, Divisions, the Amours of the Gods, and such like Things as please the Poets: Jupiter, I desire thee to tell me, for one may speak here very freely, whether thou hast ever bethought thy self of making an exact Search for the Wicked and the Good, in order to pu∣nish the one, and reward the other:—We must go to the Spring-head of the Disorder, and not think so much upon Destroying our Enemies, as to reform such Things as are irregular in our own Conduct: You know, Sirs, I speak without ei∣ther Passion or Interest, seeing my Divinity is acknowledged but by a very few Persons, and that for One Altar I have, others have an Hun∣dred. He found Fault that the Bull's Horns were above his Eyes, saying they ought to have been before them, that so he might see better where he struck; he reproved Vulcan, for that having made a Man, he had not set a Window in his Breast, in order to see whether his Thoughts agreed with his words; and he blamed Minerva, in that the House she had built could not be car∣ried whither one would. MONETA; Money; a Piece of Money marked for the Coin, and with the Arms of a Prince, or State, who make it to circulate and pass at a common Rate for Things of different
Value: Paulus the Lawyer defines Money to be a Thing stamped with a publick Coin: Josephus seems to attribute the Invention of Money to Cain, because he had found out Weights and Measures, Money must have been comprehended therein, which at first was nothing else. The holy Scripture makes no mention of any till the Year of the World 2110. when it speaks of a 1000 Pieces of Silver given by Abimelech to Sarah Abraham's Wife, of 400 Shekels of Silver which Abraham gave by Weight to the Children of Ephron, and of the 100 Lambs, that is, the 100 Pieces of Silver Money, which Jacob gave to the Sons of Hemor. The first Mark put upon Money consisted of Points to denote the Value thereof, and because that in the Time when one Thing was given in Exchange for another, Mens greatest Wealth consisted in Cattle: The Shapes of them, or of their Heads only were stamped upon the first Moneys that were made: And Cassiodorus takes Notice that the Latins called Money Pecunia, which was derived from the Word Pecus, that signified any kind of Beast; it was a Name they borrowed from the Gauls: Afterwards they stamped on their Money the Heads and Arms of Princes, or some Mark or other that intimated the Origin of States: Julius Caesar was the first whose Head was stamped upon Money by the Order of the Senate. The Jewish Moneys were the great Cicar, or Talent of the Sanctuary which weighed 100 Mi∣na's, or 250 Roman Librae; the little Cicar or common Talent, called that of the Assembly, which weighed 50 Minae, or 125 Roman Librae. The Maneth or Mina, which was Two Libra's and an Half, or 30 Ounces. The Shekel or Sicle of of the Sanctuary, half an Ounce or 20 Gerahs, or Oboli. The little Shekel consisting of Two Drachma's, worth near 32 Pence of our Money, and the Gerah or Obolus which consisted of be∣tween 14 and 15 Grains. As for the Grecians, Herodotus in his Clio writes, That the Lydians a People of Asia were the first that made hammer'd Pieces of Gold and Silver: Others attribute the first Invention thereof to Erichthonius the fourth King of Athens: Plutarch assures us, that Theseus coined Pieces of Silver weighing Two Drachma's, which on the one Side had the Picture of a Ox, in Memory of the Marathonian Bull or Captain Taurus, and on the other Jupiter or an Owl. He also made some that weighed half an Ounce whereon Minerva and Two Owls were stamped, and these were called Stateres. The Money in Peloponesus was stamped with a Tortoise, from whence came this figurative Way of Speaking ; The Tortoise exceeds both Vertue and Wisdom, that is, that with Money all Things are com∣passed. The Cizycenians coined Money, on one Side whereof was the Goddess Cybele, and a Lyon on the other. The Obolus of the Greeks was a∣bout Five Farthings English: The Drachma was worth about Seven Pence English: The Mina a∣bout Three Pounds: The Talent was in Value about 203 l. 13 s. And the Shekel about Half a Crown. As for the Romans, 'tis thought that Janus was the first who made Brass Money, on one Side of Which stood a Head with Two Faces, and on the other a Ship, as Athenaeus informs us: Janus was the first, as they say, who invented Garlands, and coined Copper-money; and Pliny says, nota aeris ex alterâ parte fuit Janus geminus, ex alterâ rostrum navis. Numa Pompilius made Wooden and Leather Money and afterwards e∣stablish'd a Company of Brasiers called Aerarii, who were the Monyers of those Times, for the Romans at first made use of unwrought Brass for Money, from whence came those Forms of Speech oes alienum, a Debt, and per oes & Libram, because they were put into the Scales to be weighed. Servius Tullius made Brass Money weighing 12 Ounces, and the same had the Figure of a Sheep upon them; and this lasted till the first Punick War: They began to ham∣mer Pieces of Silver 485 Years after the Building of Rome, I mean the Denarius which was worth 10 Asses. They had Half a Denarius called Qui∣narius, the Quarter Part of a Denarius named Sestertius, and the Teruncius which was the Fourth of an As. All these were Silver Moneys, marked on the one Side with a Woman's-Head, which represented Rome, and an X to shew the Value to be 10 Asses, and upon the Reverse were Castor and Pollux: They had Quinarii whereon Victory was pictured, and these were called Victo∣riati, and others on which there was a Charriot drawn by Two or Four Horses, which for the said Reason were called Bigati, Quadrigati: More∣over some of these Silver Pieces have been met with, on which instead of Rome, was stamped the Figure of some Genius or Tutelary God, which upon that Account were called Geniati. Gold Coin came not in Use till about 62 Years after Silver Money, in the Year of Rome 546, in the Consulship of Nero and Livius Salinator: They were Pieces whereof 38 went to a Pound, and came near to 2 Drachma's and an Half, being worth commonly about 23 Shillings. A RECAPITULATION of ROMAN MONEYS. Copper Moneys. As, Assis, or Assipondium, weighing 12 Ounces, amounted to above a Half Penny English.
The Third of an As or Triens, weighing 4 Ounces, was worth a Double: The Quarter Part or Quadrans, weighed 3 Ounces: The Sixth Part or Sextans, consisted of 2 Ounces: The Ʋncial weighed 1 Ounce. Silver Moneys. The Denarius weighing 1 Drahm, was marked with an X that signified 10 as being 10 Asses, in Value about 7 d. English: The Quinarius, worth 5 Asses: The Sestercius, or Quarter Part of a Denarius, worth 2 Assès and an Half: The great Sestercius or Sestercium, worth 1000 small Sester∣ces, that is about 8 l. 6 s. The Teruncium, weighed the 40th Part of a Silver Denarius, and is in Value one 4th of an As. Gold Moneys. Their Gold Money weighed 2 Drams and an Half: All these Words I shall explain again in their proper Alphabetical Order. TRIUM-VIRI MONETALES; the Triumvirs of Money were Officers created a little before Cicero's Time, whose Commission was contained in these Five Letters A. A. A. F. F. Aere, Auro, Argento, flando, feriundo, for the Coining of Brass, Gold, and Silver Money. MONETARIUS, a Coiner, 'twas a Name of Old for such as made Money, all the Money of the Romans and old French had the Name of the Person upon them in full Length, or at least the first Letters thereof: The Trium-virs were formerly Mint-Officers whose Business it was to have Money coined, the Names and Quality of whom may be seen in the Impres∣sions. MONETA; a holy and sacred Goddess pictured with a Pair of Scales in one Hand, and a Cornucopia in the other, with these Words, Sacra Moneta, Augustorum & Caesarum nostrorum. MONETA; this was an Epithet given to Juno, being derived à Monendo, because she gave them Notice when Rome was taken by the Gauls, that they should sacrifice a whole Sow, or because that during the War against Pyrrhus when the Romans found themselves in great Want of Money, they had Recourse to Juno, who ad∣vised them to be always just in their Actions, and they should never want. Unto which when they had bound themselves by Oath, they drove Pyrrhus out of Italy, and built a Temple to Juno Moneta wherein they laid up the Silver Money of the Commonwealth. MONOCHORDUM, is an Instrument wherewith to try the Variety and Proportion of of Musical Sounds; It was composed of a Rule divided and subdivided into divers Parts, where∣in there was a String pretty well extended at the Ends thereof upon both the Bridges, in the midst of which there is a moveable Bridge, by whose means in the Application of it to the Dif∣ferent Divisions of the Line, you might find the Sounds were in the same Proportion to one ano∣ther, as the Divisions of the Line cut by the Bridge were: Its also called the Harmonious or Canonick Rule, because it serves to measure the Flats and Sharps of the Sounds: Its held that Pythagoras was the Inventer of the Monochordum. MONS. A Mountain, 'tis a great Rising of the Earth above the usual Level of the Ground; the most celebrated Mountains in the Poets are Parnassus, called Biceps, or with a double Top, which was the Residence of the Muses; and Mount Olympus, which the Poets took often for Heaven: Mount Atlas was famous among Geo∣graphers, whose Name has been borrowed and used for a Collection of the Description of the se∣veral Parts of the World, as if the Whole had been discovered from the Top thereof. Rome had Seven Hills within it. MONS PALATINUS; Mount Palatine, which was so called either from the Pallantes who with Evander came to dwell thither, or from Palatia Latinus his Wife, or from Pales the Goddess of Shepherds. Upon this Moun∣tain stood the King's House or Palace, which from thence was called Palatium: Romulus was brought up and looked after Cattle there. MONS CAPITOLINUS; This Mountain was at first called Saturninus, because Saturn lived there; and afterwards Tarpeius from Tarpeia who was there crushed to Death with the Shields of the Sabins; and at last Ca∣pitolinus, à Capite toli, the Head of a Man which was found there as they were digging to lay the Foundation of the Temple of Jupiter, sur∣named Capitolinus: This was the famousest Mountain of them all, because of Jupiter's Tem∣ple, which was begun by Tarquinius Priscus, fi∣nish'd by Tarquinius Superbus, and dedicated by Horatius Pulvillus: Here it was that they made their Vows and solemn Oaths, where the Citi∣zens ratified the Acts of the Emperors, and where they took the Oath of Allegiance to them, and at last where such as triumphed came to give the Gods Thanks for the Victory they had obtained. MONS QUIRINALIS, Mount Qui∣rinal, was at first called, Mons Agonius, but af∣ter the Alliance that was made between Romulus and Tatius, King of the Sabins, who dwelt there, they named it Quirinalis, from their chief City called Cures; and from thence the Citizens of Rome came to be called Quirites, and after the Death of Romulus there was a Temple built here under the Name of Quirinus. MONS CAELIUS, was formerly called Quercetulanus, from the Oak that grew there, and afterwards Caelius from one Caelius Vibenna, General of the Tuscans, who posted himself up∣on
this Mountain so, as opportunely to succour Romulus in the War he waged against the Sa∣bines. MONS EXQUILINUS, Mount Esqui∣line, was so called ab excubiis, or Guards which Romulus posted there for fear of the Revolt of the Sabines, of whose Fidelity he was doubtful. It was also called Cespius, Oppius and Septimius, by Reason of some small Hillocks, which it in∣closed or hemmed in. MONS VIMINALIS; took its Name from Oziers that grew uponit; and here was a Temple dedicated to Jupiter Viminalis: It had the Name of Vimineus or Fagutalis, from a Beech-Tree, which was consecrated to Jupiter Fagutalis. MONS AVENTINUS, Mount Aven∣tine, took its Name from a King of Alba, na∣med Aventinus, who was buried there as well as Remus and Tatius the Sabine. Diana had a Temple here. MORBUS; a Disease, of whom the Poets make mention as an hurtful Deity, and Virgil places him at the Mouth of Hell; Pallentes habitant Morbi— MORBUS COMITIALIS; the Fal∣ling-sickness, when in the Assemblies of the Peo∣ple of Rome, any fell into this Sickness, the As∣sembly presently broke up, and therefore it was called Morbus Comitialis, because it broke up their Comitia or Assemblies. MORPHEUS; see after Mortui. MORS, Death; the Poets made him not only an existent Being, but also a false Deity, picturing him like a Skeleton, with Claws, and a Sythe in his Hand. Death was honoured by the Lacedamonians, and Servius in explaining that Verse in Virgil, Multa bonum circa mactantur corpora Morti Says, that Death is a Goddess, of whom Lucan and Stacius make mention; for which he cites these Words of Stacius; In scopulis Mors atra sedet: And those of Lucan; Ipsamque vocatam Quam petat à nobis Mortem tibi coge fateri. They make her to be the Daughter of the Night, and Sister of Sleep; and the same is drest in a Robe full of black Stars, as also with black Wings. MORTUI, the Dead; the Romans burnt their Dead, as being of Opinion, it would be a Benefit to the Soul, to have the Body quickly consumed, and this continued to the Time of Macrobius, or the Antoninus's: The ancient Per∣sians, as Agathias relates, exposed their Dead to be devoured of Beasts, they believing, that such as continued long entire, were wicked, and the Relations of the Deceased regulated their Joy or Sorrow accordingly. See Cadaver, where I have shewed the Way of burying dead Corps, and their Funeral Obsequies; the same may also be seen under Funus. MORPHEUS; was, according to the Fable, one of the Servants of Sleep: Ovid places a Multi∣tude of Dreams under the Empire of Sleep, but he makes Three of them to be endued with a much greater Power than the rest, viz. Morpheus, Icelas or Phobeter, and Phantasos: The 1st imi∣tates Mankind; the 2d other Animals; and the 3d Mountains, Rivers, and other inanimate Things: At pater è populo natorum mille suorum Excitat artificem, simulatoremque figura Morphea, &c. MOVERE SENATU; is a Phrase to denote one's being turn'd out of the Senate ig∣nominiously, or to be degraded. MOVERE TRIBU; to removeone from a considerable Tribe to a meaner. MOYSES, or Moses; his Father was Atram, and Mother Jochabed, who put him into an Ark of Bulrushes, that was daubed over with Pitch and Slime, and so exposed him upon the Brink of the Nile, in Compliance with Pharaoh's Order, in a Place, whither the Daughter of Pharaoh, whose Name was Thermutis (according to Jo∣sephus) was observed to resort to wash her self; his Sister Mary had Orders to stay at a small di∣stance off, to see what would become of him; the Princess seeing the said little Cradle floating, caused it to be brought to her, and finding a Child therein of Three Months old, whom she knew to be of a Hebrew Race, by his being cir∣cumcised, she was moved with Compassion, and resolved to save him: The Sister coming thi∣ther as by chance, asked her, if she would please to send her to get a Nurse to suckle him, of that People; to which the Princess agreeing, she immediately ran to the House, and brought his Mother for a Nurse for him. At Three Years end she carried him to Thermutis, who adopted him for her Son, and gave him the Name of Moses, which in the Egyptian Language, signifies one saved from the Water. Clemens Alexandrinus says, his Friends had named him Joachim, when he was circumcised: He was very carefully edu∣cated in Pharaob's Court; and as he was a Per∣son of excellent Parts, he became quickly an admirable Proficient in all the Sciences which at that time flourish'd among the Egyptians. The Scripture informs us, that he left Pharaob's Court, when he was Forty Years old, in order to go and
visit his own Nation, and that finding an Egyp∣tian abusing an Israelite, he killed him, in the Heat of his Zeal: Hereupon fearing the King's Displeasure, be fled into the Desarts of Madian, chusing rather to be afflicted with the People of God, than to possess all the Treasures of Egypt. There he married one of the Daughters of Je∣thro or Raguel, a Priest, whose Name was Se∣phora. He lived Forty Years in that Country, and as he was one Day leading his Father-in-Law's Cattle to the Bottom of the Wilderness, towards Mount Horeb, he saw a Bush burning with a great Fire, which yet consumed it not; and as he was about to draw near unto it, the Lord called him by his Name, and let him know that he had seen the Affliction of his People in Egypt, and that he would by his Means work Deliverance for them; he endeavoured to excuse himself upon the Account of his Incapacity and Stuttering; but God to confirm him in it, gave him the Signs of a Rod's being turned in∣to a Serpent, and then re-assuming its former Shape, and of his Hand turning Leprous, and in a moment being restored to its natural Colour: Then he went to see for Pharaob, whom he char∣ged from God to let his People go Three Days Journey into the Wilderness, to offer Sacrifices unto him: But he refused to obey and to let she Hebrews go, notwithstanding, all the Wonders performed by Moses in his Presence, for he saw the Rod which Aaron, Moses his Brother had in his Hand, turned into a Serpent; the Waters of the Nile and all the Springs in Egypt changed in∣to Blood, an innumerable Company of Frogs which covered the Face of the Land, and entred into his very Palace, and the Dust turned into Lice which filled the Air, and extreamly tor∣mented both Men and Beasts: There came Swarms of large Flyes thither, which destroyed whatever they touch'd; a suddain Pestilence killed all the Cattle of Egypt without hurting those of the Israelites; Men and Beasts were struck with terrible Boils; a Storm of Hail ac∣companied with Thunder and Lightning fell o∣ver all Egypt which destroy'd all sorts of Beasts and Men that were in the Fields, no other Land being spared but that of Goshen; this Storm was succeeded by the largest Locusts that ever were seen in Egypt, which destroyed all the Grass, Fruits and Harvest: A thick Darkness covered the whole Land, saving that Part where the Children of Israel dwelt; in short, a destroy∣ing Angel having killed all the First-born of the Egyptians, without sparing Pharaoh's own Son, the Egyptians pressed the Israelites to go out of their Country, and to sacrifice to their God un∣der the Conduct of Moses and his Brother Aaron. The Rabies assure us, that the Wonders per∣formed by Moses formerly in Egypt and elsewhere, were done by means of his Rod, which accord∣ing to what they say, was created by God be∣tween the Two Vespers of the Sabbath, that is, on the Evening of the Sixth Day of the World's Creation, and upon which in an wonderful Man∣ner the holy, great and glorious Name of God was inscribed, which they call Tetragrammaton, wherefore its said in the Zoar upon Exodus, which is a Commentary upon the Five Books of Moses, that the Miracles were graven thereon, and that the most holy Name of God was also inscribed; and Jonathan the Son of Ʋziel in his Targum, that is, in his Paraphrase upon Exodus, relates the same Thing; these are his Words. Rehuel (who was Jethro himself, or his Father, as Rab∣bi Jonathan seems to take him to be in his 18th Chapter) having understood that Moses had made his Escape from Pharaoh, put him in∣to a deep Ditch, where Sephora his Grand-Daughter fed him for 20 Years, after which he took him out thence. Moses going one Day into Rehuel's Garden, went to Prayers, and gave God Thanks for defending and de∣livering him by his own Power, and for having wrought divers Miracles for his sake: And per∣ceiving in the said Garden a Rod or Staff which God had created between Sun and Sun, that is, on the Eve of the Sabbath, or 6th Day of the Creation of the World, whereon the great and glorious Name of God was graved, and by Vertue of which he was one Day to per∣form great Miracles in Egypt, to divide the Red∣sea, and to strike Water out of the Rock, he presently put forth his Hand, plucked it from the Earth, into which it had been driven, and as it were planted, got it and carried it away with him. The Sentiments of the Author of this Para∣phrase are confirmed from what may be read con∣cerning Aaron's Rod in the Pirke Eliezer, which is a Book containing the History of the World to the Time of Gamaliel; and from the Schaise∣leth Hakabala which is another History-book or Chronology from the Beginning of the World: But this may be more particularly seen in a very ancient and scarce Commentary, entituled Me∣drasch Vaioscha, printed at Constantinople, which clears up what is related in the Chaldee Para∣phrase and other Authors whereof I have spoken; for Moses is there represented giving an Account at large of his Life after this manner. When I went out of Egypt, I was about 40 Years old and being one Day near unto the Water-pits; Sephora who was one of Jeyhro's Daughters came thither, and finding her to be modest and very handsom, I told her, if she plea∣sed I would marry her; her Answer consisted of an Account she gave me how her Father used such as sought any of his Daughters in Marriage, which was to carry them to a Tree that was planted in the midst of his Graden that had so sad and peculiar a Quality, that it
presently struck such as came near it dead; which when I understood, I asked from whence the said Tree was brought; she answered, That God on the very Eve of the first Sabbath after the Creation of the World, created a Rod, which he gave to Adam, Adam left it to Enoch, Enoch to Noah, Noah to Sem, Sem to Abraham, Abraham to Isaac, Isaac to Jacob, Jacob carried it into Egypt, and gave it his Son Joseph, after whose Death the Egyptians risted his House, and finding the said Rod among the Spoils, they carried it to Pharaoh's Court; and Jethro, who was one of the principal Magistrates of Egypt, no sooner saw it, but he was desirous to have it, and having stole it away, carried it to his own House: The great Name of God Tetra∣grammaton was graven thereon, with the Ex∣plications of it, and the Ten Plagues wherewith God afflicted Egypt; and as 'twas all full of Wonders, the same was kept in Jethro's House, my Father-in-Law, till that going on a Time into his Garden, and holding the Rod in his Hand, he stuck it in the Ground, and endea∣vouring soon after to pull it out, he found it had taken Root, that it blossomed, and that besides the Flowers, it bore also bitter Al∣monds: He left it there; and by the Means of this Rod, which grew to be a Tree, he tried all such as had a Design to marry his Daugh∣ters.When I was informed of all these Particulars, and found the Shepherds would not let Jethro's Daughters draw Water, I delivered Sephora and her Sister from the Hands of those rude Fellows, took some Water and gave it their Cattle to drink; after which they went towards their Father's House, and I accompanied them. Being come to the House, they went in, and I staid at the Door, and as they were come back that Day sooner than ordinary, Jethro asked them the Reason of it; they answered, That a courteous Egyptian had saved them from the Outrages of the Shepherds: When the Daugh∣ters had thus acquainted their Father with the Adventure, and told him, that he who had delivered them was an Egyptian; he asked them, if they had not return'd him Thanks for his Kindness, and bid them call me, saying, make him come in, and let him dine with us. The Daughters having performed his Com∣mand, I went in, eat and drank with him, and then with all Submission entreated him to give me his Daughter Sephora to Wife; which he promised to do, provided I could bring to him a Rod which was in his Garden; to which I agreed, went to see for the Rod, and when I found it, I plucked it out of the Ground, and carried it to him; Jethro was surprized hereat, and reflecting upon what I had done, he cried out and said, This is certainly that Prophet, of whom the Seers of Israel have spoken, who is to lay Egypt waste, and to destroy its People; and being thus possest, he all in a Rage took me and threw me into a deep Pit that was in his Garden.Sephora was not a little concerned at this Adventure, no more than my self, and she stu∣died at the same time how she might save a Man's Life who had obliged her. Hereupon she prayed her Father that he would let her tarry at home to look after the House, and send her Sisters to the Fields, to keep his Cattle: Her Father in answer told her, Daughter, It shall be so, that thy Sisters shall go and look af∣ter the Cattle, but thou shalt tarry here, and take Care of Matters at home. Thus Sephora finding her self alone, she fed me every Day with the daintiest Victuals, and the same whereof her Father Jethro eat, and that for Seven Years, which was the time I tarried in the said Pit. But at the End of that time Sephora spoke to her Father in this manner: Father, 'Tis a long time since you have thrown into this Ditch, that Egyptian who brought the Rod to you from the Place in the Garden, wherein you had put it; suffer now the Pit to be opened, and let us see what will come of it; for, if he be dead, let his Carcase be taken away, that your House may not be polluted, and if he be still alive, he must be a holy Man: Jethro made answer, Daughter, You have spoke well; Can you still remember what his Name was? Yes, Father, said she, his Name was Moses, the Son of Amram: Jethro at the same time command∣ed the Pit to be opened, and called me twice, Moses, Moses; I answered him, and pre∣sently he took me out, kissed and told me; Blessed be God, who hath preserved thee for Seven Years in this Pit: I bear him witness this Day, that he has Power to kill, and Power to make alive: I will testifie aloud, and every∣where, that thou art a right good Man, that thou shalt one Day lay Egypt waste, that thou art the Person who shall drown the Egyptians in the Sea, and by thy means Pharaoh and his Army shall run the same Fate: And at the same time he gave me Money and Sephora, his Daughter, to Wife. Abarbinel, a Jewish Doctor, whose Works are highly esteemed by that People, commenting upon the 2d Chapter of Exodus, explains that History in this manner: After Moses had been enter∣tained by Jethro, and that he came to know him to be a Man of much Understanding and deep Knowledge, he was desirous to enter into a nearer and more particular Alliance with him, because of the great Wisdom he had observed in his Conversation, and gave his Consent he should live with him: And this is that which Moses says in Exodus: And Moses consented to live with Jethro, not for the Love he bore to Sephora, whom he married, but because of
Jetbro's Wisdom. It is, says he, the Opinion of our Doctors, since they say in the Commen∣tary, that the Rod of God was planted in the Garden, and that no Man could pull it from thence but Moses, and that for the said Reason he took Sephora to Wife; for by it they meant the Tree of Life, which was in the midst of the Garden, that is, the Wisdom of Moses, upon the Account of which he was honoured with the Gift of Prophecy. Jetbro gave also to Moses his Daughter Sephora to Wife, by reason of his wondrous Wisdom. Moses lead the Peo∣ple of God into the Wilderness, and talked di∣vers times with God: He died upon Mount Nebo, from whence God had shewed him the Land of Promise, he being then 120 Years old. The Pagans made him to be their Bacchus, as you may see under that Word. Numerinus says, Plato and Pythagoras had drawn their Doctrine out of his Books, and that the first of them was the Moses of Athens: He is ancienter than all the Greek Writers, and even than their Mercu∣rius Trismegistus. Tatian, who was one of those Ancients that Apologized for the Christian Re∣ligion, against the Persecutions of the first Centuries, tell us, That Moses was before the Heroes, and even the Gods themselves of the Greeks, and that the Grecians wrote nothing good, but what they took from our Scriptures, and that their Defign by partly corrupting them, was no other than that themselves might be entituled Authors. Theodoretus says, Moses was ancienter by a Thousand Years than Orpheus, and that he was like the Ocean or Head-spring of Theology, from whence they took their Origin, as so many Streams, and whereunto the most an∣cient Philosophers had Recourse: The Learned are agreed, that the Two ancientest Writers of the World, whose Writings are transmitted un∣to us, are Moses and Homer, and that Moses li∣ved several Ages before the other; Moses wrote much in Verse, and in the Book of Numbers he has set down a Canaanitish Poet's Song of Victory. MULCIBER, one of the Names given to Vulcan, being derived from Mulceo, because the Fire softens and qualifies all Things. MUNDUS PATENS: The open World; a Solemnity performed in a little Tem∣ple or Chappel that was of a round Form like the World, and dedicated to Dis and the Infer∣nal Gods; it was opened but thrice a Year, viz. on the Day after the Vulcanalia, the 4th of October and the 7th of the Ides of November, during which Days the Romans believed Hell was open; wherefore they never offered Battle on those Days, lifted no Soldiers, never put out to Sea, nor married, according to Varro, as Macrobius witnesses, L. Saturn, C. 16. Mundus cùm pa∣tet, Deorum tristium atque Inferûm quasi janua pa∣tet, proptereà non modò pralium committ, verum etiam delectum rei militaris cansâ habere, ac mili∣tem proficisci, navem solvere, uxorem ducere reli∣giosum est. MURTIA, a Surname of Venus, taken from the Myrtle-Tree, which was consecrated to her: She was formerly called Myrtea, and corruptly Murtia. Festus says there was a Temple built for the Goddess Murtia upon Mount Aventine, as to a Goddess of Idleness, who made People idle and lazy. MUS; a Rat, Mouse; the Phrygians held Rats in great Veneration, according to Clemens Alexandrinus: Polemo relates, says he, that the Trojans gave Religious Adoration to Rats, which they called Smintheus; because they once gnaw∣ed to pieces the Bow-strings of their Enemies; and this was the Reason why they gave to Apollo the Epithet of Smyntheus: And Straho speaking of the Statue of this God, says he had a Rat at his Feet. The Worshipping of Rats appears yet to be more ancient by the Authority of some Authors: Herodotus relates, that after Senache∣rib, King of Assyria, had conquered Asia, he made War upon the Egyptians; and that Setho, King of Egypt, and Vulcan's Priest, having not Troops enough to defend him, yet putting his Confidence in the Gods, he advanced as far as Pelusium, where he pitched his Camp, and that a dreadful Multitude of Rats, went into the E∣nemy's Camp by Night, and gnawed their Bows, Arrows, and Shield-strings to pieces; insomuch, that next Day finding themselves without Arms, they hastily retreated with the Loss of many of their Soldiers. Herodetus adds, That he had seen the Statue of King Setho, put up in Vulcan's Temple, holding a Rat in his Hand, with this Inscription; Let him that looks upon me, learn to reverence the Gods. The Egyptians in their Hie∣roglyphicks were wont to point out the Destru∣ction of somewhat, by a Rat which eats and de∣stroys all it can, as may be seen in the first Book of Horus Apollo. MUSAE, the Muses; Diodorus Siculus in∣forms us, That the most Famous of the ancient Authors agreed, that the Muses were the Daughters of Jupiter and Mnemosyne; that some reckon'd them to be no more than Three, viz. Mneme, Aoede, and Melete; that is, Memory, Singing and Meditation: But that Homer and Hesiod allowed of Nine, whose Names the last Author has also given us, viz. Clioque, Euterpeque, Thaliaque, Melpomeneque, Terpsichoreque, Eratoque, Polyhymniaque, Ʋra∣niaque, Calliopeque; haec una alias supereminet omnes. To Clio they attributed the Invention of Histo∣ry; Tragedy to Melpomene; to Thalia, Come∣dy; to Euterpe the Use of the Flagelet, and other Wind-musick; to Terpsicore, the Harp; the Lyre
and Lute, to Erato; to Calliope, Heroick Verse; to Ʋrania, Astrology; and Rhetorick to Poly∣hymnia. Diodorus says afterwards, that the Word Muse comes from , which signifies to teach hidden Things, and such as are above the Capacity of the Vulgar; after which he gives a Reason for the several Names given to the Nine Muses. Its manifest that all these Names are Greek, and that they have all of them a Relati∣on to the Nature and Agreeableness of Musick and Poetry; which has very much inclined Men to believe, that the same is purely a Greek In∣vention, and that 'tis no other than a Moral Ge∣nealogy, like unto that which sometimes they make of Vertues and Vices; and the Name of their Mother, which is Memory, is also a Proof hereof. However, this very same Historian puts Mne∣mosyne among the Titanes, and makes the Nine Muses to accompany Osiris in his Military Expe∣ditions, when he gives an Account of the Theo∣logy of the Egyptians: Risûs amator erat osiris, & musicâ choreisque gaudebat. Ideò Musicorum agmen circumducebat, in quo novem erant Vir∣gines, canendi scientiâ praestantes, &c. eruditae, Graci Musas vocant, quarum praeses Apollo, undè Musagetes dictus. Thus you see the Origin of the Muses of Greece laid in Egypt, tho' Greece gives them proper Names, and to each a particu∣lar Function: Egypt is deprived of them, and they are naturaliz'd in divers Parts of Greece, whether the same were Fountains, Woods, Mountains or Cities. Diodorus also makes the Muses to accom∣pany Bacchus in his Expeditions. It may be far∣ther conjectured, that the Name of Muse came originally from Phoenicia, seeing the Word Mou∣sar signifies Instruction and Learning. There are some Criticks who believe there were no more than Three Muses at first, to whom Mount He∣licon was consecrated, and that there having been Three Statues erected to each of them, it was given out there were Nine of them, that Pierius, in Baeotia, consecrated his Nine Daugh∣ters to them, which made their Names to be common to them. Plutarch in his Symposiacs, a little before the End thereof, treats of the Muses: 'Tis a meer Allegory, wherein he ap∣plies the Nine Muses, either to Nine several Sciences, or to as many Coelestial Globes, in or∣der to unite them all into one Harmony. Clemens Alexandrinus read in some pro∣phane Authors, that which he relates concern∣ing Macar, King of Libya; who being continu∣ally jangling with the Queen his Wife, their Daughter Megaclo bought Nine Maid servants, put them to learn Musick, and to play upon In∣struments, that so by the Melody of their Con∣sort, she might divert the peevish Humour of her Father. This ingenious Piety in her had the desired Success, and she erected Nine Co∣lumns in Honour of these Nine Female Musici∣ans, to whom afterwards great Honours were gi∣ven. The Poets represent the Muses unto us, very beautiful and young, adorned with Gar∣lands of Flowers, and made their Residence to be on Mount Parnassus, and Helicon with Apollo: To them they consecrated several Foun∣tains, as that called Hippoerene, or the Fountain of the Horse Pegasus; and among Trees, the Palm, and Lawrel. MUSCA, a Fly; the Poets feigned this Insect was formerly a Female Musician, and the Moon's Rival, in respect to the Amours of Endymion, but because she came too often to sing and play about him, when he was asleep, the jealous Moon changed her into a Fly; and hence it is, that she always infests such as are asleep, and especially young People, not out of Hatred, but Love to them, to get some Kisses of them, which smart a little, as those do of passionate Lovers. There was formerly a Lady of this Name that made very good Verses, and a Courtizan of A∣thens, who was reproached for having pricked her Lovers till the Blood ran: Lucian, of whom I have had this, has writ a little Treatise, in the Praise of a Fly, which I have inserted in this place. The Fly, says he, in respect to Insects is not so big, but she is as little in Comparison of a Bee; but it may be said, that for the Delicate∣ness of her Wing she does as much excel that of other Birds, if it be lawful to reckon her of that Number, as Silk does common Thread or Wool; for her Wing is not covered with Fea∣thers, but with a fine Crape like the Grashop∣pers, and when you look upon her in the Sun, she shines with many Colours, like a Peacock's Tail, or a Pigeon's Neck, she does not flie by moving her Wings as Birds do, but by sudden Motions or Rebounds like Locusts, but yet is so flexible as to turn about in an instant; and the Noise she makes in her Flight is not so harsh as that of Wasps, but is like the Musick of a Flute compared with Hautboys or Trumpets; she has a large Eye, and a Flower upon her Head, which is hard and shining, as if it were made of Horn; and her Head is not fixed to her Body in such manner as that of Grashoppers is, but she holds it to by the means of her Neck, and stirs it any way; her Body is of a heap, her Legs long, and not short like those of the Wasps; her Belly is covered with shining Lames, like unto an Antique Cuirass; she does not prick with a Sting as Bees do, but with a little Trunk that serves her instead of a Mouth, and which has a kind of Tooth at the end of it, wherewith she bites and sucks both Blood and Milk, without doing much harm: She has fine Legs, whereof the Two fore ones serve her instead of Hands, for she cleans her self with them, and conveys her Food to her Mouth as a Man does: She accompanies Man all her Life
time, and tastes of every Thing he eats, ex∣cept Oil, which is a deadly Poison to her; her Life is not long, but pleasant; 'tis not a little Dexterity will serve-her to avoid the Webs of the Spider, that every where lays Ambuscades for her, into which her Boldness sometimes doth precipitate her. Homer compares her with the most Valiant of his Heroes, and he cannot for bear to praise and magnifie her by the Similies he uses in several Parts of his Poem: Sometimes he describes her Flight when she goes in Company towards some Vessel full of Milk, or to some of the spilt Blood of the Sa∣crifices; another while he makes use of her Example, when he speaks of the Diligence and Vigilancy, wherewith Minerva defended Mene∣laus: In another place he calls her gentle and good, because she has no Sting, and that her Wounds are not dangerous, as those of Wasps and Bees are: Shall I speak of her Power, which is so great, that Men cannot defend themselves from her? her Love is free and heavenly, for she flies in the Air coupled with her Male; and 'tis also said she is of both Sexes, as Her∣mophrodites are: She has this Advantage, that having but little to live upon, she always finds the Cloth laid; and it must be said that for her sake, it is that the Cows give Milk, and the Bees Honey: She sits down the first at Kings Tables, and tastes their Victuals. MUSEA, MUSIA & MUSIVA, Pave∣ments of Mosaick Work, which represented na∣tural Grottos: This Name was given to those sorts of Pavements, because ingenious Works were attributed to the Muses, and that the Muses and Sciences were represented therein; perhaps those publick Buildings which were appointed for the Assemblies of learned Men, called Musea, were adorned with these sorts of Work; and these Musea's were built in divers Places: In A∣thens there was a famous little Hill of this Name, where the Poet Museus was buried; and at Troe∣zen in Peloponnesus there was a Temple dedicated to the Muses, called Musea for that Reason, which was designed for the Use of learned Men, where Pitheus had taught Rhetorick, and wrote a Book upon that Subject, which Pausanias says, he had seen: But one of the most famous Musea's was that at Alexandria, of which Philostratus and Dio Chrysostom make mention, and wherein divers learned Men were maintained at the Charge of the Government: In all Probability it was erected by that curious King of Egypt Pto∣lomy Philadelphus, to whom belonged that admi∣rable Library of which so many Authors make mention, and who caused the Bible to be transla∣ted into Greek by the Septuagint. The Empe∣ror Claudius who would have himself thought to be learned, built also another Musea in the said City, which was called the Musea of Claudius, as Suetonius does restifie. MUSICA, Musick, a Science which teaches how to affect the Ear with agreeable Notes, and regulates Harmony; or else a Science whereby a Disposition is made of grave and sharp Sounds porportionable to one another, and separated by just Intervals, where with Sence and Reason are satisfied: Some attribute the Invention to Apollo, and others to Mercury: The Ancients made six sorts of Musick, viz. Rhythmical, Metrical, In∣strumental, Poetical and Mimical, which contain∣ed the Rules of Dancing, Reciting, Playing upon Instruments, Versifying, Gestures of the Actors; and Harmonical, which contained Rules for Vo∣cal Musick: These six Things being the Subject of the six Kinds of Musick according to the Dirision Porphyrie makes of them upon Ptolomy's Harmonicon. Aristoxenus the Philosopher, and Aristotle's Disciple has left us Three Books concerning the Elements of Harmonical Musick: These Books made him the Author of a Sect in Musick called from him the Aristoxenians, who opposed that of the Pythagoreans: They differed in that the last in Order to judge of Tones had Regard to no∣thing but the Reasons of Proportion, whereas the Former were of Opinion, it was requisite to join the Judgment with the Ear, whose Part it is principally to regulate such Things as belong to Musick. Aristoxenus divided Harmonical Mu∣sick into Seven Parts, and they are Kinds, Intervals, Sounds, Systems, Tones or Modes, Transpositions and Melopy. The Kinds were Chromatick, Diatonick and Enarmonick: The Chromatick abounds in Tones, and was thus cal∣led because the Greeks distinguished it by such Characters as were of a Colour that they called Chroma: The soft b belonged to this Chroma∣tick Kind, Boaetius and Zarlini after him, said, that this Chromatick Kind was invented by Ti∣motheus the Milesiant in the Time of Alexander the Great; the Spartans banish'd him their City, because this Musick was too soft, and they not accustomed to use any other than the Diatonick sort; The Diatonick contained but Two Tones, the Greater and the Lesser, and Half the Greater Tone. The Enarmonick is a Way of softning the Voice, wherewith the Ancients were so charmed that they neglected the Rest. MUSIVARII, Mosaick Works, which the Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian made at the Publick Charge. MUTA or TACITA DEA; the dumb Goddess, or Goddess of Silence, who was thought to have been the Daughter of the River Al∣mo, and called Lalaria, because of her much Babling: This Name she received for discover∣ing to Juno the Amours of Jupiter and Juturna, which incensed Jupiter, so that he cut out her Tongue, to put her for ever in mind of her Fault, and ordered Mercury to carry her into Hell, as being unworthy to see the Light: In
conducting of her thither he was charmed with her Beauty, and enjoyed her, to whom she bore Two Children which were named Lares: The Romans offered Sacrifice to this Goddess for the Prevention of Slanders, and joyned her Festival with that of the Dead, either because she imi∣tated them in Respect to their Silence by reason of her Tongue's being cut out, or because she was the Mother of the Lares, who were account∣ed to be the Genii or Guardian Angels of Men during their Lives. Ovid describes a pleasant Ceremony that used to be practised upon this Occasion for the Pre∣venting of Slanders, and says, That an old Wo∣man surrounded with a great many young Girls, offered Sacrifice to the Goddess Muta, and put Three Grains of Frankinscence with Three of her Fingers into a little Hole, having at the same Time Three black Beans in her Mouth: Then she takes the Head of an Image, which she be∣smears with Pitch, and makes Holes therein with a Brass Needle, then throws it into the Fire and covers it with Mint, pouring some Wine there∣on, of which she gives some to the Girls to drink, but reserves the best Part for her self, wherewith she makes her self drunk, and so sends them Home, saying, She has stopt the Mouths of Slanderers. Fast. 2. V. 571. Ecce anus in mediis residens annosa puellis, Sacra facit Tacitae: vix tamen ipsa tacet: Et digitis tria tura tribus sub limine ponit, Quà brevis occultum mus sibi fecititer. Tum cantata tenet cum rhombo liciafusco, Et septem nigras versat in ore fabas: Quodque pice astringit, quod acu trajecit abenâ, Obsutum menthâ torret in igne caput: Vina quoque instillat: vini quodcunque relictum est, Aut ipsa aut comites, plus temen ipsa bibit. Hostiles linguas, inimicaque vinximus ora, Dicit discedens, ebriaque exit anus. MYAGROS, otherwise called Achor and Beelzebuth by the Hebrews, the God of Flies, to whom the Elaans offered Sacrifice that he might drive away the Flies. See Achor. MYODES, see Achor. MYRINUS, an Epithet given to Apollo and taken from the City of Myrina in Eolia where he was worshipped. MYRMIDONES, the Myrmidons; a People of Thessaly, who followed Achilles to the Trojan War: The Poets feigned that they were Ants, which at the Request of King Eacus were changed by Jupiter into Men, because the Greek Word , signifies an Ant. MYRON, an excellent Statuary, who a∣mongst others of his Pieces made a Cow of Cop∣per so like unto the Life that the Bulls took her to be so; and this has rendered him famous a∣mong the Poets and all the Ancients. MYRRHA; the Daughter of Cinirus King of Cyprus, who falling in Love with her Father, deceived him by the Artifice of her Nurse to gratifie her Lust: Cinirus coming to know it, en∣deavoured to kill her, but she fled into Arabia, where she was transformed into that Tree which bears Myrrh: She was the Mother of Adonis. MYSTRUM; a kind of Measure among the Greeks that held about a Spoonful. N. N Is the Thirteenth Letter of the Alphabet, and a Liquid Consonant which is called Iinniens, because of its having a clearer and plainer Sound than others, the same sounding a∣gainst the Roof of the Mouth: And this appears in that it has the same Pronunciation in Manlius as in the Word An, a Year, in Menses, as in en: Tho' sometimes it loses much of its Strength in particular Words, and forms a midling Sound be∣tween it self and the G, which gave the Greeks Occasion to change the N into P before these Greek Letters , as  for ; tho' many are of Opinion, that this was the Transcriber's Faults in lengthning out the v too much, and making a  of it: The Latins had also somewhat of the like Nature in their Language, for they put Two gg together as the Greeks did, writing Aggulus for Angu∣lus, &c. The Greeks often changed this Letter into an L in the Midst of Words, as  was put for Manlius, or else they left it out alto∣ther, as  for Hortensius; which made Lambinus falsly believe, that the true Name of that Roman Orator was Hortesius contrary to the Authority of Ancient Books and Inscriptions; besides which we find by a great many Examples, that it was usual with the Greeks to leave out the N. when it came not in the End of Words. This Letter was also sometimes lost in the La∣tin, as when from Abscindo they made the Preter∣perfect Tense abscidi: The N moreover had an Affinity with the R, from whence we find Ae∣neus put for Aereus, Cancer for Carcer, Carmen from Cano, Germen for Genimen according to Jo∣seph Scaliger upon Varro: And N was put for S, whence it is that Cessores was found for Censores in Varro, and Sanguis for Sanguen. N among the Ancients was a Numeral Letter, signifying 900, and when a Line was drawn above it, it implied 90000. N and L being put together, with the Lawyers signified as much as non liquet, the Cause did not yet appear clear enough for Sentence to pass. NAIADES, they were false Goddesses which the Heathens believed did preside over
Fountains and Rivers: The Poets often make mention of them. It's a Word that comes from  to flow. NAPAEAE, were false Goddesses which the Pagans believed did preside over Forests and Hills: In the mean while Servius in explaining this Verse in Virgil, Faciles venerare Napaeas, says, That the Napaeae, or the Naiades were the Nymphs of Fountains; Its plain that the Word is derived from the Hebrew Nouph or Noup. And the said Servius upon another Line in Virgil, says, That the Napaeae were the Nymphs of Fountains, and the Nereides of the Seas: In the mean time, if the Greek Etymology  be gi∣ven this Word, we must say that the Napaeae are the Nymphs of Forests. NARCISSUS the Son of Cephisus a River in Boeotia, and of Lyriope the Daughter of Ocea∣nus, who was exceeding beautiful: His Parents having one Day consulted the Prophet Tiresias concerning the Fate of their Son, he answered, That if he lived, he ought not to see his own Face, which they did not at first understand: He was courted by all the Nymphs of the Country because of his handsome and good Mein, but he slighted them all, and even made the Nymph Eccho languish and die for Love of him, insomuch that she had nothing left her but a weak Voice, her Body being transformed into a Rock: The Gods were not willing to let such disdainful Arro∣gance go unpunished, and therefore one Day as he returned weary and faint from Hunting, he stopt upon the Brink of a Well to quench his Thirst, and seeing his own Face in the Water he grew so desparately in Love therewith, that he wasted away upon the Place with Love and Languishment; but the Gods in Compassion to him changed him into a Flower of his Name. Pausanias in his Boeotica contradicts this Fable, and says, That Narcissus was in Love with his Sister that was born after him, and that when she died, he also pined away and perish'd. NAVIS, a Ship, its a Vessel built with high Sides in order to sail upon the Sea: Many are of Opinion that Janus was the first Inventer of Shipping, because the Figure of one was impres∣sed upon the Reverse of the most ancient Coins of the Greeks of Sicily and Italy, according to Athe∣neus: And Phaedrus, L. 4. F. 6. speaks of the first Ship in this manner, I wish to God the Thessa∣lian Ax had never hewn down the lofty Pines growing on the Sides of the Forest of Peleon, and that subtil Argus who was desirous to trace out a bold Course and such as was exposed to the Dangers of apparent Death upon the Wa∣ters, had not built a Ship by the Art and Di∣rection of Pallas: This Ship, I say, first open∣ed the Passage of the Sea, which till then had continued inaccessible, and has been fatal to the Greeks and Barbarians: What think you of this short Relation? Doubtless you will tell me, that the same is impertinent and falsly ground∣ed, because Minos long before the Argonants, had surmounted the Violence of the Egaean Sea covering the same with a great Fleet. The most famous Ships of old are reckoned that of Ptolomy Philopator, that was 280 Cubits long, 38 broad, and 48 high, and 54 from the Top of the Poop down to the Water: She car∣ried 400 Rowers, 400 Seamen, and 3000 Sol∣diers: That which he built to sail upon the Nile, was Half a Furlong long, and 30 Cubits broad: But this was nothing to Hiero's Ship, that was built by the Direction of Archimedes: There was as much Timber used in it, as was designed for 60 Gallies; and the same was so well contrived on the Inside that every Rower, Seaman, Sol∣dier and Passenger had a Cabin for himself: There were in it moreover several Halls to eat in, Rooms, Walks, Galleries, Gardens, Fish-ponds, Stables, Kitchins, Mills, a Temple for Venus, Baths and Council-Chambers: Besides which, it had an Iron Rampart, and Towers, Two at the Head and as many in the Stern, the other being on the Sides with Walls and Bastions, whereon might be seen several Warlike Engines, and among the rest one that threw a Stone of 300 Pound Weight, or an Arrow of 12 Cubits long to the Distance of 600 Paces; with many other strange Things of which Atheneus makes mention. NAEVIUS surnamed Accius, was a famous Augur who lived in the Time of Tarquinius Pris∣cus; its said of him that being minded in the King's Presence to give Authority to his Pre∣dictions, he cut a Stone in two with a Razor. See Accius. NAULUM, this was Money put into the Mouth of a Person deceased at Rome, to pay Charon the Ferryman for his Passage, and this Piece was to be of the current Coin of the Em∣peror that then reigned, which gave People af∣terwards an Opportunity to know when such an one died. NAUMACHIA; Sea-fights, which were the finest Shews the Ancients had; for Nature and the Elements gave way to the Art and Inven∣tions of Men: Julius Caesar having found out a convenient Place on the Banks of the Tiber, and near enough to the City, called Codetta, as Sueto∣nius says, caused the same to be cleansed and ex∣cavated, wherein he presented the People with the Diversion of a Sea-fight: There Tyrian and Egyptian Ships fought; and this kind of Shew was so new, that it drew Spectators thither from all Parts of the World. Among these Sea-fights may be comprehended the fantastical Actions of Caligula who built a Bridge upon Two Rows of
Ships joined and fastned together, that reached from Baiae as far as Puteoli, insomuch that those Two Towns in the Territories of Rome, which by Sea and Nature were separated from each other 3600 Paces, were hereby joined together; the Emperor mounted upon a charging Horse and richly accoutred, rid several Times backwards and forwards upon the said Bridge the first Day, having a Crown on his Head, an Ax upon his Saddle-bow, his Shield on his Arm, and a Sword by his Side: Next Day he appear'd in an Ha∣bit that was less Warlike, and rode to and fro a few Times in a Chariot drawn by Two state∣ly Horses, being followed by a great many Per∣sons of Quality, who are named in the History. As for his Successor, he undertook a real Sea-fight upon the Lake Fucinus; he made a Line of a Dozen Ships to fight against as many of the opposite Side, the one being Rbodians and the other Tyrians. They were animated to fight by the Trumpets of a Triton, who by the Help of an Engine arose out of the Water with his Com∣pany: He had the Curiosity to make the Com∣batants pass before him, who saluted him with these Words. Sir, cried they, receive the Sa∣lutation of those who come to die for your Diver∣sion, Ave, Imperator, morituri te salutant. To whom he gave no other Answer than, Avete vos. Nero also diverted the People with a Naval∣fight, after he had first divided the Mountain which separates the Lake Fucinus from the Ri∣ver Lyra: He fitted out Gallies in Three or Four Lines and put 19000 Men aboard them to fight. But the most remarkable of all the Sea-fights and which is most extolled by Historians and Poets, is that of Titus and Domitian: For here were 3000 Fighting Men on both Sides, one of whom they called Athenians, and the other Party Sy∣racusians. NEBO, its a Deity mentioned in Isaiah the Prophet, which presides over Prophesie, accord∣ing to St. Jerom, who has no other Proof for it but the Signification of the Word: The Chal∣ems were much given to Divination, and Gro∣tius says with great Likelihood of Truth, that he was some Wizzard or Astrologer, of whom they had made a God. NECESSITAS; Necessity; was a Heathen Deity, which accompanied Man from his very Birth: Plato makes her to be the Mother of the Destinies. NECROMANTIA; Negromancy; an Art by which Communication is held with the Devil and the Dead: The Pythonissa, or Witch of Eudor, in the Scripture, made Samuel ap∣pear unto Saul by the Art of Negromancy. NECTAR, the Drink of the Gods, accord∣ing to the Fable. NEMBROD; Nimrod; Vossius thinks him to be the Mars of the Pagans; and Diodorus Siculus represents Mars in such a manner as is not very disagreeable to what the Scripture says concern∣ing Nimrod: For he was the first Inventer of War, and of an Empire established by Force of Arms: Thus Nimrod's Hunting ended in War, and the Effect thereof proved the Foundation of the first Empire in the World, that began at Babylon; which makes the Description given of Nimrod, to be very like unto that of Mars. It was Belus, according to all our prophane Au∣thors, that laid the first Foundation of the Assy∣rian Empire; and 'twas Nimrod that did it ac∣cording to a plain Text in Genesis; from whence it follows that Nimrod must be the same with Belus: In short, Mars being no other, according to Diodorus Siculus, than he who first began Wars and Battles, its very probable that Belus or Nimrod was the Person whom the Heathens worshipped by the Name of Mars; and if the Chronicle of Alexandria says, that Nimrod the Founder of Babylon was transformed into the Constellation, called Orion; its likely the Reason might be, because Orion was formerly an Hunter as well as Nimrod. Bochartus is of Opinion, That Nimrod was rather the Bacchus of the Ba∣bylonians: Nimrod was the Son of Chus; Bar-Chus has the same Import as the Son of Chus in Hebrew: The Letter R being often omitted by the Hebrews in the middle of Words. Bacchus might have been formed of Barchus: Nimrod comes near to the Word Aimra in Chaldee, which signifies a Tiger; whence it was that Bacchus was covered with a Tiger's Skin, and had Tigers to draw his Chariot. Bacchus his Victories in the Indies may represent those of Belus or Nimrod in the Empire of Babylon and the East. The same Author says elsewhere, That the Fable of Ju∣piter may be applied to the History of Nimrod, who rebelled against his Father Saturn, that is, Noah; for Nimrod in Hebrew comes from Marad, which signifies to rebel. NEMEA; a Forest in Achaia, where the People of Argos were wont to celebrate their Plays in Honour of Hercules, who had killed a Lion in the said Forest; and this made him take the Surname of Nemens. There are some Au∣thors who attribute the instituting of these Plays to have been in Honour of Archemorus the Son of Lycurgus, who died with the Stinging of a Ser∣pent: The Crown which was bestowed on the Conquerors at these Games, was made of Ash∣branches and the Judges were in Mourning. NEMESIS; this Goddess was she who par∣ticularly affected to punish and humble the Proud; the Persians despising the Greeks, and so having fitted up Marble in order to the Erecting of Trophies of a Victory, which they had not yet won, when the Grecians defeated them at Ma∣rathon, they made use of the same Marble to set up a Monument for the Goddess Nemesis, as Pausanias relates. This Author makes Oceanus to be the Father of this Goddess, and he is of
Opinion, that it was not the main Ocean, that was meant, but a River of that Name in Ae∣thiopia; but 'tis more likely that it was the true Ocean, from whence the Poets deduce all the Gods. He makes her also to be the Mother of Helen, by which no other is intimated but the Divine Displeasure, which suffered the extra∣ordinary Beauty of the said Lady, to be as it were the Torch that kindled the Flames of War between Europe and Asia, with Losses and incre∣dible Mortifications to both sides. Lastly, He says, that the Statues of Nemesis at Smyrna had Wings to make her the more like unto Cupid; because she very often made those feel her Seve∣rities, whose Obduracy Love could not subdue, and the which proceeded from nothing but Pride. Strabo makes mention of the Temples of Nemesis, who was also called Ramnusia. The Egyptians painted her having her Throne upon the Moon, that so she might observe the Actions of Men. When the Romans went for the Army, they sacrificed to her, and gave the People a Shew of the Gladiators; and when they returned victorious they rendered her Thanks for the Revenge she had taken upon their Ene∣mies. Plato L. 4. de Leg. says in plain Terms, that Nemesis is the Angel of Revenge, Omnibus praeposita est Nemesis juditii angelus, actionum Om∣nium consider aix. This Philosopher has said what the Poets and Historians would say; that there is an Eternal Justice who severely punishes the Proud, and who has Angels to be the Exe∣cutioners of her Wrath; Artemidorus has the same Idea of this Goddess as Plato, which is no∣thing else but the same Justice, from whom the Good ought to expect all sorts of Kindnesses and Favours; and from whom on the Contrary the Wicked can promise to themselves nothing but Chastenings and Punishments: The Romans also worshipped this Goddess, but gave her no Name in their Language, as Pliny says; Nemesis, quae Dea Latinum nomen ne in Capitolio quidem invenis: and again elsewhere; Alias Graecam Nemesim in∣vocantes cùm ob id Romae simulachrum in Capitolio est, quamvis Latinum nomen non sit. But no Bo∣dy has better exprest the Nature and Power, and formed a truer Idea of this Goddess than Am∣mianus Marcellinus, who yet does not give her any Latin Name, tho' he does Two in Greek, viz. Adrasea and Nemesis; of whom he gives a Description rather like a Philosopher, or a Di∣vine than an Historian. L. 14. He informs us that 'tis she who raises up the Just and punishes the Wicked, that she tumbles down the Proud, and makes a just Mixture of Prosperity and Ad∣versity, gives Success to our Undertakings or dis∣appoints our Designs according to the Counsels of an Eternal Wisdom. But tho' the Latins had no proper Name in their Language to express this Goddess by, yet the Poets have not forgot to speak of her, as does Candian: Sed Dea quae nimiis obstat Rhamnusia votis, Ingemuit flexitque rotam. Again, it appears by some Verses of the Poets that the Name of Rhamnusia came from the Place where this Goddess was worshipped: The same being Rhamnus in Attica, where there was a Temple erected to her; and as for the Name of Adrastea, Strabo says, it came from King A∣drastus, who dedicated a Temple to her: Cal∣listhenes Adrasteam ab Adrasio rege denominatam ait, qui primus Nemesi templum posuit. And for this Purpose he recites the Verses of Antimachus the Poet: Hic sacris colitur Dea & Adrastea vo∣catur, primus illi aram condidit Adrastus ad amnem Aesopi. NENIA; this Word sometimes signifies a Toy or Trifle, and other whiles Lamentations and mournful Times, sung at the Burying of the Dead: The Word comes from a trifling Play among Children, called Nenia, which was much used by those of Rome, and wherein he that succeeded best was made King: Roscia, dic sodes, melior lex, an puerorum Nenia, quae regnum rectè facientibus offert. Hor. Ep. 1. L. 1. But the Nenia for the Dead is derived from a Hebrew Word, that signifies Lamentation or Complaint. The Lamentations of Jeremy are no∣thing else but Nenia's upon the Destruction of the Jewish Monarchy, and the City of Jerusalem, which he bewails like a Man that is dead. Nenia is not Greek; for the Greeks called mournful Songs Epicedia, or Threni. The Nenia's began presently as soon as the Party expired, as it ap∣pears from the Gospel it self: Filia mea modo d∣functa est, said the Chief of the Synagogue to the Son of God,, and yet the Singers of the Nenias and of all their mournful Musick had already begun their Lamentations. The Nenia's did not al∣ways consist of mean Verses; for those made by David upon the Death of Saul and Jonathan, and of Jeremy upon Jerusalem, are compleat Pieces, and very elegant. NEPHALIA, a Sacrifice and Feast of the Greeks, called the Feast of Sober Men, at which the Athenians offered to the Sun and Moon, to Aurora and Venus, a Drink made of Water and Honey: They burnt all sorts of Wood upon this Occasion, except the Vine and Fig-tree. NEPTUNUS, Neptune, one of Saturn's Sons and Jupiter's Brother, who for his Share had the Dominion of the Sea assigned him; in∣stead of a Scepter they gave him a Trident, and for a Chariot a great Sea-shell, which they make to be drawn either by Whales and Sea-Calves or by Horses whose nether Parts were fishy: His Wife was Amphitrite whom he ob∣tained
by the means of a Dolphin, in Acknow∣ledgement of whose Kindness he placed him a∣mong the Stars near into Capricorn. He taught Men the Art of managing a Horse, which with a Blow of his Trident he made to come out of the Earth, when he was in Dispute with Miner∣us who should give Name to Coecropia, which was afterwards called Athens from Minerva: Be∣ing engaged in a Conspiracy against his Brother Jupiter, he was forced to fly with Apollo to Lao∣medon, where he helped to build the Walls of Troy, tho' he was so unhappy as not to be paid for his Labour, They make Neptune to be the Creator of the Horse, for thus Virgil speaks of it. Tuque, ô cui prima frementem Fudit equum Tellus, magno percussa tridenti, Neptune. Georg. L. 1. Servius says, that Neptune was also called Equester, because he made a Horie come out of the Earth, that he might have the Honour to give Name to the City of Athens, tho' Minerva pre∣vailed, by making an Olive-tree suddenly to grow up out of the Ground: It's probable this Horse was nothing but a Ship, the Swiftness whereof a Horse does imitate, and which is un∣der the Protection of Neptune: The Fable also signifies perhaps nothing else but the two Things wherein the City of Athens excelled; viz. Ships and Olive-trees: Pausanias gives other Reasons why the Invention of the Use of Horses is attri∣buted to Neptune. The Medals represented him naked, holding sometimes a Dolphin in his Left-hand, or under his Feet, and his Trident in his Right, as may be seen by the Reverse of the Medalls of Marcus A∣grippa: He was represented at other Times with his Trident in one Hand, and in the other an Arostolia or Ornament, which was fastned to the Prow of Ships; and this is made out to us by the Reverse of the Silver Medalls of Augustus and Vespatian, on which there are these abbrevia∣ted Words Nept. Red. Neptuno reduci; these two Emperors intimating hereby their rendring Thanks to Neptune for their Expeditions by Sea and safe Return: He was represented also lying upon the Sea, holding his Trident in one Hand, and leaning with the other Arm upon such a Vessel as the Gods of the Rivers were wont to do: He is to be seen likewise mounted in a Cha∣riot drawn by two Horses, as he is also sitting upon a Dolphin, holding Victory in his Right-hand, which puts two Crowns upon his Head, and his Trident in the Left: When the Romans and Greeks gave Neptune Thanks for the Victories they obtained by Sea; they represented him on the one Side with his Trident, and on the o∣ther stood Victory upon the Stern of a Ship. The Romans built a Temple to Neptunue Equester, as Dionysius of Hallicarnassus says, and appointed a Festival for him, called Consualia, wherein they crowned some Horses with Garlands of Flowers, which in this manner were led through the City. The Arcadians gave this Festival the Name of Hippocratia. The History of Japhet agrees very much with what the Fable relates concerning Neptune: Ja∣phet's Share, according to Scripture, was Europe, with all the Isles of the Sea, and the Peninsula's whereof it consists, Euhemerus the Historian, as interpreted by Ennius, and related by Lanctan∣tius, bears the same Testimony concerning Nep∣tune, that the Seas and the Islands fell to his Lot: Neptuno maritima omnia cum insulis obvene∣runt: Plutarch says, the Egyptians called the Promontories and the utmost Parts of the Earth Nephthyn, which Term has doubtless a great deal of Resemblance to that of Neptune. As for Neptune's other Name called by the Greeks . Bochartus thinks it is derived from the Punick Word Pesat: Herodotus says also, there were none but the Libyans that gave Nep∣tune the Name of Posidon; so Posidon will be the same Name as Neptune. Lactantius does not doubt but that Neptune was Superintendant Ge∣neral of the Seas. All Nations had also a Neptune of their own, and all these Neptunes had in like manner some∣thing that was very manifestly like and unlike to one another: Diodorus Siculus speaks of an Al∣tar in Arabia dedicated to Neptune, standing upon the Sea-side. Sanchuniathon says, that Ʋ∣soüs was the first who hollowed the Body of a Tree, and in Phoenicia durst adventure to trust himself with the Waves of the Sea. The Nep∣tune of the Phoenicians is ancienter than him of the Greeks and Latins, as they were Navigators before the others; and him they made to be the Son of Pontus: The Egyptians had also their Nep∣tune, and Plutarch assures us, that even the Name of Neptune was taken from the Egyptian Tongue, and signified Promontories, and Sea-Coasts: But Plutarch perhaps, confounds the Egyptians with the Libyans, for Herodotus wit∣nesses that the Word Neptune was proper only to the Language of the Libyans who were the oldest Worshippers of this Deity. None, says he, assumed the Name of Neptune at the Be∣ginning but the Libyans, who always worship∣ped this God. The same Author says else∣where, that the Scythians had also a Respect for Neptune, and that they called him Thamimasades. Appian relates, that Mithridates threw the Cha∣riots drawn by Four Horses in Honour of Nep∣tune, into the Sea. NEREUS, is one of the Gods of the Seas, his Name being derived from  Fluid, ac∣cording to Hescychius: But yet 'tis more pro∣bably deduced from Nâhar, an Hebrew Term, signifying fluere, fluvius: Some make him to be
the Son of Neptune, others of Pontus: Pontus and Neptune being the same; but Neptune is more often looked upon as the Genius of the Seas, and Oceanus and Pontus as the Body thereof. They make Nereus to have 50 Daughters, called from him Nereides, which are so many particular Seas, being Parts of the main Sea it self. Nereus mar∣ried Doris by whom he had Thetis. NEREIDES, are Sea-Nymphs and the Daughters of Nereus. NERO, the 6th Emperor of Rome, was the Son of Domitius Aeneobarbus and Agrippina and adopted by the Emperor Claudius his Predecessor, to the Empire: The Medals which we have of him shew his natural Inclinations by the Features of his Face: For his Eyes were small and beetle∣browed, his Throat and Chin met together, his Neck was thick, his Belly big and Legs small: Take him altogether, he perfectly resembled a Hog, which he did not illy imitate in his sordid Pleasures; his Chin was a little turn'd up, which was a Sign of Cruelty; his Hair light and Legs small, as Suetonius observes, and his Face rather Fair than Majestick, which made him easily to be adjudged an effeminate Person: So that if in the Beginning of his Reign he shewed much Moderation and Clemency, even so far as to say he wished he could not write, that he might not sign the Sentence of a Criminal which was brought to him, it was no more than an affected Modesty, which Policy and the Respect that he bore unto his Preceptors, inspired him with. Seneca in his Satyr against Claudius, with a sort of Flattery unbecoming a Philosopher, brings in Apollo speaking of Nero, as being like unto him∣self both in Beauty and Majesty: Ille mihi fimilis vultu, fimilisque decore, Nec cantu, nec voce minor, &c. And this doubtless is the Reason why Nero is of∣ten seen represented like unto Apollo: To speak the Truth, he had no bad Face, but he could not pass for a very handsome Person, since his Eyes were too small, his Neck very thick, and his Legs so slender and disproportionate to his Height. Indeed, at the time when Seneca writ, he was handsomer than afterwards, seeing he was yet but young, and not so gross and fat as afterwards, and this may be observed by the Me∣dals which were cast, while he was yet but Caesar. * We have a Dialogue in Lucian, which speaks of Nero's undertaking to cut thro' the Isthmus of Corinth, which I shall recite intire in this place, because it contains some Particulars of the said Prince his Life. Menecrates. Did not this Design seem to have somewhat in it of the Air of Greece, which this Prince affects so much? Musonius. It would doubtless have spared Merchants and Sailors much Trouble, and par∣ticularly Pilots, which are a long time sail∣ing round Peloponesus, and would have very much conduced to the Defence and Profit of Greece, which would have had a better Inter∣course with it self in the several Parts of it hereby. Menecr. Thou will oblige us to give a Relati∣on of what passed upon this Occasion, seeing thou were present. Muson. This I will very willingly do: The Love of Musick, and an Opinion which Nero had that the Muses could not sing better than himself, carried him into Greece, that he might be crowned at the Olympick Games; for as to the Pythian Games, he thought he had a greater Share therein than Apollo himself; and I do not know but that he might believe the said God would neither dare to sing nor play upon the Harp after him. This Design therefore had not been premeditated long, but when he found himself upon the Place, and saw the little Di∣stance there was from one Sea to the other, the same being about Three Quarters of a League, he was taken with a Desire to render himself famous by this Undertaking, according to the Example of other great Princes, who had un∣dertaken the like Designs. For Agamemnon (as 'tis said) separated the Island of Negropont from Baeotia. Darius made a Bridge over the Bospho∣rus, and Xerxes would have cut thro' Mount Athos. Besides, he was mightily pleased to hear himself praised, for Tyrants are never so cruel nor blind, but they desire to do something for the Benefit of the Publick, or their own Glo∣ry; wherefore, after he had sung the Praises of Neptune and Amphitrite upon the Theatre of Corinth, with another little Poem in Honour of Leucothea and Melicertus, he went on with a Golden How, which was presented him, and with Songs and publick Acclamations advanced towards the Place, where the Canal was to be made, and there began to dig a little; after which recommending the Business to those who had the Charge thereof, he returned into the City, believing that he had by this Action out-done the Labours of Hercules. The Work was divided so, that his Army should be imploy'd in that part which was eanest, and that was to dig a Canal in the Plain, while the Malefactors, which were taken out of the Prison, should do the rest. After they had worked for Twelve Days, there was a Rumour spread up and down Corinth, that the Mathematicians should say, that one of the Seas was much higher than the other, and that if they continued to go on, the Isle of Egina would be drowned: But besides that these Rumours were false in themselves, they never had been able to divert the Resolution of a Prince, who affected to do great Things, if all the Mathematicians in the World had assured him of the Truth thereof; for he would never have
abandoned the Undertaking, had he not recei∣ved the News of Vindex his Revolting, and that all Things were in Confusion at Rome. Menecr. Tell us now what it was that incli∣ned him to have such a passionate Love unto Musick, and whether he had so good a Voice as some have reported; for others have affirmed the Contrary. Muson. His Voice was in reality neither to be admired nor laughed at, because it was neither very good nor very bad. It was a kind of a ri∣sing Voice that he does not manage ill, and such as agrees very well with his Harp, as well as his Gesture and Countenance; besides which, he understood the Way of the Theatre exactly well, and better than became a Prince. But when he pretended to rival the Masters of the Art, he made a Fool of himself; whatever Danger might ensue: For he was too full of Action, and stood a Tip-toes; besides, he coloured in the Face thro' an over Eagerness, and a Desire to perform well, tho' he naturally had a very ruddy Coun∣tenance; and as he had no extraordinary Voice, nor good Breath, they fail'd him often at a Pinch. Menecr. But how do they do to enter the Lists with him? Muson. He put a Player to death at the Isth∣mian Games, who had the Boldness to dispute the Prize with him; for it is no less Danger to excel him, than 'tis to laugh at his Voice. Menecr. How was that, we know nothing of it? Muson. This was done at the Games of all Greece, and was thus: Tho' it were not an usual thing to represent the Diversions of the Theatre at these Games, no more than to sing at the Olympick Games, yet he was minded to carry away the Honour of his Tragedy; amongst those who came to contend with him for the Prize, there was a very famous Actor from Epirus, who in∣sisted upon having 10 Talents for yielding the Ho∣nour unto him; this made him swell with Anger, besides, the Actor had already told in private, what it was that hindred Nero to grant him what he asked. But as he saw him acting his Part with great Applause, he caused one of his Ser∣vants to tell him, that he ought to yield that Honour to his Prince; and because he would not, but persisted inflexible, and doubled his Efforts, which were attended with the loud Acclamati∣ons of the People; he ordered his Actors to go upon the Stage (as if that were part of the same Act) who when they had push'd him against a Pil∣lar, but his Throat with thin pieces of Ivory, which they had in their Hands, that were as sharp as Razors. Menecr. And did he after this Action get the Applause of Greece, and win the Victory? Muson. This passed for a Jest, in a Man that had killed his own Mother. Menecr. Indeed, 'tis not strange he should go about to make an Actor hold his Tongue, when he had endeavoured to stop Apollo's Mouth, by hindring his Priestess to deliver any more O∣racles, because she had placed him in the Num∣ber of Paricides, tho' she had still spared him; for Oresles and Alcmaenon, with whom she com∣pared him, had killed their Mother in Revenge for their Father, which had some Shadow of Glory in it; but Nero's Crime was without Pre∣tence. When the Provinces had revolted against him, and that he found he was hated by every Body for his Cruelty and enormous Debaucheries, he killed himself, that he might avoid the Punish∣ments his Crimes deserved. NERVA, named Cocceius, succeeded Do∣mitian, and was chosen Emperor by the Senate with unspeakable Joy; he happily began his Reign by putting forth a Proclamation for a ge∣neral Pardon to all such as were banish'd or in Prison: He was a very just and good Prince; he was represented upon his Coin with a dry and wrinkled Face, his Eyes sunk in his Head, and his Chin sharp: He was very old when he came to the Empire, and was afflicted with a very weak Stomach, which made him lean for want of Di∣gestion; and this altered his Aspect, and hid his Inclinations: Tho' he had a large and Eagle Nose, yet he was not Valiant; 'twas rather a Sign of great Goodness in him; he had a pretty long Visage: In the mean time they found in him several Signs of an Inclination to Passion from the Lines of his Face and Habit of his Body; and among the rest, a lean and thin Face, a sharp-pointed Head, a more than ordinary Tall∣ness of Body, hooked Nose, Beetle-brows, and a dry and sharp Chin; in short, he died by be∣ing put into too violent a Passion against Regu∣lus, after he had reigned One Year and Four Months. NESSUS; the Centaur; a Son of Ixion and a Cloud, with whom Hercules having entrusted his Wife Dianira, for him to carry her over the River Evenus, he went to ravish her, which being perceived by Hercules, he shot him with an Arrow: At his Death he bequeath∣ed his Shirt stained with his Blood to Dianira; giving her understand, that if she could get Hercules to wear it, he should for ever love her: This therefore she sent unto him by Lycas, and as soon as he had put it on, he found his Bo∣dy seized with so violent a Fire, that he threw himself Headlong into the Flames of Mount Oeta. NESTOR, whom Homer proposed for an Example of Wisdom and Prudence, lived about 300 Years, and was sound both in Body and Mind; whence it is, that when we would wish a Man a long Life, we wish him the Age of Nestor.
NEUROBATES; by this Name were a kind of Rope-dancers called, who walked not upon an extended Cord, but made several Tours and Leaps, as a Dancer does upon the Ground at the Sound of Musick. NICANDER; was a famous Physician in Nero's Time, who wrote Two Poems concerning venemous Beasts, and Remedies against Poisons, called Theriaca, and Alexipharmaca. NICETERIUM; the Prize at the Olym∣pick and Circensian Games. NILUS; the Nile, a River which crosses a great part of Affrica, the Spring-head thereof being unknown till the last Age; the same is in a Territory which the Inhabitants call Abain, or Sacahela, that is, the Father of the Waters: This River runs out of Two Fountains or Eyes, to use the Words of the People of that Country, that are at about Thirty Paces distance, each of them being about the same Circumference as one of our Pits or a Coach-wheel, whose Bot∣toms are 16 or 17 Foot deep: The Inhabitants, who are Heathens, worship the largest of the Two, and to it offer several Cows in Sacrifice, whose Hesh they eat as if it were holy, and leave the Bones in a Place appointed for that Purpose, which at present makes a Mountain: Its above 2000 Years since Herodotus has made mention of these Cows that were sacrificed at the Sources of the Nile. The Inhabitants call it Agaiis, the same being in the Kingdom of Goy∣am, 12 Degrees North Latitude and 55 Longi∣tude. Its in a Plain about Three Quarters of a League long, surrounded with Mountains: At its going out from thence the River enters into a small Lake, then is loft under Ground for about a Musket-shot; and Three Days Journey from the Source thereof, 'tis so large and deep as to bear Vessels on't; but in about 100 Paces far∣ther it runs cross some Rocks, so that one may easily pass over without wetting his Feet: They sail upon it with Boats made of Mat, and well set together: It receives Three great Rivers into it, viz. the Gema, Linquetil and Brantil, and when it comes out of the Lake of Dambea, which is Fifty Leagues over, it receives into it other large Rivers, viz. the Gamara, Abea, Baixo, and Aquors, and lastly the Tacasus near Egypt: It hath Two principal Cataracts or Falls. At the Second it falls into a great Abyss, and the Noise thereof may be heard at the Distance of Three Leagues; the Water is forced with so much Violence, that it forms a kind of an Arch, and leaves so great a Space between, that a Man may pass it without being wet; and there also are Seats cut in the Rocks, where Travellers may rest themselves: The first Cataract or Water∣fall of the Nile is about Fifty Foot, but the se∣cond is three times as high: Its false that the Noise made by these Cataracts, render the Neighbouring People Deaf, tho' the same may be heard Three Days Journey off, and that the Waters which spurt therefrom, appear like a Smoak. Alexander consulted the Oracle of Ju∣piter Ammon, in order to know where the Spring of this River was. Sesostris and Ptolomy sought for it in vain: Cambyses, as Strabo says, spent a whole Year to find it: Lucan witnesseth, that Caesar said, He would have given over the Pur∣suit of the Civil War, if he were sure to find it. Isaac Vossius hath wrote concerning the Original of the Nile, and other Rivers, and attributes the Rise and Overflowing thereof to the Rains, which fall between the Two Tropicks on the 1st of June, and which are the Causes of the fine Weather we enjoy in Europe. When the Nile rises up to 16 Degrees, they fear a Famine, but when it comes to 23 'tis a good Year: When 'tis too high, the Inundation is dangerous: The Measure for the Increase of the Nile was kept in the Temple of Serapis, and the Emperor Con∣stantine caused the same to be carried to the Church of Alexandria. Plutarch says the Egyptians adored the Waters of the Nile, and St. Athanasius intimates as much: The Nile was the chief Instrument of God's Blessing bestowed upon Egypt, as the same Au∣thor observes; and thus from it have they made their God Osiris, if we believe Plutarch. And it ought not to be thought strange that Osiris, which is the Sun, should be also the Nile: For by the same Reason that the Sun is Osiris, or the Active or Male Principle in respect to all the Earth, which is Isis, the Passive and Feminine Principle, the Nile is also the Active Principle and Author of the Fertility of the Land of Egypt, from which it receives all its Faecundity; so the Nile is Osiris likewise. There are some also of Opinion, that the Name of Osiris comes from the Hebrew Name of the Nile; for in Scripture the Nile is usually called Nahal Misraim, Fluvius Aegypti, and sim∣ply Nahal or Nehel, from whence they made : Again, Mela says, that the Nile at the Springs thereof was called Nuchul, quasi Na∣chal. But the same Scriptures give likewise un∣to the Nile the Name of Scachar Niger, because the Waters of the said River are very often troubled, muddy, and blackish; whence also it is, that Plutarch and other Greek Authors some∣times call it . Servius and other Latin Writers name it Melo. From Schachar or Scha∣bar they make Siris, which is the Name given to the Nile by Dionysius, in his Description of the World: Siris ab Aethiopibus vocatur. Its also believed, that the Reason why the Dog-star is called Sirius, is, because it hath borrowed its Name from the Nile, with which it hath so much Sympathy, the Overflowings of the said River being confined to the Dog-days. This being premised; 'tis not difficult to believe that the
Nile or Siris have been worshipped under the Name of Osiris. The Overflowings of the Nile are so beneficial to Egypt, that there is no need of Rain in that Country. Thus the Nile unto them stood instead of Jupiter, who was held to be the Author of Rains. And this Tibullus ex∣presses in these Verses: Te propter nullos Tellus tua postulat imbres, Arida nec pluvio supplicat herba Jovi. And in Athenaeus we read this Prayer put up to the Nile, as to the Jupiter of Egypt. . NIMROD. See Nembrod. NINUS, was the Son of Belus and Founder of the Assyrian Empire; he continued the Build∣ing of the City of Babylon, which at first he made the Seat of his Empire, than founded Ni∣neve, so called from his own Name: He made an Idol of his Father Belus, whom he would have to be worshipped by his People, made it a Place of Refuge for all Malefactors, and was the Au∣thor of Idolatry. NIOBE, Tantalus his Daughter, who died miserably through her own Vanity; for she ha∣ving bore a great many Children, was so rash as to prefer her self before Latona. At this A∣pollo and Diana growing angry, they killed all her Children with Arrows; which made her pine away for Grief. The Poets say, that the Gods being touched with Compassion for this un∣fortunate Mother, which pined away with Tears and Sorrows, changed her into a Marble∣stone, which by a Blast of Wind was carried as far Lycia, near unto the City of Sypilus, where her marbled Body continually sweated as a Sign of her Mourning. NISUS, King of Megara, who had an Hair in his Head of a Purple Colour, unto which was limited the Duration of his Reign; which Story is taken from Sampson's Hair, wherein consisted all his Strength: Cui splendidus ostro Inter honoratos medio sub vertice canos, Criuis inhaerebat, magnifiducia regni.Ovid. Metam. l. 8. v. 8. Scylla, a Daughter of this King's, happening to fall in Love with King Minos during the Time of his Besieging Megara, betray'd her Father, and cut off this fatal Hair: The City hereupon was taken, Nisus transformed into a Sea-Eagle, and Scylla being deserted by Minos, was changed into a Bird named Ciris: Jam pendebat in auras, Et modò factus erat fulvis Halyaeetos alis, &c. Plumis in avem mutata, vocatur Ciris: & à tonso est hoc nomen adepta capillo.Ibid. v. 145. Here is a double Etymology the one Greek, and the other Hebrew, and as Ovid hints, the Name of Ciris comes from  tondere; but that of Nisus from the Hebrew Nets which signifies a Sparhawk. NOBILITAS, Antonius Geta, Son to the Emperor Severus, has given us the Figure of it in a Medal of his, where she is represented in a Roman Lady's Dress, holding a Scepter in her Hand, and upon her Left Arm a small Statue of Minerva. NODINUS or NODOSUS, a God that presided over the Knots that are in the Stalks of Corn. NODUS GORDIUS; the Gordian Knot, tis a Greek Proverb, which is said concerning a Knot that cannot be untied, and figuratively put for a Difficulty that cannot be resolved: It proceeds from an indissoluble Knot of Leather∣thongs, which Gordius King of Phrygia laid up in the Temple of Apollo, in Commemoration of his being saluted King, because he was the first that entred into the said Temple. Alexander cut it with his Sword, because he could not untie it, for the Oracle had foretold, that the Person who untied it, should conquer Asia. NOAH, the Son of Lamech, a just and up∣right Man, who found Favour with God, and who with his Family only escaped the Deluge, being shut up in an Ark by the Lord's Command∣ment. Noah's History has been applied to Sa∣turn; for Noah was the Father of all Mankind after the Flood: He was also the King and Au∣thor of another Golden Age, while the Earth was peopled with no other than with his Chil∣dren and Grand-children, whom he had brought up in Innocence and under whose Empire he left them to enjoy an entire Liberty: There were no Slaves in the first Age after the Deluge; all Man∣kind making as it were yet but one Family. And whereas Noah, according to the Scripture, was the first that planted a Vineyard and brought up the Use of Wine, the Heathens gave Saturn also the Glory of having taught Men the Art of Agriculture, and especially planting of Vines and the Use of the Sickle. Athenaeus, after Berosus, says the Saturnalia were celebrated at Babylon, as well as in Greece and Italy: And these Saturnalia were Days ap∣pointed for Debaucheries; as if the Heathens had had a mind to keep up the Remembrance of Noah's Drunkenness, into which he unadvisedly fell, before he had yet had a Tryal of the Strength of Wine. St. Cyrill relates unto us the Testimo∣nies
of Alexander Polyhistor and Abydenus, who say, that Xisutrus King of Assyria, escaped the Deluge, which Saturn had foretold should come, by putting himself, according to his Advice in an Ark together with all Kinds of Beasts; that he sailed to Armenia, and that he sent some Birds to know if the Waters were gone off the Face of the Earth. It's manifest, that this is the Story of Noah counterfeited, and that these Fables had their Origin in Assyria; insomuch that the fabu∣lous Saturn is the true Noah, and his Ark rested on the Mountains of Armenia. Tzetzes makes Noah one while to go into India, and at another time to Egypt: He lived 350 Years after the Deluge, and repeopled the Earth according to the Command which God gave him: St. Epipha∣nius says, that Noah made a Division of the World between his Three Sons at Rkinocorura a Place upon the Frontiers of Egypt. NOEMA, the Daughter of Lamech, whom Moses has joyned with Jubal and Tubalcain; Ge∣nebrard in his Chronicle says, she invented the Art of Spinning and Woollen Manufacturies, and so she was the Minerva of the Heathens, but as the Name of Noema signifies Beautiful, others have been of Opinion 'twas Venus; here unto they add farther, that as Noema is in the Book of Genesis joined with Tubalcain, so the Pagans said, that Venus was Vulcan's Wife. NOMEN, a Name; the Greeks had but one Name, but the Romans had sometimes Three or Four, which they called Praenomen, Nomen, Cognomen, and sometimes Agnomen. The Prae∣nomen is that which belongs to every Person in particular; the Name is that which denotes the House from whence one is descended, and the Surname is that which belongs to a particular Family or to a Branch of that House. It was a Custom among the Romans to give to their Children the Name of the Family, to Boys on the 9th Day after their Birth, and to Girls on the 8th. But according to Festus and Plutarch, the Praenomen was not given them be∣fore they put on the Virile Robe, that is, at the Age of 17. Thus Cicero's Children were al∣ways called Ciceronis pueri till those Years, after which, they called them Marcus filius, and Quin∣tus filius: As for the Slaves they had no other Name than that of their Master, as Lucipor, Lu∣cius his Slave, Lucii puer; Marcipor, Marcus his Slave, Marcipuer. But yet afterwards they gave them a Name which generally was that of their Country, as Syrus, Geta, Davus, and when they were made free they took the Praenomen and Name of their Master, but not the Surname, in the room of which they retained their own Name. Thus that learned Freedman of Cicero was called M. Tullius Tyro; and this was also ob∣served with Respect to Allies and Strangers, who took upon them the Name of the Person by whose Favour they had obtained the Priviledge of be∣ing Citizens of Rome. Varro says, that the Women formerly had their own proper and particular Names, as Cala, Caecilia, Lucia, Volumnia, and those, Names, as Quintilian observes, were distinguish'd by Letters inverted thus C. L. M. However, afterwards they gave them no Names, but if there was on∣ly one Girl, they did no more than give her the Name of her Family, and sometimes softened the same by the Way of a Diminution, as Tullia or Tulliola: But if they were two, they called one Major, the other Minor; and if more, they were named according to their Age, Prima, Se∣cunda, Tertia, Quarta, Quinta, &c. or they made a Diminutive of the same, as Secandilla, Quartilla, Quintilla, &c. NOMENCLATOR; He was a Person among the Romans who accompanied those who laboured under-hand to be made Magistrates, and who told them the Names of all the Citi∣zens they met with, that they might salute them, and call them by their Names, which was a very civil Custom, and much in use at Rome. NONAE; the Nones, quasi Novae; being as much as to say, new Observations, tho' its more likely the Name came, because that from the said Day to the Ides, there were always Nine Days. They computed Six Days in the Nones of May, October, July and March, and in the other Months only Four. Some believe that Ro∣mulus began the Month on the First Day of the Moon's appearing in the Evening, on which the Country People were obliged to come to Town, in order to know of the Pontiffs, the Time when the Feasts and other Ceremonies were to be celebrated; and in short, whatever they were to do, or let alone during the whole Month. And as the Sacrificer was on the same Day wont to cry the Word  with a loud Voice Five times successively, if the Nones contained but Five Days, or Seven times, if they comprehended Seven; so the Nones perhaps got their Name, in that at first they were called Nono Idus, the 9th of the Ides, as they are put indeed in the place of the IX of the Ides. Besides, seeing there were Three different Variations, and such as are ve∣ry considerable in the Course of the Moon; the 1st, When she is entirely hid by the Sun-beams; 2d, On the first Day of her appearing, when she rises at Night, and appears with Horns at her coming forth from under the said Beams; 3d, When she is at the Full; 'tis thought that Romulus from thence took occasion to divide the Days of his Months, which he began always with the Calends, at the time when the Moon, sub ra∣diis Solis celaretur, was hid by the Sun-beams, and afterwards gave the Name of Nonae or No∣vae Lunae to the Day whereon the New Moon appear'd, and that of the Idus when she was at the Full, or appear'd with a beautiful Face, the same Word coming from the Greel
Idus, which signifies as much; from whence they give a Reason for the Inequality of the Days of the Nones: For, as it happens by a Composition of the Sun and Moon's Motions, that the Moon comes forth sometimes sooner from under the Beams of the other, and sometimes latter, and that this Difference is usually confined within the Space of Two Days: Its very likely, say they, that at the Time when Romulus instituted this Calender, the Moon continued longer hid by the Sun-beams, in the Months of March, May, July, and October, and that upon this Occasion he allowed Seven Days to the Nones of these Four Months, and only Five to the rest, during which the Moon got sooner from under the said Beams, and was visible. NOVEMBER; 'twas formerly the 9th Month of the Year, instituted by Romulus, which consisted of Ten in all; and now 'tis the 11th. The Emperor Commodus called it Exuperatorius; but after his Death it reassumed its former Name: In this Month the Sun enters into Sagitarius; and it was under the Protection of Diana: On the first Day thereof they made a Feast to Jupi∣ter, and performed the Circensian Games: On the Day of the Nones or Fifth were the Neptu∣nalia celebrated, which lasted Eight Days. On the 7th was held the Show of Ornaments: On the 3d of the Ides the Inclosure of the Sea: On the Ides the Feast called Lectisternia: On the 18th of the Calends, the Trial of Horses: On the 17th of the Calends, the popular Plays in the Circus for Three Days: On the 14th, the Traders Feast lasting Three Days: On the 13th, the Pontiff's Supper in Honour of Cybele: On the 11th, the Liberalia: On the 10th, they of∣fered Sacrifice to Pluto and Proserpina: On the 8th, were the Brumalia celebrated, which lasted for Thirty Days: On the 5th, were performed the Mortuary Sacrifices to the frighted Gauls and Greeks. NOVENSILES; were Heroes newly received into the Number of the Gods, or the Gods of the Provinces and Kingdoms which the Romans had conquered, and to which they sacrificed under the Name of Dii Novensiles. NOX; the Night, the Daughter of Terra and Chaos, which the Poets represented in the Form of a Woman in Mourning, crowned with Poppies, and having black Wings, and riding in a Chariot drawn by Two Horses, surrounded with Stars, which served as her Guides: They sacrificed a Cock unto her. Cic. L. 3. de Nat. Deor. Says her Children were Love, Deceit, Fear, Old Age, Miseries, Distinies, &c. The Night is part of the Natural Day, during which the Sun is not above the Horizon; the Ancient Gauls and Germans divided Time not by the Day, but by Nights, as you may see in Caesar and Tacitus. NUMA, called Pompilius; the Son of Pomponius Pompilius: He was born at Cures, the Capital City of the Sabines; the Fame of his Vertue made the Romans chuse him for their King, after Romulus his Death: He revived all the Ancient Ceremonies of Religion, and insti∣tuted new Ones; and writ down a whole Form of Religious Worship in Eight Books, which he caused to be laid with him in his Tomb after his Death. But one Terentius, says Varro, having an Estate haid by the Janiculum, as his Servant was ploughing near unto Numa's Tomb, he turn'd up the Books wherein the said Prince had set down the Reasons of his instituting such My∣steries. Terentius carried them presently to the Praetor, who, when he had read the Beginning of them, thought it was a Matter of that Impor∣tance as deserved to be communicated to the Senate: The Principal Senators having read some things therein, would not meddle with the Regulations of Numa, but thought it conducive to the Interest of Religion to have the said Books burnt. Numa had had Recourse to the Art of Hydromancy, in order to see the Images of the Gods in the Water and to learn of them the Re∣ligious Mysteries he ought to establish: Varro says, that this kind of Divination was found out by the Persians, and that King Numa, and after him Pythagoras the Philosopher made use thereof: To which he adds, that they also in∣voked Mens Souls upon this Occasion by sprink∣ling of Blood, and this is that which the Greeks called Necromancy; and because Numa made use of Water to perform his Hydromancy, they said, he married the Nymph Egeria, as the said Varro explains it: It was therefore by this way of Hy∣dromancy that this inquisite King learnt those Mysteries which he set down in the Pontiff's Books, and the Causes of the same Mysteries, the Knowledge whereof he reserved to himself alone: He boasted he had very often Conver∣sation with the Moses, to whom he added a Tenth, which he named Tacita, and made the Romans worship her. He somewhat rectified the Calender, and ad∣ded Two Months to the Year, which at first con∣sisted but of 10 Months, and so made them 12, adding every Two Year one Month consisting of 22 Days, which he called Mercedinum, and which he immediately placed after the Month of Fe∣bruary; he lived about 80 Years and of them reigned 40. This Numa Pompilius, second King of Rome was indeed both a King and a Philo∣sopher, who gave himself up so much to the Doctrine which Pythagoras afterwards publish'd to the World, that many through a gross. Ig∣norance of the Time took him to be a Disciple of Pythagoras: Dionysius of Hallicarnassus has re∣futed this Error, by shewing that Numa was more ancient than Pythagoras by Four Genera∣tions, as having reigned in the 6th Olympiad, whereas Pythagoras was not famous in Italy before
the 50th. The same Historian says, that Numa pretended his Laws and Maxims were communi∣cated to him by the Nymph Egeria, which o∣thers believed to be a Muse; at last the said Historian says, Numa pretended to have that Conversation with a Coelestial Mistress, that so they might believe his Laws were the Ema∣tions of the Eternal Wisdom it self. NUMERUS; a Number, is a Discrete Quantity, being a Collection of several separate Bodies. Euclid defines it to be a Multitude com∣posed of many Unites. The perfect Number establish'd by the Ancients is Ten, because of the Number of the Ten Fingers of a Man's Hand. Plato believed this Number to be perfect, inas∣much as the Unites, which the Greeks called Mo∣nades, compleated the Number of Ten. The Ma∣thematicians who would contradict Plato herein, said, that Six was the most perfect Number, because that all its Aliquot Parts are equal to the Number Six: And farther, to make the Per∣fection of the Number Six to appear, they have observed that the Length of a Man's Foot is the 6th Part of his Height. There is an even and an odd Number; the Even is that which may be divided into Two equal Parts, whereas the odd Number cannot be divided equally with∣out a Fraction, which is more of an Unity than the even Number. The Golden Number is a Period of 19 Years, invented by Metho the A∣thenian; at the End of which happen the Luna∣tions and the same Epact; tho' this Period be not altogether true: Its thought to have been thus called either because of the Benefit there is in the Use of it, or because it was formerly writ∣ten in Gold Characters. See Arithmetica. NUPTIAE, Marriages, from the Verb nu∣bere, which signifies to vail, because the Bride had a Vail on of the Colour of Fire, wherewith she covered her self: They carried a lighted Torch, and sung Hymen or Hymenaeus, which was a fabulous Deity of the Pagans, whom they be∣lieved to preside over Marriages: The Poets called him fair Hymenaeus. See Matrimonium. NYMPHA; a Nymph; a false Deity, be∣lieved by the Heathens to preside over Waters, Rivers and Fountains; some have extended the Signification hereof, and have taken them for the Goddesses of Mountains, Forests and Trees. The Ancients took the Nymphs to be Bacchus his Nurses, whether it were because the Wine wanted Water to bring its Grapes to Maturity, or because 'tis requisite Water should be mixed with Wine, that it may not disorder the Head. They have been sometimes represented each of them with a Vessel, into which they poured Wa∣ter, and holding the Leaf of an Herb in their Hands, which grows in Water and Wells; or else another while with that of a Water-Plant called Nymphaea, that took its Name from the Nymphs; and again, with Shells instead of Ves∣sels, and naked down to the Navel; the Nymph were sometimes honoured with the Title of Au∣gust, as other Deities were, which appears by this Inscription: NYMPHIS AUGUSTIS MATURNUS V. S. L. M. That is, Votum solvit libens meritò: Maternus has freely and fully discharg'd her Vow to the Au∣gust Nymphs. This Epithet has been given them by way of Honour, because 'twas believed they watched for the Preservation of the Impe∣rial Family. NYMPHAEA; the Baths which were conse∣crated to the Nymphs; and therefore so called from them. Silence was more particularly required there; whence we read in an Inscription of Gru∣ter, NYMPHIS LOCI, BIBE, LAVA, TACE; to the Nymphs of the Place, drink, bathe your selves, and be silent. O. O Is the Fourteenth Letter in the Alphabet, and the Fourth Vowel: The O by its long and short Pronounciations represents fully the Omega and Omicron of the Greeks; the Pronuncia∣tion whereof was very different, says Caninius after Terentianus; for the Omega was pronounced in the Hollow of the Mouth with a great and full Sound, including two oo; and the Omicron upon the Edge of the Lips with a clearer and smaller Sound. These two Pronounciations they have in the French Tongue; the Long O they distinguish by the Addition of an S, as coste, hoste, motte; or by the Dipthong au, as haute, faute, &c. and the Affinity there is between this Vowel O and the Dipthong au, is not without an Example in the Greek Tongue, wherein you have , vulnus, according to the Dorick Dialect, from whence the Latins have also used caudex and co∣dex; Caurus or Corus, &c. And hence, perhaps, it is, that as this Dipthong au retains much of the A, so the O has some Affinity with the A; for the Eolians used  for , exercitus  for , supra; which was also imitated by the Romans, who took Domo from , and used Fabius for Fovius, according to Festus, Far∣reus for Forreus, &c. And in the French Tongue the A and the O are often joined together in the same Word, as in Laon, faon, paon, which are pronounced with A Long, as Lân, fân, pân; tho Ramus says, that in his Time some distinguished
the Long O by these two Letters AO, which they did perhaps in Imitation of the Greeks who chan∣ged  or  as well as  in their Contractions into . Again, the O has some Affinity with the E, whence it is that the Greeks from  dico, have made  dixi, and the like; that the Eto∣lians used  for , tremo; and the Latins from , made spondeo; from pen∣deo, pondus; from tego, toga; and they used to say adversùm or advorsùm; vertex or vortex; ac∣cipiter for accipitor, a Bird of Prey; bemo for bo∣mo; ambe and ambes for ambo and ambos, in En∣nius. But the O had still a greater Affinity with the V, whence the Ancients, as Longus says, ea∣sily confounded these two Letters, and tho' they writ Consol, they pronounced it Consul: Cassio∣dorus also informs us, they wrote praestu for prae∣sto; poblicum for publicum; colpam for culpam. Pliny in Priscian says the same thing; and thence it comes to pass that huc, illuc, are used for hoc, illoc, and this Virgil himself does: Hoc tunc ignipotens caelo descendit ab alto. Aen. 8. Quintilian also observes, that they used Hecoba, and Notrix with an O for an Ʋ; and that of Odysseus, the Eolians had made Ʋdysses, from whence the Romans said Ʋlysses; and that, in short, his Ma∣sters wrote servom with an O, whereas from his Time forward they wrote the same with two , servum. The two Dipthongs oe and oi come near the Greek Dipthong oi: The O among the Latins was very like unto the V; wherefore it often happened that the oe was changed into an u, as when from the Word poena they made punire; and thus we may still find in some old Inscriptions oisum or oesum put for usum, coira∣vit or coeravit for curavit; moenera for munera; and so also they used Puni for Poeni, and bellum Punicum for Poenicum. O in Arithmetick stands for a Cypher; it was also made use of for a Nu∣meral Letter that signified Eleven, and when they put a Bar above it, it stood for 11000. OBELISCUS, an Obelisk, a very high Stone set up perpendicularly for an Ornament to some Place, which had often Inscriptions and Hieroglyphicks upon it. The Difference be∣tween Pyramids and Obelisks consisted in that the Pyramids have a large Basis, but the Obelisks are very narrow: Pliny says, the Egyptians cut their Obelisks in the Form of a Sun-beam, and that the Word Obelisk in the Egyptian Tongue signi∣fied a Ray or Beam. OBOLUS, a Copper Coin worth a Maille or Two Mites, which is not above one 3d of a Far∣thing in our English Money: Some will have it only to be the Quarter Part of a Denier, the Half of a Maille: The Greels had Silver Oboles which were worth 11 Deniers, and as some would have it a French Penny (less by near a Fourth than the English Penny) and 4 Deniers. They had also Gold Oboles. M. Du Cange says, there has been in France Oboles of Gold and Sil∣ver, that the white Obolus was worth 3 Deniers, and was called Obole tierce, because it was the third Part of a French Penny. There were also Silver Oboles that weighed a Denier and 15 Grains. Obolus in Physick is a Weight of 10 Grains, or Half a Scruple, and there are 3 Scruples go to a Dram or Gross. The Obolus amongst the Jews was a kind of a Weight named Gerab, weighing 16 Barley-Corns. The Obolus with the Sicilians was a Pound Weight: It was also a sort of Money: They pretend the Romans borrowed this Name from them: Borellus de∣rives the Word from ; because the same was long and small like a Needle, from whence also he derives the Name of Obelisk. OBSEQUIAE, Obsequies, Funeral Solemnities; they are Ceremomes performed at the Burials of Great Persons, the Word being derived from Obsequium, because these Obsequies are the last Devoirs we can render to the Deceased. See Funus. OBSTETRIX, a Midwife, being such an one as delivers a Woman in Labour; Hyginus informs us, the Ancients having no Midwives, several Women died in Labour, because of their being ashamed to have Recourse to the Physi∣tians for Help, and since there was a Law a∣mong the Athenians which forbad Women to have any thing to do with Physick: Hereupon a young Woman called Agnodicia, having a great Inclination to the Science, disguised her self in Man's Cloaths and studied it, and then went to Women in Labour, and for the removing of all Scruples from them, she made her Sex known unto them and then delivered them. The Phy∣sitians observing that this would make them lose their Practise among the Women, sued the said young Woman, and accused her of ill Practises in Respect to the Female Sex: In short, they got her condemned by the Areopagites, but she gave them Proofs of her Innocence in a full Assembly: Then the Physitians had Recourse to the Law which prohibitted Women to profess Physick; upon which the Athenian Ladies inter∣posed in the Matter, and got the Law repealed; so that Women were left at full Liberty to study that Profession. OCCASIO, Opportunity, an Heathen God, whom Phaedrus, L. 5. Fab. 9. represents unto us thus: A Man with Wings, and ran so swiftly that he could go upon the Edge of a Razor without hurting himself. One that hath Hair before, and is bald behind, with his Body stark naked; one that cannot be possest but by Prevention, and whom Jupiter himself can∣not
recover, if he has once been left to escape, which denotes to us, that he that loses his Op∣portunity meets with it no more. OCCIDENS; the West, It's one of the Four Cardinal Points of the Heavens and the Earth, the Place where the Sun and other Stars set in respect to us. The West of the Summer is that Point of the Horizon where the Sun sets, when 'tis in the Tropick of Cancer; the West of the Winter is that where the Son sets, when 'tis in the Tropick of Capricorn; and this hap∣pens when the Sun comes to the Points of the Solstices; each of them is 23 Degrees and an half distant from the true Point of the West. OCEANUS; the Ocean, is that main Sea which surrounds all the Earth; this Name, if we believe Hesychius, comes from , which was the old Name thereof, and 'tis very like∣ly proceeded from that Hebrew Word Choug or Houg, that signifies a Circle; because it goes round the Earth: This Word Houg is in Scrip∣ture often to be met with in this Sence; or if you will,  comes from , because of the Swiftness of its Motion. Homer in his Iliads makes Oceanus to be the Father of the Gods, and Tethys their Mother. . This Opinion may have had its Origin from that Text in Genesis, where the Chaos seems to be represented like unto the Confusion of the Waters before God reduced them into order, and made a Distinction between them: In this Sence the Ocean and Tethys, that is, that Abyss which comprehended the Heavens and the Earth as an immense Quantity of Waters, before the same were separated by the Distribution made of the Chaos; this Abyss, I say, might be called the Father and Mother of all the great Bodies, of which Nature was composed, and which bore the Name of Gods among the Heathens. And where Plato says, that Oceanus was begotten of Caelum and Tethys, he means nothing else but the Ocean that was separated from the Heavens and the Earth, as it was upon the Reduction of the Chaos into order. The innumerable Multitude of Petty Deities that preside over the Waters, whether they be Fountains, Lakes, Rivers, or Seas, might very well be the Occasion of giving unto the Ocean the Quality of the Father of the Gods: But in the main, this vast Number of Water-Gods, and their Genealogy, signifies no more than the Di∣stribution of the Waters of the Ocean, which is done throughout all the Earth, and which by its Vapours or Subterranean Conduits supplies all Fountains, Lakes and Rivers, insomuch that 'tis nothing but the Element of Water, and the Ocean that is continually animated by the Soul of the Universe, which makes its Divinity, ac∣cording to the Language of the Heathens. Vir∣gil in his Georgicks sacrificed to the Ocean. Oceano libemus, ait: And he brings in Aeneas sacrificing a Bull to the Gods of the Sea. Justine relates, that when Alexander had subdued and passed thro' Asia, as far as the Ocean, he offered Sacrifice, and pray'd him to grant him an happy Return into Greece; Oceano libamina dedit, prosperum in patriam redi∣tum precatus. Diodorus Siculus says, that the Ancients gave the Name of Ocean to Moisture or the Liquid E∣lement, which is as it were the Nutriment, and consequently the Mother of all Things, and that this is the Meaning of the Verse before cited out of Homer; and to clear the Thing fully, we may add what he says elsewhere concerning Jupiter, and the other Gods or Stars, that they went to Ocea∣nus Habitation, to be entertained at a great Feast by him. Diodorus has said Oceanus and Tethys were the Nutriment of all Things; and Macrobius explains this Feasting of the Gods at Oceanus his House, by the Vapours of the Sea, wherewith the Stars were nourish'd, and where∣of they stood in need, for the Qualifying of their Heat, significans bauriri de bumore allmenta side∣ribus. This was an Opinion commonly enter∣tained by a great many of the Ancient Fa∣thers of the Church, who gave a Literal Expli∣cation of the Waters (which in Scripture are placed above the Firmament) and believed there was a great Quantity of Water above the Region of the fixed Stars, to allay the Heat of those Coe∣lestial Fires, and hinder them from burning the World. Tho' this Idea may seem odd, yet 'tis certain, the same is very agreeable to Truth, if it be cosidered, that the Stars being fiery Globes of an incredible Bigness, as well as the Sun, it was requisite to separate them from each other by very great Spaces filled with Air, and some Liquid Matter, wherewith to allay their Heat, and make them more tollerable, which in their own Natures were combustible; but 'tis no great Matter if the Name of Air or Water has been given to this Liquid Substance, wherein, as I may say, all these Globes or Luminaries, such as the Stars are, or dark Bodies, as the Planets and Earth, do swim. Eusebius gives us the Words of Porphyrie, who applies the Fable of the Poets in this Case entirely to the Coelestial or Elementary Bodies, and who says, that the Ocean was of a Liquid Nature in general; that Tethys was the Symbol thereof; that Achelous was drinkable Water; Neptune, the Sea-water; that by Amphitrite was meant, such Waters as are the Principle of Generation; Lastly, That the Nymphs and Nereides were such particular Waters, as are either sweet or salt.
OCTAVIUS CAESAR, surnamed AU∣GUSTUS. See Augustus. OCTOBER; the Month of October, being the 8th Month of the Year in Romulus his Calen∣der, and 10th in that of Numa, has always retain∣ed its first Name in spight of all the different Names, the Senate and Roman Emperors would have given it: For the Senate ordered that this Month should be called Faustinus, in Honour of Faustina, the Wife of Antoninus, the Emperor: Commodus would have had it bear the Name of Invictus; and Domitian made it be called Domi∣tianus, according to his own Name. This Month was under the Protection of Mars. On the 4th Day of it was celebrated the Solemnity of Mun∣dus Patens. See Mundus Patens. On the 12th an Altar was dedicated to Fortune, entituled, Fortunae Reduci, to flatter Augustus at his Return to Rome, after he had pacified Sicily, Greece, Sy∣ria, Asia, and Parthia. On the 13th was kept the Feast of Fountains, called Fontinalia. 15th they sacrificed a Horse to Mars, called October equus. 19th was celebrated the Feast called Ar∣milustrium in the Armies. 28th, and following Days, the Plays of Victory were performed, which Sylla instituted. Towards the End of the Month the Vortumnalia, and Sarmatian Games were celebrated. OCTOBER EQUUS; an Horse which was sacrificed to Mars in the Month of October; there was then a Race run with Chariots, drawn each by 2 Horses, and he that run quickest was sacrificed to Mars. Plutarch gives Two Reasons for this Ceremony; the first was to punish the Horse for the Taking of Troy; the second, be∣cause the Horse was a Martial Creature, and ought to be offered in Sacrifice to the God of War. OCULARIA; Spectacles; its not belie∣ved that Spectacles were known to the Ancient Greek and Latin Poets; for it would be very strange if they had had any knowledge of them, that they never took an occasion to name them, and to make any Diversion with them upon the Stage: It would have been a Wonder that Pliny should make no manner of mention of them in his Chapter concerning the Inventors of Things: Indeed, there are some modern Authors who cite certain Fragments out of Plautus; such as Faber ocularius, and Oculariarius of Tomb-stones, and the Figure graven upon a Marble at Sulmo: But Dati, in a issertation of his, has shewed us the Weakness of all these Arguments. M. Spon, in the 16 Dissertation, Of his Searches af∣ter Antiquity, says, That Spectacles were invent∣ed in the Time of Alexander Spina, a Dominican of the Convent of Pisa, in the Year 1313. ODEUM; M. Perrault upon Vitruvtus, says, I have been forced to retain the Greek Word, for it could not have been rendred into French (no more can it into English) but by a Peri∣phrasis, which also would have been very dif∣ficult, forasmuch as neither Interpreters nor Grammarians do agree about the Use of this Edifice. Suidas, who holds that this Place was appointed to rehearse the Musick that was to be performed on the great Theater, grounds his Opinion upon the Etymology of the Word, which is taken from Ode, that in Greek signifies Song. The Scholiast on Aristophanes is of another O∣pinion, and thinks that the Odeum was a Place erected wherein to repeat. Plutarch in the Life of Pericles, says, It was built for those Persons, who heard the Musicians when they disputed for the Prize; but the Description he gives thereof, lets us understand, that the Odeum was built Theater-wise; for, he says, it had Seats and Pil∣lars all round it, and was made with a sharp Top, with Masts and Sail-yards taken from the Per∣sians. Cratinus the Comick Poet, upon this Oc∣casion says by way of Raillery, that Pericles had ordered the Form of the Odeum of Athens, ac∣cording to the Shape of his own Head, which was sharp, insomuch that the Poets of his Time when they were minded to ridicule him in their Plays, intended him under the Name of Jupiter, Scinos Cephalos; that is, one who hath a sharp Head, like a Tooth-picker, which the Ancients made of a Shrub called Scinos, which is the Mastick. OEDIPUS; the Son of Laius and Jocasta; Laius, King of Thehes, having married Jocasta, the Daughter of Creon, understood by the Ora∣cle, that they should have a Son born of that Mar∣riage, who should kill him; which made him command Jocasta to strangle all the Children she should bear: Oedipus being born, his Mother gave him to a Soldier to kill him, in pursuance to the King's Command, but he contented him∣self to make Holes in his Feet, and to run an Ozier Twig thro' them, wherewith he hung him to a Tree upon Mount Cithaeron. Phorbas, one of Polybius his Shepherds, who was King of Co∣rinth, finding the Infant hanging in that man∣ner, and taking pitty of him, he made a Pre∣sent of him to the Queen, who brought him up as her own Child; they gave him the Name of Oedipus, because of the Swelling that remained in his Feet, which had been pierced through. When he grew up, he went to consult the Ora∣cle, in order to know who was his Father, answer was made, That he should find him in Phocis; upon which he went thither, and meeting with him in a popular Tumult, he killed his Father Laius, and did not know him, as he endeavoured to appease them. Juno being an Enemy to the Thebans, sent the Monster Sphinx near unto Thebes, that had the Face and Speech of a Virgin, the Body of a Dog, the Tail of a Dragon, and the Claws of a Lion, with the Wings of a Pird. she proposed some Enigmatical Questions or Riddies to all Passengers, and if they could not resolve the same, she presently devoured them,
insomuch that no Body durst come near the City: Hereupon they had Recourse to the Ora∣cle, who answered, they could not be freed from this Monster, unless this Riddle were explain∣ed, viz. What Animal it was that in the Morn∣ing went upon Four Feet, at Noon upon Two, and at Night upon Three. Creon, who had pos∣sest himself of the Kingdom after the Death of Laius, caused it to be published throughout all Greece, that he would quit his Kingdom, and give Joeasta, Laius his Widow, for a Wife to any one that should explain the Riddle: Oedipus did it, and explained it thus; saying, That it was a Man, who in his Infancy crawled upon all Fours like a Beast, leaning upon his Hands and Feet; that at Years of Maturity he went only upon his Two Feet; and at last being broken with Age, leaned upon a Stick as he walked. The Monster seeing her self overcome, and trans∣ported with Rage, went and knock'd her own Brains out against a Rock. Oedipus as his Re∣ward had the Kingdom given him, and igno∣rantly married his own Mother Jocasta. In the mean time the Gods sent a terrible Plague upon Athens, to revenge the Death of Laius, which, according to the Oracle, whom they consulted for that Purpose, was not to cease, but with the banishment of him who had killed him: Upon this they had Recourse to the Art of Negro-mancy, for the Discovering of him, and it was found to be Oedipus; who then coming to know his Crimes, put out both his Eyes, and con∣demned himself to perpetual Banishment: He withdrew when he was very old to Athens, to die there, according to the Order of the Ora∣cle, near the Temple of the terrible Goddesses, in a Place named Equestris Colonus, where Nep∣tune, surnamed Equestris, was worshipped. OENOMAUS, King of Elis, who had a very beautiful Daughter, called Hippodamia; when he understood by the Oracle, that his Son∣in-Law should be the Cause of his Death, he would not give his Daughter in Marriage to any one but he who should outdo him in a Race, or else lose his Life: Pelops, who was in Love with Hippodamia, accepted of the Offer, and having bribed Myrtilus, Oenomaus his Charioteer, he caused the Chariot to break in the middle of the Race, and threw down Oenomaus, who was kil∣led with his Fall; so that by this means he got the Kingdom, and married Hippodamia. OENONE; a Nymph of Mount Ida, who fell in Love with handsome Paris, and foretold him the Misfortunes he should one Day bring upon his Country by stealing away Helen. Dictys Cretensis says, when she saw the Body of Paris, which was brought to her to be buried, she died of Grief. OENOTRIA; that Part of Italy which lies towards Sicily, and called so from the Plenty of Wines it produceth. Some Authors say it took its Name from Oenotrius the Arca∣dian, as Pausanias; but Varro will have it from Oenotrius, King of the Sabines: This Name was afterwards given to all Italy. OETA; a Mountain which divides Thessaly from Macedonia, and is famous for the Death of Hercules, who from it was called Oetaeus; this Mountain abounded in Hellebore. OGYGES, King of the Thebans, and the Founder of the City of Ihebes about 1500 Years before the City of Rome, according to Varro, L. 3. de Re rustica, tho' others attri∣bute the Founding thereof to Cadmus. St. Au∣gustine relates that a greater Deluge happen∣ed in this King's Time, than that of Deuco∣lion. OGYGIA; an Island between the Seas of Phoenicia and Syria, famous for the Residence of Calypso, who there entertained Ʋlysses after his Shipwrack, and with whom he staid Seven Years. There is Reason to believe, that the Island of Ogygia is an imaginary Thing only. Plutarch places it in the Ocean Five Days sail from Bri∣tannia towards the West. Pliny puts it in the Mediterranean, near unto Locris, and calls it Calypsus; and this he seems to say in favour of Homer, and to let us see that that Poet had some Reason to make Ʋlysses go into the Isle of Ogygia, where that Hero received some secret Favours from Queen Calypso. Lucian ridicules Homer and Ʋlysses upon this Occasion very pleasantly, where he says in his Coelestial Navigation, that he found Ʋlysses in the Isle of the Blessed, and that that Hero charg'd him to carry a Letter to Ca∣lypso into the Island of Ogygia; but herein he would not have himself forget that from the very Beginning of his Story he had protested he would not say a Word of Truth. Ptolomy speaks of a Town in Botia in Greece, which he calls Ogyges or Thisbe, and was built by a Prince of that Country called Ogyges: The Name of the said Prince gives some Cause to think, that Fabius Pictor speaks of Gomer under the Name of Ogyges, and that Ogyges, Saturn and Gomer in that Age were the same Person: The Reason whereof is, that that Ogyges of Ptolomy reign'd a little after the Deluge, as Pausanias and Bero∣sus assure us. OLYMPUS; a Phrygian, who was an ex∣cellent Musician, and Player upon string'd In∣struments, and according to Plutarch, in his Treatise of Musick, brought the Invention there∣of into Greece: He was also the first who at the Obsequies of Python play'd a mournful Tune af∣ter the Lydian Mode. OLYMPUS; Mount Olympus, scituated in that Part of Thessaly which is towards Macedo∣nia: Its very high, and the Air there always so∣rene, which made the Poets take it for Heaven; they feign'd that Jupiter governed Olympus, that is Heaven.
OLYMPIADES; the Olympiads; a Chro∣nological Term, being the Space of Four Years: The Greeks reckoned by Olympiads, every one of which contained the Space of Four whole Years; and these Olympiads took their Name from the Olympick Games, that were celebrated near the City of Pisa, otherwise called Olympia, in Peloponesus, from whence the said Games were so named. These Games are also called Iphiti, because Iphitus instituted them, or at least wise renewed the Solemnities of them. The first Olympiad began in the Year of the World 3938, and of the Julian Period, An. 3208, and 777 Years before Christ's Nativity: The Pelo∣ponesian War began the first Year of the 87 O∣lympiads. OLYMPICI, Ludi is understood; the O∣lympick Games: They were famous Games a∣mongst the Greeks that consisted of Five sorts of Exercises, viz. Running, Whorlbat or Quoiting, Jumping and Wrestling: Pelops was accounted to be the Instituter of them after the successful Battle he fought against Oenomaus, whereby he obtained Hippodamia. however Hercules depri∣ved him of Part of the Glory of this Institution, either because he revived the Ceremonies there∣of that had been neglected, or because he added to the Magnificence of the same; they were ce∣lebrated every Fourth Year near unto Olympia a City of Elis: They became so solemn that the Greeks made them their Epact to reckon their Years by, which were called Olympiads, and this lasted after the Reform of the Calender even to the Reign of Constantine; those who won the Prize were so much honoured, that when they return'd to their own Country, a Piece of the Wall was beat down that they might enter tri∣umphantly in a Chariot into the City; Cato brought these Games to Rome, and Augustus in∣stituted others like them which he dedicated to Apollo after his Victory at Actium. OPS; the Romans gave the Name of Ops to the Earth, because of its Power to give us Re∣lief: Opis differs from Ops, and is one of the Names of Diana among the Greeks, because she assisted Women in Labour: Its also the Name of one of Diana's Nymphs in the Eneids, L. 4. And thus Servius speaks concerning this Distincti∣on of Names; Cùm Terramdicimus, haec Ops facit, si Nympham dicamus, baec Opis: si divitias, hae opes numero tantùm plurali: We have said before, that Caelum and Terra, Saturn and Ops were the first Gods of the Latins. ORACULUM, an Oracle; an ambigu∣ous and obscure Answer which the Heathen Priests made to the People concerning Things to come, by making them to believe that the Gods spoke by their Mouths: The Madness and Blindness of the Heathens in respect to their Oracles cannot be sufficiently admired, the same being captious and obscure, and nothing else but the pure Artifice of the Priests without any, Dia∣bolical Operation: The Custom of Consulting the Oracles was not known in the Golden Age, wherein they lived in Tranquillity of Mind, and perfect Innocence, whereas afterwards the in∣constant and restless Humour of Mankind lead them to make Enquiry after Futurity: Ovid in∣deed says, that Themis in the Time of the De∣luge pronounced Oracles, Fatidicamque Themin quae tunc Oracla tenebat. But this is to make the Usage of Oracles to exist in the first Ages against the Judgment of Sta∣cius, and what we read in the Scripture. For tho' God spoke to Adam and to Noah, yet 'tis certain that Divine Apparitions and Predictions, Divinations and the Responses of Oracles did not begin to be frequent till the Time of Abra∣ham, to whom God began to make Promises of the Land of Canaan; that is, that it was not till the second Millenium was expired, when Men be∣gan to be engaged to the Service of God by Pro∣mises and frequent Predictions of future Bles∣sings: And this the Devil delay'd not to imitate amongst the Gentiles. I do not know of any thing more ancient than what Homer says concerning the Oracle of Jupiter at Dodona, which Ʋlysses went to consult, that he might learn of the Oak-Trees the way to get back to Ithaca: However, Herodotus says, that the Phoenicians having stole away Two Pro∣phetesses from Thebes in Egypt; one of them they carried to Lybia, and the other to Greece; and that these set up Two Oracles, the one Jupiter Ammon in Affrica, and the other Jupiter Dodoneus in the Oak-Tree Grove of Dodona; thus Oracles had their Beginning in Egypt, and from thence passed into Lybia and Greece: O∣thers have said, that they were Two Doves that were brought up at Thebes, which deliver∣ed Oracles at Dodona and Ammon: Silius Italicus has followed this Opinion. In gremio Thebes geminas sedisse columbas. Strabo says, that the Oracles of Dodona and of Jupiter Olympius were silent in his Time; he speaks elsewhere at large of the Oracle at Del∣phos. Tacitus informs us, that Germanicus con∣sulted the Oracle of Apollo at Colophon in Asia: The Priest went down to it into a Cave, af∣ter having only taken the Names, and Number of such as came to consult it, and answered all of them in Verse tho' he had not studied at all for it. Lucian in his Treatise de Dea Syriae, or the God∣dess of Syria, speaks of an Oracle of Apollo, wherein that God gave Answers himself, where∣as otherwise his Priests did it. When he was about to predict any thing, he shook him∣self; then his Priests took him upon their Shoul∣ders,
and if they did not, he moved himself and sweated; when they took him up, he led them where he pleased, guiding them as a Coach∣man does his Horses, turning this or that Way, and passing from one to the other, until the Chief Priest asked what he had a mind to know. If the Thing displeased him he went back, but if otherwise he advanced forwards, and I have seen him once raise himself up and pass thro' the Air: This is the Way they come to know his Will: and they do nothing either in Pub∣lick or Private without having first consulted him: He foretells the Change of Times and Seasons, and even Death it self. Cicero observes that all Nations have taken their Divinations from such things as were most familiar to them; the Egyptians and Babilonians from the Stars: The Tuscans, from the Entrails of the Beasts they sacrificed: The Arabs, Phrygians and Cilicians, who were always in the Fields, from the Flight and Singing of Birds: Ammia∣nus Marcellinus speaks of a singular Way of Di∣vination used among the Scythians, with long Staves, (which the Women made Choise of) being that which was called Rhabdomancy, where∣of the Scripture gives us an Example in the As∣syrians who made use of it. The Words of Am∣mianus are these; Futura miro praesagiuns modo. Nam rectiores virgas faeminae colligentes, easque cum incantamentis quibusdam secretis praestituto tempore discernentes, apertè quid portendatur no∣runt. Nebuchodonozer laying Siege to Jerusalem, made use of Three different Ways in order to know the Event of his Enterprize, Commiscens sagittas, interrogavit Idola, exta consuluit; he u∣sed Rhabdomancy by mixing and unmixing his Ar∣rows; consulted the Idols, that is the Oracles; and inspected the Entrails of Beasts. And thus the Assyrians and Babilonians might very well communicate their Superstitions to the Egyptians, who might afterwards send them from thence into Greece; for in Homer we have neither any Inspection made into the Entrails of Beasts, no Oracles of the Idols consulted, nor any Rhabdo∣mancy; they were the Oak-Trees at Dodona, and not the Idols that delivered Oracles. Herodo∣tus treats at large of the Rhabdomancy of the Scythians, and Strabo speaks concerning that of the Persians. There is no Certainty that Daemons delivered Oracles, they were the Priests of those false Gods that did it, and who for Money made what∣ever. Answer the Enquirer pleased; and upon this Account a little Treatise in Latin writ by Van-Dalen, Doctor of Physick, may be consult∣ed: Its true, that Maebius pretends to refute Van-Dalen, and one of the greatest Arguments he produces is this; That God forbad the Chil∣dren of Israel to consult Vizzards and Spirits of Divination; from whence he concludes, that Ptyhon, by which Torm Daemons were meant, were concerned with Oracles; but for the Re∣futing hereof, it may be said, That God speaks of no other than Magick and Negromancy; wherewith the Daemons without doubt concern∣ed themselves: I need do no more than relate a Passage out of Lucian's Dialogue concerning Alexander the Quack, to convince People, that the Imposture and Malice of Men had a greater Share in those Oracles than the Daemons, unless it may be said that those who took upon them to deliver Oracles were themselves inspired by the Spirit of the Daemon. Lucian's Words are these: That Impostor finding a favourable Op∣portunity, delivered Oracles for Money, ac∣cording to the Example of Amphilocus; who after the Death of his Father Amphiaraus, being driven out of Thebes, withdrew into Asia, where he predicted Things to come for a Half-Penny apiece to the Barbarians: Then he gave them Notice that the God himself in such a Time would give them Answers, and that every one should write his Desire in a Letter sealed: Af∣ter which, shutting himself up in the Sanctuary of the Temple, he called them all who had gi∣ven him their Letters, according to their turn by an Herald, and return'd them sealed to them with the God's Answer. It would not be diffi∣cult for a Man of Sence to find out the Cheat, but these foolish People did not perceive that he opened every Letter, and after he had in∣serted what Answer he thought fit, returned them sealed up as before; for there are seve∣ral ways to open Letters without breaking the Seal; and I will give some Instances hereof, that so a piece of Subtilty may not pass for a Miracle: In the first place you may with an hot Needle loosen the Wax that fixes the Thread to the Letter, without breaking the Seal at all, and when you have read what you have a mind it may be closed up in the same manner: There is another Invention for this Purpose, and that consists of Lime and Glew; or is prepared with Mastick compounded with Pitch, Wax and Brimstone, mixed with the Powder of a very transparent Stone, whereof they make a Ball, with which while the same is yet soft they take off the Impression of the Seal, after they have rubbed it with Hogs-grease, for it hardens presently, and serves to make an Im∣pression as if it were the Seal it self. Many have thought that Oracles ceased upon the Coming of Christ, as Eusebius for one, who grounds his Opinion upon a Passage taken out of Porphyrie: I'll tell thee the Truth concerning the Oracles of Delphos and Cluros, says Apollo to his Priest: Formerly there came out of the Bowels of the Earth an infinite Number of O∣racles, and from Fountains and Exhalations, which inspired them with Divine Raptures; but the Earth by the continual Changes which Time has introduced; has reassumed, and cad∣sed
them to re-enter into her self, Fountains and Exhalations: There are no more left but the Waters of Mycale in the Plains of Didymus, and those of Claros, and the Oracle of Parnassus. Now this Passage does not say, that Oracles were ceased; and moreover, it excepts Three of them; which is enough to shew us, that Ora∣cles did not cease at the Coming of Christ, see∣ing also we have several Proofs to the contrary in Ancient Writers, who make it appear, that Oracles lasted above 400 Years after Christ's Coming, and that they were not wholly silenced but with the total Destruction of Paganism. Sue∣tonius in Nero's Life, says, That the Oracle of Delphos forewarn'd him to beware of 73 Years; and that Nero believed he should not die before that time, not dreaming that Old Galba, who was of that Age, should dispossess him of the Em∣pire. Philostratus in the Life of Apollonius Tya∣nans, who saw Domitian, tells us, that Apolloni∣us visited all the Oracles of Greece, and particu∣larly those of Dodona, Delphos, and Amphiarâus. Plutarch, who lived in the Reign of Trajan, in∣forms us, that the Oracle at Delphos was still in being, though she was reduced to one single Priestess, whereas she formerly had Two or Three. Dion Chrysostome under Adrian, relates, That he had consulted the Oracle of Delphos, and had received an Answer, which to him seem∣ed very intricate. In the Days of the Antoni∣nus's, Lucian says, that a Priest of Tyana went to enquire of the false Prophet Alexander, if the Oracles which were delivered at Didimus, Claros, and Delphos were the true Answers of Apollo, or Impostures. After the Antonines, Three others contended for the Empire, viz. Severus; SSptimius, Pescenninus, Niger, and Clodius Al∣binus. They consulted the Oracle of Delphos, says Spartianus, to know which of the Three was best for the Commonwealth, and the Oracle made Answer in a Verse: The Black is the Best, the Affrican is Good, the White is the Worst. Dion who did not finish his History before the 8th Year of the Emperor Alexander Severus, that is An.. Dom. 230. says, that still in his Time Am∣philocus delivered Oracles in a Dream: He also informs us, that there was an Oracle in the Ci∣ty of Apollonia, where what should come to pass was delivered as the Fire took hold of the In∣cense, which was thrown upon the Altar: In the Reign of Aurelian, about the Year 272, the Re∣volted, Palmirenians consulted the Oracle of A∣pollo Sarpedonius in Cilicia; and they also con∣sulted that of Venus Aphacita. A Deity much unknown, named Besa, delivered also Oracles upon Letters at Abida, in the farthest Part of Thèbais, in the Reign of the Emperor Constan∣tins. Lastly, Macrobius, who lived in the Time of Arcadius and Honorius, Theodosius his Sons, speaks of a Deity at Heliopolis, in Syria, and of his Oracle: But Theodosius the Younger having shut up all the Temples of the false Gods, and rased that of Serapis in Egypt; all the Oracles became silent, and Paganism was upon Pain of Life forbidden to be publickly practised; by the Edicts of Valentinian III. and Martianus in the Year 451. ORCHESTRA; the lower Part of the Theater, made in the Form of a Semi-Circle, and shut up at the midst of the Steps: It was so called, because that in the Grecian Theaters, it was a Place where they kept their Balls from , which signifies to dance. The Orche∣stra among the Greeks made a Part of the Scene; but at the Roman Theaters none of the Actors went down to the Orchesira, which was taken up with Seats for the Senators: The Orchestra now adays is the Place where a Consort of Musick is placed; formerly it was the middle of all the Theater, which consisted of Three Parts, to wit, the Steps or Seats, which we call the Thea∣ter; and the Orchestra, which is named the Pit: Among the Romans it was the Place where they placed the Senators; but among the Greeks it was where they danced or kept their Balls that made part of their Plays. ORCUS; this comes from the Caldee Word Arequa, which signifies the Earth, in a Text of Jeremy, and is but a Dialect of the Hebrew A∣retsa, and this Word is taken for Hell. OREADES, Nymphs of the Mountains, which were so called from the Greek Word , that signifies a Mountain. ORESTES; the Son of Agamemnon and Clytemnestra, who put her Husband Agamemnon to Death to revenge the Death of her Daugh∣ter Polyxena whom he had sacrificed. Orestes and Electra his Sister killed Clytemnestra, that the Death of their Father might not go unpu∣nished: Orestes after this Parricide ran mad, and with his Friend Pylades fled into Scythia; he land∣ed at Tauros whither Ephigenia had been transpor∣ted by Diana, and where she was her Priestess, to offer all Strangers who landed in that Coun∣try in Sacrifice to that Goddess: Orestes was taken and he had very like to have been sacri∣ficed by his Sister, who did not know him; but at last coming to be acquainted one with another, they fled away both together privately, and car∣ried with them Diana's Statue, after they had killed Thoas who was King of that Country: Orestes returned to Athens, where after the Puri∣fications appointed him by the Oracle, he came to himself again, and went to reside at Orestes a City in Arcadia, where he died with the stinging of a Serpent: The Scythians adored Pylades and Orestes as Gods, and built them Temples and Altars, as Lucian in his Dialogue of Toxaris or of Friendship, informs us, wherein he brings in Ioxaris who was a Scythian, speaking to Mene∣sippus in this Manner.
Toxar, Observe how the Barbarians (for so they call us) have better Sentiments of the Greeks, than the Greeks themselves: We have built Temples for those Men, whom you have not as much as erected Funeral Monuments for. Where will you find a noble Tomb either for Orestes or Pylades in Argos and Messena; whereas they are adored by the Scythians? And tho' they were no Strangers, you have not thought them worthy of this Honour: But Vertue is adorable even in Enemies, wherefore what they have done for one another is graven in the Temple of Orestes upon a Brass-Pillar, and 'tis the first Thing we teach our Children: Their Actions are also set on the Walls of the Tem∣ple, where may be seen on one Side a Ship dash∣ing her self to Pieces against a Rock, and those Two Heroes led Prisoners along, and crowned like Victims that were to be sacrificed; and on the other they are represented with their Arms in their Hands, breaking their Chains, and defending their Liberty at the Ex∣pence of many a Man's Life, and even of King Thoas's, then they carry away Diana and her Priestess, they are pursued as they begin to sail and their Ship attacked, but they make a gaslant Resistance, and at last save themselves by Swimming, being either wounded them∣selves or amazed with the Wounds of others. ORGIA; a Term made use of by the Hea∣thens, whereby to express the Feasts and Sacri∣fices of Bacchus, which were more particularly celebrated upon Mountains by raving Women called Baccbantes. Servius says, that at first all sorts of Sacrifices were called Orgia in Greece, and the same at Rome were named Ceremonies. ORIENS; the East. The first of the Four Cardinal Points of the World, where we see the Sun and Stars rise: The Point or Tropick of Cancer which intersects the Horizon, is called the Summer-East; and the Winter-East is the Point of the Horizon that is intersected by Capricorn: In Trajan and Adrian's Golden-Coin the East is found represented by the Sun with this Word Oriens. ORION, proceeded from Jupiter, Nep∣tune and Mercury's Urine, who passing through the World arrived one Day very late at a poor Countryman's Hutt, whose Name was Hyreus, and who received them very kindly, and in order to entertain them killed the only Ox he had: The Gods to reward his Liberality bid him ask what he would for his Reward and he should have it; upon which he prayed them, that he might be able to have a Child without being married; the said Gods presently causing the Ox his Hide which he had killed to be brought to them, they pissed upon it, and bid him bury it in the Ground and not trouble himself about it till Ten Months end: when the Time was ex∣pired he found a Child there, which he called Orion: Hesiod makes Neptune to be his Father and Euryale the Daughter of Minos his Mother: He tells us, he had obtained a Power of Neptune to walk as lightly upon the Water, as Iphics did over the Heads of Ears of Corn: Being gone one Day from Thebes to Chio, he ravished Mers, Enopian's Daughter, who struck him blind, and drove him from the Island; from whence he went to Lemnos to Vulcan, who brought him to the Sun, that cured him of this Blindness: As he went afterwards to ravish Diana, she caused him to be stung by a Scorpion, whereof, as Pa∣lephatus says, he died. Homer in his Odysses, L. 5. relates, that 'twas Diana her self that shot him to Death with her Arrows, out of a Jealousie she had that Aurora was in Love with him: And this is confirmed by Plutarch in his Fortune of the Romans, where he says, that Orion was beloved of a Goddess: Diana in Compassion made him a Constellation (placing him before the Feet of Taurus) which consists of 17 Stars, in Form like unto a Man armed with a Cutelas: It rises on the 9th of March, bringing Storms and great Rains with it, whence Virgil gave it the Epithet of Orion aquosus; it sets June 21. Lucian in Praise of an House, speaking of the Sculptures which adorn'd the Appartments, says thus of Orion: This next is an old Story of Blind Ori∣on, which imports, that some Body shewed him the Way, he ought to follow in order to re∣cover his Eye-sight, and the Sun that appear'd cured him of his Blindness; and this Vulcan con∣trived in the Isle of Lesbos. ORPHEUS the Son of Oeagrus, or ac∣cording to others, of Apollo and the Muse Cal∣liope; he was born in Thrace, and was both a Poet, Philosopher, and an excellent Musician, Mercury having made him a Present of his Harp on which he play'd so exquisitely that he stoped the Course of Rivers, laid Storms, drew the the most savage Animals after him, and made Trees and Rocks to move: Having lost his Wise Eurydice, who shunning the Embraces of Aristeus King of Arcadia, trod upon a Serpent, who stung her to Death, he went down to Hell after her, where by the Melody of his Musick he obtained Leave of Pluto and Proscrpina for her to return, upon Condition he should not look behind him till he got upon Earth, but being overcome by an amorous impatience,, he turned about and lost his Eurydice for ever; up∣on which he conceived so great an Hatred to Women, that he endeavoured to inspire others with the same, and this provoked the Women of Thrace to that Degree, that being one Day with Transports of Fury celebrating their Orgia they fell upon Orpheus, tore him to Pieces, and threw his Head unto the River: Lucian writes concern∣ing it in this manner. When the Thracian Wo∣men killed Orpheus, 'tis said, his Head which they threw into the River swum a long time
upon his Harp, uttering mournful Tones in Honour of the said Heroe, and that the Harp being touched by the Winds answered the mournful Song; and in this Condition they ar∣rived at the Isle of Lesbos, where the People e∣rected a Funeral Monument for him, in the Place where Bacchus his Temple now stands, but they hung up his Harp in Apollo's Temple, where the same was kept a long time till the Son of Pitta∣cus having heard say, that it play'd of it self, and charmed Woods and Rocks, had a mind to have it for himself; and so bought it for a good Sum of Money of the Sacristan; but not think∣ing he could play safely in the City, he went by Night to the Suburbs where as he went a∣bout to touch it; the same made such a dread∣ful Noise instead of the Harmony he expected, that the Dogs run thither and tore him in Pieces, and so was attended with the same Fate herein as Orpheus himself. There are some Au∣thors who say, that the Menades tore Orpheus in Pieces, because he having sung the Genealogy of all the Gods, had said nothing of Bacchus, and the said God to be revenged on him caused his Priestesses to kill him. Others say, this Misfor∣tune befel him by the Resentment of Venus, to whom Calliope Orpheus his Mother had refused to give Adonis any longer than for 6 Months in the Year, and that to revenge the same, she made all the Women in Love with Orpheus, and that every one of them being minded to enjoy him, they had in that manner tore him in Pieces. Cicero says, that Aristotle thought there never was such an one as Orpheus, and that the Poems which were attributed to him, were the Works of a Pythagorean Philosopher. In the mean time, 'tis hard to doubt there was such an one, after so many Testimonies of the Ancients to the Contrary, since Pausanias makes mention of Or∣pheus his Tomb, and of the Hymns he had com∣posed, which he says, came but little short or the Elegancy and Beauty of those of Homer, but that his Wit was attended with more Religion and Piety than the others. St. Justin reports, that Orpheus, Homer, Solon, Pythagoras, and Plato had travelled into Egypt, that they got there some Knowledge of the Scriptures, and that afterwards they retracted what they had before written con∣cerning the superstitious Worship of their false Deities in Favour of the Religion of the true God: Orpheus, according to this Father, in his Verses spoke very clearly concerning the Unity of God, as of him who had been, as it were the Father of that extravagant Multiplicity of the Heathen Gods. The Fable made him after his Death to be changed into a Swan, Lucian informs us also in his Judicial Astrology, that he gave the Greeks the first Insight into Astrology, tho' but obscure∣ly and under the Vil of divers Mysteries and Ceremonies: For the Harp on which he celebra∣ted the Orgia, and sung his Hymns and Songs, had Seven Strings which represented the Seven Planets, for which reason the Greeks after his Death placed the same in the Firmament and called a Constellation by its Name. ORUS or HORUS, King of Egypt; the Son of Osiris; the Greeks call him Apollo, because perhaps, he divided the Year into Four Sea∣sons, and the Day into Hours. See Horus. OSIRIS, was a God and King among the Egyptians, to whom they gave also divers other Names: Diodorus Siculus says, that some took him for Serapis, others for Bacchus, Pluto, Am∣mon, Jupiter and Pan. After that Osiris King of Egypt, who was the fifth of the Gods that reigned in that Country, after, I say, Osiris was killed by his Brother Typhon, it was believed his Soul went into the Body of the Ox Apis, and into all the rest which were successively sub∣stituted in his Stead, and this Ox was looked upon as the Image and Soul of Osiris, according to the Testimony of Diodorus Siculus; and as there were Two sacred Oxen in Egypt, the one named Apis in the City of Memphis, and the other called Mnevis in Heliopolis, the same Diodorus says, they were both consecrated to Osiris; Tan∣ros sacros tam Apim quam Mnevim Osiridi sacros & dicatos esse, & pro Diis coli, apud universos pro∣miscuè Aegyptios sancitum est. Diodorus after∣wards sets forth at large how the Worship and Mysteries of Osiris were carried from Egypt to Creece under the Name of Bacchus the Son of Semele the Daughter of Cadmus, originally de∣scended from Thebes in Egypt; for the Daughter of Gadmus having had a Bastard Child that was very like unto Osiris, Cadmus to save the Honour of his Daughter deified her Son after his Death, making him to pass for another Osiris the Son of Jupiter: Orpheus a little after went to Egypt, and in Acknowledgment of the Kindness he had re∣ceived from Cadmus his Family, he publish'd these same Mysteries in Greece but so as to attribute to Semele's Son, all that had been said of the truc Osiris several Ages before; and so the Osiris of Egypt, and Bacchus of Creece, the Mysteries of the Egyptian Osiris, and those of the Greclan Bacchus, were one and the same. Herodotus at∣tributes the bringing of this Name, History, and Mysteries of Osiris or the Egyptian Ba∣chus into Greece, to Melampus, who was anti∣enter than Orpheus. The Egyptian Tradition, according to Diodo∣rus Siculus, was, that Osiris, Isis and Typhon were the Sons of Saturn and Rhea, or rather of Jupi∣ter and Juno; that Osiris is the same with Bac∣chus, and Isis the same as Ceres, that Osiris and Isis reigned with extraordinary Mildness, and conferred great Benefits on their Subjects, that they hindred Men to eat one another any more; that Isis inveated the Sowing and Use of Corn,
and made several excellent Laws; that Osiris was brought up at Nysa in Arabia Felix, and go∣ing for one of Jupiter's Sons, they called him , that he applied himself to Agricul∣ture, and first taught how to plant Vines: That Hermes or Mercury was his Secretary in sacred Things; that he was minded to travel all over the World to teach Mankind the use of Corn and Wine; and in his Absence recommended Mercury to the Service of Isis, to Hercules the Government of Egypt, to Busiris that of Phoeni∣cia; and Lybia to Anteus; that he was accompa∣nied by Apollo his Brother; Anubis, Macedo, Pan and Triptolemus; that having passed over Africa Asia and Europe, he built the City of Nysa in the Indies, defeated Lycurgus in Thrace, and at last returned home; he was killed by his Brother Typhon; that Isis and Orus his Sons reveng'd his Death, and having slain Typhon, they paid Di∣vine Honours to Osiris, whose Members Isis very carefully gathered together, which Typhon had divided between the Murderers. Plutarch ob∣serves that the Egyptians took Osiris for a good Genius, and Typhon for an evil Genius, and the Principle of all Evil. Plutarch wrote a particu∣lar Treatise concerning Isis and Osiris; where in an Account is given of the Birth, and great Exploits of Osiris, of his Conquests, Benefits to Mankind, the secret Contrivances of Typhon a∣gainst him, his Death, and the Care taken by Ises for his Deification. At last he pretends that Osiris and Isis, from good Genii as they were, became Gods, as a just Reward of their Vertue, and that Osiris is Pluo, and Isis, Proferpina. Synesius, Bishop of Cyrene, who wrote a Trea∣tise concerning Providence, confines himself al∣most wholly therein to the Explaining of the Fable or History of Osiris: He begins with this Reflection, That if the same be a Fable, its full of Wit, since the Egyptians were the Authors thereof; and if it be more than a Fable, it de∣serves our Pains to make a further Inspection into it; he afterwards gives the same Account as other Writers have done, of Osiris and Typhon; and says, that their Father was a King, Priest and a God, because the Egyptians pretended they had been govern'd by the Gods before the Kingdom fell into the Hands of Men: After∣wards he gives a Description of the Reign of Osiris, which was a Reign of Justice, Piety, Cle∣mency and Liberality it self. Typhon dethroned and banish'd him, and assuming the Government, reigned in all manner of Vices, and with all ima∣ginable Cruelty. But the Patience of the Peo∣ple being worn out, they recalled Osiris. Typhon was punished by the Gods, and Osiris recovered the Crown. M. Spon in his Searches after Anti∣quity, gives an Account of an Idol of Osiris: I remember, says he, that being formerly at Leyden, I saw among the Curiosities of their Anatomy-School, two small Idols: The first is an Osiris, that was a famous Deity among the Egyptians, having a Miter on his Head, at the lower part whereof there was an Ox's Horn on each side; for he was thus worshipped in the Form of an Ox, because he had taught Mankind the Art of Tillage; in his Left Hand he held a Staff bent at the End, and in his Right a Triangular Instrument: This last was very like unto a Whip with three Cords. Plutarch says, that Osiris commanded over the Dead, and might not this Whip be the Ensign of his Authority, as the Furies are represented with a Whip and Torches? OSSA; a Mountain upon the Frontiers of Thessaly, that is covered all over with Wood and Snow. Seneca says, that this Mountain was joined to Olympus, but that it was separated by the Labour of Hercules: It was a Place of Re∣treat for Gyants and Centaurs. OSTRACISMUS; Ostracism; it was a kind of Banishment, in Use among the Greeks, of such Persons whose over great Power the People suspected, as fearing least the same should degenerate into Tyranny; This Banish∣ment was not accounted disgrateful, because 'twas not a Punishment inicted for any Crime: It lasted Ten Years, and in the mean time the exiled Person enjoy'd his Estate: It was thus called because the People gave their Suffrages by writing the Name of him whom they were minded to banish upon Shells: Aristides was exiled in this manner, because he was too Just, as Plutarch says in his Life. OTHO, named M. Silvis, was the 8th Emperor, and succeeded Galba, whom he put to Death: The Medals which we have of his, make him somewhat like unto Nero, which caused the People to cry, Othoni Netoni: But yet he was not so fat, tho otherwise he had the Mien and Delicacy of a Woman: He was shaved every Day, and wore a Peruke, because he had but very little Hair: His Peruke may be distinctly observed on his Silver and Gold Medals; and 'twas he that brought the Use of Wigs into Ita∣ly. The Brass Medals of this Prince, which are all of them Egyptian or Syrian; do not represent him with a Peruke, perhaps, because they did not know the Use thereof in those Countries; and so they do not give so exact a Resemblance of him as the Latin ones stamped in Italy. His Inclimations were conformable to those of Nero's, and this Conformity made them contract so en∣tire a Friendship, that every Thing was in com∣mon between them, even to their Wives, with∣out entertaining the least Jealousie thereup∣on: However, when Otho became Emperor, he appeared of a better Disposition, and perhaps put a Constraint upon himself, that he might procure the Favour of the People: He shew'd both Courage and Bravery against Vitellius, his Competitor for the Empire, and beat him three
times, but at last being gulled with Proposals of Peace, he was defeated; which Misfortune made him resolve to kill himself rather, if Suetonius is to be believed, out of a Sence of Pity for the Death of so many Men that lost their Lives in endeavouring to support him, than out of an Ef∣fect of Despair: And as his Resolution to kill himself was looked upon as a great Action a∣mong the Romans; Suetonius cannot forbear ad∣miring him, saying, That tho' he had the Com∣plexion of a Woman, he being fair, clear skin∣ned, and without Hair, of a middle Stature, with small Feet, yet his Body was not answerable to so much Resolution as he shewed at his Death. OVATIO; an Ovation; a lesser Triumph amongst the Romans, which was allowed some Commanders that had won a Victory without the Effusion of much Blood, or for the Defeating of Rebels, Slaves, Pyrates, or other unworthy Enemies of the Republick of Rome. Their En∣try was on Foot, and sometimes on Horse-back, but never in a Chariot; and they wore Crowns of Myrtle, which they called Ovales, having all the Senate following of them. This Word Ova∣tio, according to Servius, is derived from Ovis, because the Conqueror sacrificed a sheep only upon this Occasion to Jupiter, whereas in the great Triumphs they sacrificed a Bull; others de∣rive it from those Acclamations and Shouts of Joy made by the People, in Honour of the So∣lemnity: This sort of lesser Triumph was esta∣blished in the Year of Rome 250 or 251, and 'twas the Consul Posthumius Tubertus, that after the Defeating of the Sabines, brought up the Custom of it. OVIDIUS NASO; a Latin Poet, born at Sulmo, a considerable Town of the Peligni, in Italy, in the Consulship of Hirtius and Pansa, that is in the Year of Rome 711. He was banish'd into the Province of Pontus in Asia, for making Love to Julia, Augustus his Daughter, or as o∣thers will have it, for writing lascivious Verses, touching the Art of Love: He died at Tomos, January 1st, of the CXCIX Olympiad, that is in the 40th Year of the Reign of Tiberius, and 17th of our Redemption: The Sweetness that is to be met with in several Parts of this Poets Works, makes us concerned for those that are lost, as the Six last Books de Fastis, &c. He gives an Account himself of the Cause of his Banish∣ment and Ruine in the following Distick. Ille ego qui fueram tenerorum lusor amorum, Ingenio perii Naso Poeaemeo. P. P Is a Consonant, and the 15th Letter in the Alphabet, being a Numeral Letter that signifies 100, according to Ʋgution; but Baronius believes it signifies a Septenary Number: When a little dash is put over it, it stands for 400000. The P and B are so like one another, that Quintran declares, that in the Word obtinuit, his Reason required him to put a b, but that his Ears could hear nothing but a p, optinuit: For which Rea∣son we see in ancient Inscriptions and old Glosses that these two Letters have been often confound∣ed, as apsens for absens, obtimus for optimus, pleps for plebs, poplicus for publicus, &c. Hence also we have suppono for subpono, and oppono for obpono, still in use. Several Nations also often pronounce one of these Letters for the other, as the Ger∣mans particularly, who say ponum vinum for bo∣num vinum. The Greeks often put them for one another; and Plutarch says, that 'twas usual with those of Delphos, to say  for  for : And so among the Latins, as often as an s followed, the b was changed into a p, as scribo, scripsi: These two Letters have also this in common, that they often slip into Words, where there is no need of them, as Absporto for Asporto. PACTOLUS; a River in Lydia, that rises in Mount Tmolus; it brings Golden Sands down with it: The Poets feigned this Gold-Sand pro∣ceeded from Midas his having washed himself therein, and that he left there the Gift which he had received from Bacchus to change all Things into Gold. PAEAN; a Song of Rejoycing, sung in Ho∣nour of Apollo. Io Paean, the Original of this Word was this: Apollo being grown up, be∣thought himself of the Injury which his Mother had received from the Serpent Python, and so engaging with her in a Fight, he slew her with his Arrows: During the Combat, these Words were heard repeated, Io Paean; from hence it be∣came a Custom to sing the same at the Publick Games, at Triumphs and Victories both in Rome and Greece: This Song was also made use of af∣ter a Victory, in Honour of Mars; as it was like∣wise for the Curing of some Sickness, wherewith any were afflicted; and then they addressed themselves to Apollo the God of Physick. PAEON, Endymion's Son, and the Brother of Epeus, who in a Race being out-done by him, resigned the Kingdom to him, according to A∣greement: Then he retired towards the River Axus, and gave Name to that Part of the Coun∣try of Macedon, which was called Paeonia. There was another Person of this Name, who had great Skill in Physick, and who cured Pluto of the
grievous Wounds he had received from Her∣cules. PALAEMON, the Son of Athamas and Ino, called before Melicertus, but took upon him this Greek Name of Palaemon, when that being thrown into the Sea with his Mother Ino, they were both deified by Neptune, and reckoned amongst the Gods of the Sea: The Latins gave him the Name of Portumnus, because that they commit∣ted the Care of Ports and Havens unto him. Theseus instituted Plays in Honour of him, called the Isthian Games, where the Victors were crowned with Branches of Pine. PALAESTRA; was a publick Building a∣mong the Greeks, for the Performing of all sorts of Exercises, as well of Body as Mind, as consist∣ing of a College and an Academy, in the Sence wherein the Words are modernly taken: Tho' the greatest part of Authors take Palaestra to be but as an Academy for bodily Exercises, accord∣ing to the Etymology of the Word, which comes from , that in Greek signifies Wrestling, which was one of the most famous Exercises a∣mong the Ancients: This was one of the Diver∣sions at the Olympick Games, and there was a Prize assign'd for it. Foyls are Slights in Wrest∣ling. Philostratus made a Picture of the Palae∣stra, which is represented like a young Nymph full of Vigour and Strength, and he would have her to be Mercury's Daughter, who invented this sort of Exercise in Arcadia. PALAMEDES; the Son of Nauplius, King of the Isle of Eubaea, and an irreconcilable Ene∣my to Ʋlysses; be added Four Letters to the Greek Alphabet, . He also inven∣ted Weights and Measures: He appointed the Watch-word to be given in Armies, and the Way to form a Battallion according to the Fly∣ing of Cranes, which for that Reason were cal∣led Palamedes his Birds. They make him to be a great Astrologer, he having regulated the Years according to the Course of the Sun, and the Months according to that of the Moon: He was stoned to Death by the Grecians, being falsly accused of holding intelligence with Priamus by Ʋlysses. PALATINUS; Mount Palatine; one of the Seven Hills of Rome, and so called either from the Palantes, who came and dwelt there with Evander, or from Palantia, Latinus his Wife, or from Pales the Goddess of Shepherds. The King's Palace stood upon this Mountain, and from hence King's Courts came to be cal∣led Palatia. Romulus was brought up on this Mount. PALES; the Goddess of Shepherds, who was beloved of Apollo: There was a Feast celebra∣ted in Honour of Apollo, April 20 or 21, by of∣fering Sacrifices, and making great Fires of Straw of Hy, which were kindled with great Rejoy∣cings, and by Sound of Drums and Trumpets; the Country People leaped over these Fires, and purified their Cattle therewith, in order to keep them from the Mange, and other Distem∣pers. See Palilia. PALILIA; they were Feasts, and Publick Rejoycings made as well in the City as Country, April 20th, in Honour of Pales the Goddess of Flocks, to intreat her to make them fruitful, and preserve them from the usual Diseases. Fires were kindled both in City and Country, such as are at this Day used in Popish Territories on St. John's Eve: And the same were made with Bean-straw, Horse-blood and Calves-Ashes, which Calf they took out of the Cow's Belly, that they sacrificed on the Day of the Fordicidia, at what time the Chief of the Vestal Virgins burnt those Calves, and gathering the Ashes very carefully up, they reserved the same for a Per∣fume on the Day of the Palilia, that so the Peo∣ple and their Cattle might be purified there∣with: 'Twas to her that they went to fetch those Ashes, which afterwards they threw in∣to the Fire, as Ovid tells us, Fast. L. 4. V. 731. I, pete virgineâ populus suffimen ab arâ: Vesta dabit, Vestae numine purus eris. Sanguis equi suffimen erit, vitulique favilla. Tertia res, durae culmen in ane fabae. The People danced about the Fire, and purified themselves thus: In the Country they lighted a great Fire in the Morning, made of the Branch∣es of Olive, Pine and Lawrel, and threw some Brimstone upon it, then went to fetch their Cattle, which they drove round it, and drew in the Smell that came therefrom: This Cere∣mony Ovid describes at large: Pastor oves saturas ad prima crepuscula lustret. Ʋda priùs spargat, virgaque verrat humum. Frondibus & fixis decorentur ovilia ramis, Et tegat ornatas longa corona fores. Caerulei fiant puro de sulfure fumi, Tactaque sumanti sulfure balet ovis. Ʋre mares oleas, tedamque, herbasque Sabinas, Et crepet in mediis laurus adusta focis. They afterwards offered Sacrifice to the Goddess which consisted of Milk, boiled Wine and Mil∣let, the same being accompanied with Vows and Prayers for the Fruitfulness and Preservation of their Flocks, then they fell to eat and divert themselves, leaping over the Fire which they had kindled with Straw or Bean-straw. These Feasts were also performed in Honour of Rome's Original, which was on that Day founded by Romulus.
PALICI; they were Gods famous in Sici∣ly: Diodorus Siculus says, the Temple of these Deities was much reverenced and very ancient: In it there were two very deep Basons of boil∣ing and sulphurous Water, which were always full without ever running over: In this Temple it was that they took the most solemn Oaths, and Perjuries were there presently punished with some terrible Punishment. Some lost their Eye∣sight, insomuch that those Oaths determined the most intricate Causes: This Temple was also used as an Asylum, for such Slaves as were opprest by their Masters; the Masters not da∣ring to break the Oath they took there, that they would use them more kindly. Silius Itali∣cus in a Line and an half has exprest all that Diodorus says, Et qui praesenti domitant perjura Palici Pectora supplicio. Macrobius observes very well that the River Sy∣metus being in Sicily, the Temple of the Palici was there also, according to Virgil; Symetia circum Flumina, pinguis ubi & placabilis ara Palici. He adds, that the first Poet that mentioned it was Esquilus, a Sicilian; he relates a Fable out of him, concerning a Nymph whom Jupiter had ravished, and who for fear of Juno hid her self in the Earth: At the Time of her Delivery, she brought forth Two Brothers, which were called Palici, , as being such as had entred into the Earth, and came out again. The Word Palici comes from the Hebrew Pali∣chin, that signifies venerabiles, colendi; and from Pelach, colere, venerari. And Esquilus himself seems to intimate as much by this Sentence; Summus Pa∣licos Jupiter venerabiles voluit vocari. Hesychius says, that the Father of these two Brothers was Adra∣nus, which Name comes from the Hebrew Adir, which is one of God's Eulogies, signifying, Glori∣ous and Illustrious. The Two Basons where the Oaths were taken, were called Delli, and from whence Divine Vengeance broke out upon the Perjured, as Macrobius says, and Callias after him; but this is an Arabick Word, and in all likelihood was Phoenician; for Dalla in Arabick signifies as much as indicare; perhaps, it might come from the Hebrew Daal, i. e. haurire; for Aristotle assures us, that he who swore writ his Oath upon a Note, which he threw into the Wa∣ter, the Note swam upon the Surface. If he swore what was true, otherwise it disappeared. Ovid gives a natural Description enough of these two Lakes, in his Met. Lib. 5. V. 405. Perque lacus altos & olentia sulphure fertur Stagna Palicorum, ruptâ ferventia terrâ. PALILIA. see next after Pales. PALINURUS; a Companion of Aeneas, who being overcome with Sleep, fell with his Helm over-board into the Sea, and being carried as far as Port Velino, the Inhabitants rifled him and cast him to the Sea again: But a little after they were afflicted with a severe Plague, which made them go and consult the Oracle of Apollo; who answered that they must appease the Ghost of Palinurus, in Pursuance of which Advice, they consecrated a Grove to him, and erected a Tomb for him upon the next Promontory, which obtained the Name of Palinurus. PALLA, a sort of Garment long in Ʋse both by Men and Women, which the Kings and ancient Romans wore; and even those who ap∣peared upon the Stage were wont to wear this long Robe, as Plautus says. PALLADIUM; the Palladium was a Sta∣tue of Pallas, which fell down from Heaven, in the keeping of which consisted the Fate of Troy, Ʋlysses and Diomedes creeping through the Gut∣ters into the Temple that was in Troy, took a∣way the Palladium: Diomedes after the Destru∣ction of Troy, going into Italy, gave the Palla∣dium to Aeneas, in Pursuance to the Commands of the Gods: Aeneas deposited the same at Lavi∣nium, where it continued. It was afterwards carried to Rome into the Temple of Vesta; ne∣vertheless, Appian in his History of the Mithri∣datick War, says, that when Fimbria ruined Ili∣um he boasted he had there found the Palladium whole among the Ruines: Dionysius of Hali∣carnassus is of Opinion, there were Two of these Statues of Pallas one of which was taken away by Ʋlysses and Diomedes during the Seige of Troy, and another that was left there. Others assure us, that the Trojans made another Palladium ex∣actly like the true one, and that it was the false one which the Grecians took away: Dionysius of Halicarnassus his Words are these: The Oracle having assured them the Town would be im∣pregnable, and the Kingdom remain unshaken, as long as those sacred Pledges were there: The Romans in all Likelihood feigned that there were Two Palladiums, or that there was one made like unto the other, that they might not be oblig'd to confess that they had lost the Pledge of the Eternity of their Empire. PALLAS, a Goddess who came out of Jupiter's Brain compleatly armed, by the Help of Vulcan, who cleft his Head with a very sharp Ax; she was brought up near the Lake Triton, from whence she was called by the Poets Trito∣nia, they made her to be the Goddess of Arts and Sciences. See Minerva. PALLIUM; there were Three sorts of Garments called by this Name, one which the Romans used to tie about their Heads, when they were not well; another was a fourcorner∣ed Robe or Mantle after the manner of the
Greeks, and the Roman Women, also were a long Robe called by this Name. PALLOR, Paleness; the Ancients made a Deity of it, to which they offered Sacrifice, according to Clemens Alexandrinus: Romani Her∣culi rauscarum depulsori, & Febri ac Pavori sacri∣ficant. Latius says, that Tullius Hostilius intro∣duced the Worship of Fear and Paleness among them. PALMUS, a span, a Measure taken from the Length of the Hand, when it was extended as much as it could be; for what we vulgarly now call the Palm of the Hand, was formerly called Palmus. There were in former Times Two sorts of them, to wit, the great and little Palm or Span, that divided a Foot unto Two unequal Parts; the Greater consisting of 12 Fingers, and the Lesser of Four. PALUDAMENTUM; a Garment were by the Romans in Time of War; being the Coat of Arms of their principal Men, who for that Reason were called Paludati; whereas the Soldiers had nothing but short Coats, and were therefore named Sagati: this Garment was open on the Sides with short Sleeves, like unto An∣gels Wings and came down no lower than the Navel. It was white or red, and Valerius Maxi∣mus says, it was an ill Omen to Crassus when he was going to make War against the Parthians, that they gave him a black Paludamentum: Pul∣lum ei traditum est paludamentum, cùm in praelium euntibus album aut purpureum dari soleret. PAN; an Egyptian God who was worship∣ped under the Shape of a Goat, they called him also Mendes, because that Word signified an He-goat in the Egyptian Language. Eusebius gives us the Opinion and Words of Porphyrie concern∣ing him, who says, that Pan was one of the good Genii, engaged in the Service of Bacchus, who shew'd himself sometimes to labouring Men, and put them into such terrible Frights, that many of them died thereof, from whence these Frights came to be called Panick Fears. Euse∣bius very discreetly takes Notice of the Contra∣dictions of the said Philosophers, that would have Pan to be a good Genius, and yet made it cost them their Lives to whom he appeared: Its true that Pan was honoured in Egypt under the Form of an He-goat, and that the Damons very often took upon them the Shape of the said Animal: The Daemons in Scripture are often termed Pilosi, He goats: The Hebrew Word Sebirim signifies an He goat, Pilosi, Hirci: This sort of Idolatry was common even in Moses his Time, seeing the same had crept in among the Israelites: Non sacrificabunt ampliùs sacrificia sua Pilosis, post quos fornicari sunt. Herodotus says, that the People of the Pro∣vince of Mendes placed Pan among the Gods who were before the 12. that he was represent∣ed with a She-goat's Head and the Legs of an He-goat; tho' he were believed to be really like unto other Gods, Lastly, that at Mendes it is a common Name to Pan, to an He-goat, and to a Town, there was kept a sacred He-goat, upon whose Death, all the Country went in Mourning, as others did upon the Death of Ayl or Mnevis. Plutarch reckons that the Pans and Satyrs hapning first to know of the Death of Osiris, who was killed by his Brother Typhon, and having spread the News of it, put the People into so great a Consternation, that that was after∣wards called Panich Fears: The Word Pan in Hebrew signifies Terror: Diodorus Siculus says, the Egyptian Priests first consecrated themselves to Pan, and that in their Temples they dedi∣cated the Images of their Pans in the Form of an He-goat; pretending the same was no more than to give Thanks unto the Gods for the Fer∣tility of Nature and of their Nation. The Greeks, if we believe Herodotus, came late to know the History of Pan; that Historian says, it was not above 800 Years before his Time, and that the Greeks made him to be Mercury and Penelope's Son: In general he declares, that the Greeks came but by Degrees to the Knowledge of the Egyptian Deities, and that they formed their Genealogy according to the Time they came to be acquainted with them: And so they did not know Pan till after the Trojan War, be∣cause they make Penelope to be his Mother; and Lncian in his Dialogues of the Gods explains the Matter, where he brings in Pan and Mercury speaking thus. Pan, Good-morrow, Father. Merc. Good-morrow, Son, but who are you that call me so? for to look upon you, you are more like unto an He-goat than a God. Pan, You reflect upon your self more than I, in saying so; Do you no longer remember that pretty Woman whom you ravish'd in Arca∣dia? What makes you bite your Fingers? It was Penelope the Daughter of Icarus. Merc. And how comes it to pass that you are become horned, with a Beard, Tail, and Goat's Feet. Pan, It is because you were then transformed into the Shape of an He-goat that you might surprize her. Merc. I remember it, but I am asham'd to own it. Pan: I will not disgrace you at all, for besides that I am worshipped in Arcadia, where I possess 1000 Flocks, I am famous for my Skill in Musick, and have shewed my Valour in the Battle of Marathon, insomuch that the Athenians for my Reward have given me a Grot under their Cittadel, whether if you will ever come, you shall see how I am honoured there. Pausanias says, that it was in the Reign of Pandion the Second at Athens, that those Plays and Combats called Lupercalia Lycoea, were insti∣tuted in Arcadia by Lycaon, who was King of the
Country, near unto the Temple of Pan, tho' they were consecrated to Jupiter Lycaeus. When Evander went from Arcadia into Italy, he car∣ried the Celebration of the Lupercalia in Honour of Pan thither; and Dionysius of Hallicarnassus gives a Description thereof, as of a Custom which was still in Force in his Time. Pausanias tells us, that Lycaon consecrated these Plays to Jupiter Lycaeus, but Dionysius of Hallicarnassus says, they were consecrated to Pan; which gives occasion to believe that the Arcadians confound∣ed Jupiter with Pan, of which the said Historian gives also a convincing Proof, when he says else∣where, that the greatest and most ancient of the Arcadian Gods was Pan: As Arcadia was a mountainous and woody Country, Its not strange they should make the God of the Mountains and Woods to be the greatest of all the Gods: montes & nemora Pani dicari. Ovid himself in his Fasti testifies, that Pan's Chief Priest was na∣med Flamen Dialis, as well as Jupiters. And this is clear, that they have either put the Name of Pan upon Jupiter himself, or invested Pan with the Majesty of Jupiter. Those who would make the ancient Fables to be a kind of Philosophy, which under those Disguises conceal the greatest Secrets of Nature, take Pan which in Greek signifies All, for the Universe, as Plutarch says in his Treatise of Osiris: That Part of Pan which has Humane Shape from the Wast upwards re∣presents Heaven and that Intelligent Being, whereby all the World is govern'd. His red and fiery Face denotes the Region of Elemen∣tary Fire: His Wrinkles and stern Looks the various Changes of the Air and Seasons: His Hairs are the Beams of the Sun; and his Horns denote the Moon which receives all the Influ∣ences of the Coelestial Bodies, and disperses the same again over the Earth: His lower Part is rough and hairy, which denotes the Earth with the Forests, Herbs and Plants growing thereon, his Two Legs are the Two Hemisphears that compose the World; his Belly is the Sea; and his Horn feet denote the Stability of the Earth. The Panther's Skin which he carries upon his Shoulders, the which is full of round Spots, represents the Firmament full of Stars, says Probus the Grammarian upon Virgil's Georgicks: The Seven Reed-pipes joined together denote the Seven Planets and their Spears; the Har∣mony of the Seven Tones, that of their Courses and Revolutions, says Cicero in his Somnium Sci∣is; the Breath wherewith he makes them sound is the Spirit of Life which is in these Stars. He holds a crooked Staff in his Hand that signi∣fies the Year; his amourous Complexion, and the Laciviousness wherewith he pursues the Nymphs is the Desire of Generation which spreads it self thro' all the Beings of this World, who attract Matter proper for that End from the Moisture which is represented by the Nymphs. PANATHENAEA; Feasts celebrated at Athens in Honour of Minerva, which were insti∣tuted by Theseus, when he brought all the Peo∣ple of Attica to coalesce into one Body: The La∣tins called these Feasts Quinquatri Wrestling was one of the Exercises practised here, they also danced the Pyrrhick Dance upon the Thea∣ter, which was done with Arms, and was insti∣tuted by Pyrrhus. These Games were of two sorts, the great ones which were performed e∣very Five Years, and the lesser ones annually. See Quinquatria. PANES, the Satyrs, of whom Pan was the Chief, and who for that Reason were often con∣founded with Pan, which is justified by this Verse of Ausonius. Capripedes agitat cùm laeta protervia Panes. They were the Gods of Woods, Fields and of Hunting, and often were taken for a Symbol of Impudence and Unchastity. PANDORA, whom Hesiod says, was the first Woman in the World, was made by Vulcan of a little moistned Earth, afterwards animated by all the Gods, and endued with their Perfections: For Venus gave her her Beauty; Pallas her Wisdom; Mercury his Eloquence; Apollo his Musick, and Juno her Riches; and this made her to be named Pandora from  and  which signifies All Cift. Jupiter being angry with Prometheus because he had made a Man and stolen Fire from Heaven, gave Pando∣ra a Box wherein he enclosed all sorts of Evils, with Order she should carry it to Epimetheus, the Brother of Prometheus, who upon the recei∣ving thereof, rashly opened it, when all the said Evils flew abroad into the Earth, and there was only Hope left in the Bottom which he kept. PANTHEA, or SIGNA PAN∣THEA; Panthean Statues, they were ancient Statues that by the different Figures that were upon them represented all the Gods, or at least a great Part of the most considerable of them.  in Greek signifies All, and  God. And so they called the Temples wherein all the Gods were worshipped together, Panthea, and where∣in all their Representations might be seen. Of this sort was the famous Pantheum at Rome, built by Agrippa, and dedicated to Jupiter Vindex, according to Pliny: It was afterwards conse∣crated by Boniface 3. to the Virgin Mary and all the Saints. It was of a round Form, and is at this Day called Santa Maria della Rotonda: There was one at Athens which Pausanias calls the com∣mon Temple of the Gods, and these sorts of Temples might be seen in many other Cities: Lucian says, that he had observed the Statue of a Goddess in Syria, which indeed was made for Juno, but that it had something in it of Pallas,
Venus, Luna, Rhea, Diana, Nemesis, and the Destinies. Ruffinus in his Ecclesiastical History writes, that there was still at Alexandria, in Theodosius his Reign, an Idol of Serapis made of all sorts of Mettles, and all kinds of Deities: The Ancients therefore made Statues, which by their different Figures denoted all the Gods. There were Panthean Inscriptions, Panthean Gravings and Panthean Feasts. PANTHEON, the Pantheon, or a Tem∣ple built by M. Agrippa, Augustus Caesar's Son in Law, of a round Form in Honour of all the Gods; it was made of Brick on the Out-side and within was adorned with Marble of various Co∣lours: There were Niches in the Walls where∣in were placed the Statues of the Gods, espe∣cially that of Minerva which was made of Ivory by Phidias the Statuary, and that of Venus at whose Ears hung a very rich Pearl of Queen Cleopatra's, which Augustus ordered to be cut in two, because it could not be matched, which the said Queen at a Feast with Mark Antony caused to be dissolved and drunk it up: It weighed Half an Ounce, and was valued at 10000000 Sesterces, which in English Money amounts to a∣bout 76390 l. 11 s. The Gates of that Temple were made of Brass, the Beams covered with guilt Brass, and the Roof made of Silver Plates, which Constantine carried to Constantinpole. It was dedicated to Jupiter Vindex. The Emperor Adrian built one like it at Athens in Honour of all the Gods, which he enriched with 26 Columns of Thrygian Marble, and there he erected a Li∣brary and an Academy called by his Name, which he adorned with 100 Pillars of Lybian Marble. PANTOMIMUS; a Mimick, who among the Ancrents appeared upon the Stage, and by his Signs and Gestures represented all sorts of Actions. A Mimick, says Lucian, ought to have the Art to express the Passions and Motions of the Soul, which Rhetorick teaches us, and should borrow the various Postures and Faces of Men from Paintings and Sculpture, &c. And a little farther; as the Oracle of Apollo said, he should make the Spectators to understand with∣out speaking, in the same manner as if one had spoke. This is that which Demetrius the Cy∣nic Philosopher confesses, who condemned it; but then a celebrated Mimick in Nero's Time desired him not to condemn him, before he saw him; and having ordered the Vocal and Instrumental Musick to cease, he represented before him the Adultery of Mars and Venus, wherein he repre∣sented the Sun that discovered them, Vulcan who spread his Nets for them, the Gods who ran to see the Sight, Venus all in Confusion, Mars a∣stonished and supplicant, and the rest of the Fable with so much Artifice, that the Philoso∣pher cried out, he thought he saw the Thing it self and not a Representation of it, and that this Man's Body and Hands spoke: But as it are fallen upon this Subject, I'll give you under one, the Testimony of a Barbarian of thse Times concerning it; for a Prince of Potus be∣ing come to Nero's Court upon some  seeing this famous Farce-Dancer dance with so much Address, tho' he understood not a Worf of what he sung, yet understood all, and desired the Emperor in raking his Leave of him, to make him a Present of this Man; and as Nero was amazed at his Request, he said, This it is to have Barbarians to my Neighbours, among whom not one understands the Language, and this Person will serve them as an Interpreter, and by his Gestures make them to understand what he means.The Perfection therefore of this Art is to counterfeit so exactly the Part one acts, so as to make neither a Gesture nor Posture that hath not some Reference to the Thing that is represented. PAPILIO; a Butterfly; the Symbol of the Soul, a Bas-relievo of Marble might be seen in a Manuscript of the late M. de Bagris, where∣in was represented a young Man extended upon a Bed, and a Butterfly which flew away that seemed to come out of the Mouth of the De∣ceased, because the Ancients did believe, as some of the common People do now, that the Soul came out at the Mouth; which made Homer in his 9th Illiaed say, That when the Soul has once passed the Barrier of the Teeth, it cannot re∣turn. PARANYMPHUS; he anciently was the Manager of Nuptial Solemnities. PARASANGA, was an old Persian Mea∣sure, esteemed to be 30 Furlongs, according to the common Consent of the best Authors, both Ancient and Modern; they had, indeed, some Parasangae that were much greater, and others again far less. Strabo, L. 2. says, That the Pa∣rasanga of the Persians, was accounted by some to be 60 Furlongs, by others 40, and again by some 30. Agathias in his Gothick Wars makes it to be but 21, which makes me say, that there were Parasangae from 20 to 60 Furlongs. But each Furlong contained 125 Paces. PARCAE; the Destinies, the Daughters of Erebus and the Night, they were called Parcae by way of Antiphrasis, quod nemini parcant, because they spare no Body. The Ancients made them Three in Number, viz. Clotho, Lachesis and A∣tropos, because all Things under the Sun, have their Beginning, Progress and End. At Megara, says Plutarch, in the Temple of Jupiter Olympius, might be seen his Statue, made of Gold and Ivo∣ry by Theoseomus, who upon his Head carried the Destinies and the Hours, says Eschylus, that had as well a Command over the Gods as Men, and whose Orders are inviolable. The Birth, Growth, and Death of Mankind is attributed to them, which doubtless gave occasion to the Poets
Fiction; who tell us, That they spun Mens Lives; that Clotho held the Distaff and spun the Thread, Lachesis turned the Wheel, and that Atropos cut it. Hyginus attributes unto them the Invention of these Greek Letters, A, B, H, T, Y, which made Martianus Capella call them the Secretaries and Guardians of the Library of Heaven, and that they keep the Archives thereof. Plato in∣forms us, that the Three Destinies represented unto us All sorts of Times; Clotho, that which is past, Lachesis the Time present, and Atropos that which is to come; and he places them in Heaven, each of them sitting upon a Throne, clad in White, with Crowns upon their Heads, and singing the Syrens Song, that is, the Muses's, or that of the Eight Spheres, which they repre∣sent: That Lathesis is the Firmament, the Stars whereof preside over the Actions of Men, and the Productions of the Earth; Clotho represents the Planets, which denote the Destinies; and Atropos is Saturn, who by his slow Motion, strengthens them. The Ancients have represented the Destinies divers ways. Lucian sets them out in the Shape of Three poor old Women, having large Locks of Wool mixed with Daffodils on their Heads, one of which held a Distaff, the other a Wheel, and the third a Pair of Scissars, wherewith she cut off the Thread of Man's Life. Others have given us another sort of an Idea of them, Clo∣tho appearing in a long Robe of divers Colours, wearing a Crown upon her Head, adorned with Seven Stars, and holding a Distaff in her Hand; Lachesis in a Robe full of Stars, with several Spindles in her Hands; and Atropos clad in Black, cutting the Thread with large Scissars. Pausa∣nias in his Elegiacs, says, there was at Olympus an Altar called Megaretes, that is, the Conductor of the Destinies; and in Apollo's. Temple there were Two Statues of the Destinies, Jupiter ma∣king the Third. What Plutarch adds concern∣ing the Destinies, is not, perhaps, ill grounded; for, there was a Destiny which the Ancients placed in the Stars, and which might have a good Meaning, since 'tis not to be doubted, but all natural Causes form one Concatenation, from whence it comes that all Consequences and Ef∣fects prove necessary and inevitable: This Au∣thor says, that there is one of the Three Desti∣nies influenced by the Sun, and gives Birth to all Things, that the Second follows the Moon, and that 'tis she which unites and sustains the Pro∣ductions of the other: Lastly, that the Third is more like unto the Earth, and 'tis she also that is most concerned with Fortune: Clemens A∣lexandrinus say, there were some who confined Destiny so much to the Moon, that they said, if there were Three of them, it was because of the Three most remarkable Days of the Moon: Parcas allegorice dici partes Lunae, tri∣gesimam, quintam decimam & novam lunam, ideo & candidatas dici ab Orpheo, qua fuit partes lucis. Varro says, and we ought to believe him, that formerly they used Parta, instead of Parca: This Word answers the Greek , and comes a Par∣tiendo, , to divide; because 'tis Fate that makes a Division and Lot for every Body: But in respect to that Universal Chain of all natural Causes, which produce all sensible Effects, and form, as I may say, the Fate of our Bodies; the Moon without doubt is one of the most consi∣derable and efficatiousof any, as she is also nearest to the Earth. The Moon was one of the Desti∣nies in the Opinion of those who gave this Qua∣lity to Ilithyia, which is known to be the Moon, and to preside over Nativities. Pausanias tells us, that Venus Ʋrania was also accounted one of the Destinies, and that she was even the Eldest of the Three Sisters: Epigramma verò indicat Vene∣rem Caelestem, earum quae Parcae vocantur, natu maximam. PARENTALIA; they were Solemnities and Banquets made by the Ancients, at the Obsequies of their Relations and Friends. PARIS; the Son of Priamus, King of Troy, and of Hecuba: His Mother being with Child of him, saw in her Dream that she was brought to Bed of a Burning-torch, which would set all Asia on fire: And having consulted the Augurs there∣upon; they made answer, That that Child one Day should be the Cause of the Ruine of his Country. Priamus being informed of it, exposed him to be destroy'd, but his Wife Hecuba being touch'd with Compassion, delivered him pri∣vately to the King's Shepherds, to bring him up on Mount Ida, in Phrygia, where he grew up, and became Valiant and expert at all bodily Exercises, wherein he exceeded Hector, whom he threw in Wrestling. Dares the Phrygian, who had seen Paris, gives us an Account of his Per∣son, in his Book, concerning the Destruction of Troy; where he says, He was tall, and well pro∣portioned, of a fair Complexion, had very good Eyes, and a sweet Voice; that he was Bold, Couragious, Forward and Ambitious: And this is confirmed by Dion Chrysostom and Cornelius Nepos, in their Translation of Dares into Verse. Hector upbraids him for his very Beauty, as if he were fitter for Love than War. Homer gives him the Title of being Valiant, and among o∣thers names Diomedes and Machaon's being wounded by him; to which Dares adds Menelaus and Palamedes, Antilochus and Achilles, whom he slew. Hyginus relates the Fight he had with his Brethren, whom he overcame, while he was a Shepherd. As to the Contest between the Three Goddesses, viz. Juno, Venus and Pallas, to know which was the fairest of them; Dares in his Poem concerning the Destruction of Troy, re∣cites the Words which they spoke to Paris, in
order to engage him to give Sentence in their Favour, as well as Lucian does in his Dialogue concerning the Judgment of Paris: Venus want∣ed not Reasons to gain the Opinion of amorous Paris, and to oblige him to declare in her Fa∣vour; for, as his Reward, she promised him one of the finest Women in the World, which was Helen, Menelaus his Wife; and she was so con∣stant to her Word, that she favoured him to carry her off; which occasioned the fatal War made by the Grecians against the Trojans. Some Commentators upon Homer, and Spon∣danus among others, believe this pretended Sen∣tence of Paris was not known to Homer. Plu∣tarch himself favours this Conjecture, when he maintains that the 3 Verses of the 24th Iliad, where he speaks of it, are Supposititious, and in∣serted by some other; and that 'tis an unbeco∣ming thing to believe the Gods were judged by Men, and that Homer making no mention there∣of any other where, there was Reason to be∣lieve these Lines were foisted in: But a Medal of Antoninus Pius gives us to understand, that this Action was believed to be true by the An∣cients; and we may farther oppose against Plu∣tarch, the ancient Statue of Paris done by Eupbra∣nor, whereby, as Pliny says, it might be known, that he was a Judge between the Goddesses, the Lover of Helen, and the Person that killed A∣ahilles. Other Authors have thought that Paris himself feigned his having been a Judge be∣tween the Goddesses, and that he did this in Opposition to Hercules, who renounced Vice in favour of Vertue, how difficult soever it appear∣ed, since Paris despised the Riches and Honours promised him by Juno, and the Knowledge prof∣ferred him by Pallas, and abandoned himself to his Pleasures. Eusebius treats of the History, and not the Fabulous: part; for he writes, that the City of Troy was destroy'd for the Rape of Helen, one of the Three Grecian Ladies that contended for Beauty. PARNASSUS; a Mountain in Phocis, con∣secrated to Apollo and the Muses; whence arise the Fountains of Custalins, Hippocrene, and A∣ganippe, so famous in the Poets. At the Foot of this Mountain stood the City of Cyrrha, and the Temple of Apollo of Delphos: The Muses took their Epithers from these Places; for in the Poets they are called Parnassides, and Ca∣stalides. PARRICIDA; a Parricide, the Murder∣er of his Father or Mother. The Romans made no Law against Parricides, because they did not think there could be a Man so wicked as to kill his Parents. L. Ostius was the first that killed his Father, 500 Years after Numa's Death, even after the Time of Hannibal: And then the Pom∣peian Law was made, which ordained, that the Person who was convicted of this Crime, after he had been first whipped till the Blood came, should be tied up in a Leathern Sack, together with a Dog, an Ape, a Cock and a Viper, and so thrown into the Sea, or next River. PARTUNDA; a Goddess that assisted at Child-bearing. PASIPHAE; the Daughter of the Sun, and Wife to Minos, King of Creet: The Fable tells us, she fell in Love with a Bull, whom she enjoy'd by Daedalus his Contrivance, who by his Skill made a Cow, wherein Pasiphae being inclo∣sed, she conceived by this Bull a Creature that was half Man half Bull, which was shut up in the Labyrinth, and with the Assistance of Ariadne killed by Theseus. Servius informs us, that this Taurus was one of Minos his Captains, who by the Procurement of Daedalus enjoy'd Pasiphae, and because the Child she bore was like unto Taurus and Minos, he was called Minotaurus. Lucian says, that Pasiphae hearing Daedalus dis∣coursing of the Coelestial Sign Taurus, she became in Love with his Doctrine, which she learnt from him, and this gave the Poets occasion to feign that she fell in Love with a Bull. PASSUS; a Pace; a Measure taken from the Space that is between the two Feet of an Ani∣mal; the common Pace is that Space we gain in walking; the Geometrical is double to the com∣mon Pace: The Common consists of two Feet and an half, the Geometrical of five Feet; and this Geometrical Pace is the most common Mea∣sure, the exactest and most certain of all, both among the Ancients and Moderns. PASTOPHORIUM and PASTO∣PHORI; the Pastophori were those whose Bu∣siness it was at Solemn Festivals to carry the Shrine of the Deity, when they were to pray to him for Rain, fair Weather, or some such like Miracle. Its observable that the Greeks had a College of this Order of Priests, in Sylla's Time, and 'tis certain they carried about the Shrines of the Gods when some Solemn Processions were made, and there were certain Persons appoint∣ed for this Office: And hence it may be conclu∣ded, that the Pastophorium signifies an House, wherein dwelt the Priests who were appointed for this Charge, and which were usually near the Temple, M. le Moine agrees, that the Pasio∣phorium was a Cell, and little House adjacent to the Temple; but he gives the Word another Origin, pretending it was borrowed from the Flags, which were usually put before these little Tabernacles. PATAICI DII; these Gods, according to Herodotus, were much like unto the Dii Ca∣biri, or Samothracian Gods, at leastwise, as to their Figures; for they were little Pigmy Images, with which the Phaenicians adorned the Prows of their Ships. Herodotus, perhaps, was mistaken when he put these Gods upon the Prow; others place them on the Poop, and Perseus says it was the Custom.
Ingentes è puppe Dii. The Origin of this Word is clearly Hebrew, ac∣cording to Scaliger; for Patach in that Language is the same as insculpere. Bochartus thinks it may be derived from the Hebrew Word Batac, i. e. considere; for those Idolaters trusted in these Gods. Selden has treated of these Pataick Gods, and believes all the Phoenician Gods bore the same Name. PATER-PATRATUS; was the first and principal Person of the Heralds College, that made as it were a Council of War to examine the Differences which arose between Neighbour∣ing People, and who endeavoured amicably to accommodate the same; they themselves going to the People to induce them to restore what they had taken, and to redress the Injury com∣plained of. PATERA; an ancient Vessel wherein they received the Blood of the Victim. Patera fili∣cata, was a Cup adorned with Fern-leaves. Pa∣tera hederata, was such as was adorned with Ivy. Patera pampinata, Cups on which Vine-Leaves or Branches were carved. PATRES CONSCRIPTI, were the Senators of Rome, who at first were only called Patres, but afterwards thus named when their Number was increased. Plutarch says, that Ro∣mulus having chosen and established Ten Orders of Senators, writ down their Names on Tables of Gold in the Peoples Presence; and this gave them the Appellation of Patres Conscripti: Those who were chose from among the Knights to be Senators, were called Patres allecti. PATRICIUS; a Patrician; one descend∣ed from the Senators, and first Founders of the Republick of Rome. PATRONUS; a Patron; the Person un∣der whose Protection one puts himself; it was also used in respect to a Master who had made his Slave free: The Law of the Twelve Ta∣bles entituled the Patrons to the Estates of their Freed-men, who died without lawful Issue, born after their Enfranchisement, and also intestate; for, tho' by this Manumission or Enfranchisement, the Slaves not only obtained their Liberty, but also the Right of Citizens, and so were made Ci∣tizens of Rome, and consequently capable to ac∣quire and possess all sorts of Estates, and had Power to dispose of them, yet they were very far from the Condition of the Ingenui, who were born free; for the Law subjected them to shew great Respect, and to perform considerable Ser∣vices and Devoirs to their Patrons; to the Ob∣servation of which they were so rigorously tied, that when they failed therein, they might not only be made liable to pecuniary Mulcts, and subjected to lose part of their Estates, but also be chastised with Corporal Punishments, and sometimes be even recalled to their former State of Servitude, according to the Hainousness of their Ingratitude, as 'tis fully set forth under the Title of Jus Patronatûs. But besides these Rights which the Patron exercised over the Per∣son of Freed-men while living, he had also ano∣ther over their Goods after their decease, being priviledged to inherit when the Freed-man died without having Children born him after his be∣ing made free, and intestate: And there were but Two sorts of Persons that could exclude the Patron, viz. Children lawfully begotten after his Manumission, and the Heir by Will, whom the Law preferred before the Patron: But as it was an easie thing for the Freed-men to deprive their Patrons of the Benefit of Inheriting; and that many times those who had no Children of their own, got some by Adoption, or else by Will disposed of their Estates in favour of Stran∣gers; the Praetor by his Edict introduced a Re∣medy for this, by giving the Patrons Possession of half of the Estates of their Freed-men, in op∣position to adopted Children and Stranger-Heirs: And forasmuch as by this Edict one law∣fully begotten Child of the Freed-man, coming to succeed his Father, entirely excluded the Pa∣tron; the Papian Law made an Addition to the Praetor's Edict, and enlarged the Right of the Patron, by enjoining, that if the Freed-man had a considerable Estate even to 100000 Sesterces, and less than Three Children, the Patron should have a Share equal to one of the Chil∣dren's, which he could not be deprived of by a Will. PAVENTIA; a Deity of the Ancients, mentioned by St. Augustine, L. 4. de Civ. Dei, which diverted Childrens Fears. PAVIMENTUM; a Pavement, of which there were divers sorts: Pliny says, that those Pavements which were painted and wrought by Art were brought out of Greece, and among o∣thers that of Pergamus, called Asarotcs, which was not swept; and this Name was given it, because the Crumbs and Offals which fell from the Table were so well represented in this sort of Pavement, that they seemed to have been real, and the Servants had no need to take care of sweeping the Rooms: Then came the Mosaick Pavements in Fashion, which the Greeks called Lithostrota, and were used at Rome in Sylla's Time, about 170 Years before Christ's Coming: It was a Pavement made of small Stones joined, and as it were united together by Cement, and by the Ordering, and variety of their Colours representing different Figures. See Musea. Vi∣truvius speaks of Pavements, which he calls Pa∣vimenta sectilia, or Pavements of pieces made like one another, which he distinguishes from Mosaick Pavements.
PAVO; a Peacock; a Bird by the Heathens consecrated to Jupiter; they feigned that Argus his Eyes were put into the Peacock's Tail. Lucian has left us an Account of him thus: The Pea∣cock, says he, at the Beginning of the Spring, when the Flowers first peep out, spreads abroad his Golden and Azure Feathers in a most mag∣nificent manner, and contends with the Spring which of them shall produce the most beautiful Things; he spreads himself, turns and admires his own Beauty, whose Splendor is doubly in∣creased by that of the Light, which does not only embellish the Colours, but multiplies them: This particularly happens to those Golden Circles, which crown the Enamel of his Tail, and each of them resemble a Rain∣bow that changes its Colour according to the divers Reflections of Light. PAVOR; Fear, whom the Romans made to be a Deity. Pausanias, in his Corinthiaca, says, That Mermerus and Pheres, Medea's Children being stoned by the Corinthians, the Ghosts of them did so frighten young Children, that they died therewith: The Oracle commanded they should offer Sacrifice to them every Year, and set up Two Statues, one to Fear and the other to Paleness. PAX; Peace; a Deity adored by the Hea∣thens. Pausanias says, that the Statue of Peace was worshipped at Athens, under the Form of a Woman, who held Plutus the God of Riches by the Hand: The Emperor Claudius began to build her a Temple at Rome, but 'twas not fi∣nished and adorned till Vespasian did it, after the Conquest of Judea, and the Destruction of Jeru∣salem, as the Gold, Silver, and Brass Money which he coined do testifie, whereon Peace is graven, holding a lighted Torch in one Hand, wherewith she sets some broken Arms on fire, and in the other an Olive-branch, with this De∣vice, Paci Orbis Terrarum: She is also represent∣ed unto us with an Olive-branch, and Mercury's Caduceus. Titus his Son and Successor in the Em∣pire, has given us the Figure of Peace, repre∣sented like a Goddess, holding a Palm in one Hand, and Scepter in the other, with this In∣scription, Pax Aeterna. PECULATUS; it was a Crime in a Per∣son that robbed the Publick Treasure, or con∣verted it to his own use, who was the Disposer, Keeper, or Receiver of it; there are divers sorts of it, all mentioned under Lex Julia. PECULIUM; this is the Money or Estate of one who is under the Power of another, which a Son under a Father or a Slave, may get by his own Industry, without any Furtherance or As∣sistance from his Father, or Master, but only his Leave. PECUNIA; Money; to whom the Romans offered Sacrifice to induce her to make them rich. PEDANI, or PEDARII SENA∣TORES; young Senators who followed the Opinion proposed by the Older, and were al∣ways of their side: And hence is that Saying of Cicero, Ire pedibus in sententiam alicuyus, to espouse the Opinion of a Person. PEGASUS. The Horse Pegasus, whom the Poets feigned to have Wings, and who with the Impression of his Hoof made the Fountain Hip∣pocrene spring out of Mount Helicon; it was up∣on this Horse Bellerophon was mounted, when he fought Chimera; its said he flew up to Hea∣ven, and placed himself amongst the Stars: Its also a Coelestial Constellation in the Northern Hemisphere, consisting of 20 Stars. Keepler makes it to have 23. Pontanus says, when it rises, it makes a Man a Poet and Ingenious, a Lover of Glory and of Arms; and Firmicius says, that if it set with Mars, the Man will perish by Fire. PELION; Mount Pelion in Thessaly, which was formerly joined to Mount Oeta, and separa∣ted from it by an Earthquake. PELOPS; the Son of Tantalus, King of Phrygia, and of Taygete, whom his Father Tanta∣lus cut in pieces, and boiled to feast the Gods withal; there was none but Ceres that eat there∣of: The other Gods perceiving it, abhorred the Action, and restored Pelops to Life; for they gathered all his Members together, and sent Mercury to fetch his Soul out of Hell. As Ceres had eaten some of the Shoulder, they gave him an Ivory one in lieu of it, which healed many Diseases: He was much beloved of Neptune, who gave him immortal Horses, with which he ran against Oenomaüs, for the beautiful Hippodamis his Daughter, became Conqueror, and so Pos∣sessor of that admirable Creature. Pelops was for his Beauty, according to Lucian, admitted to eat with the Gods. PELORIS and PELORUS; one of the Three Capes of Sicily, which is in the North Part of that Island: It was so called from a Pilot whom Hannibal slew, as supposing he betray'd him; but coming afterwards to know his Mi∣stake, he erected a Statue for him in an high Place, near the Sea-side in Sicily, which he called Peloris, according to his Name. PENATES; a Name given to all the Houshold-Gods, which the Ancients worshipped in their Habitations: There Gods were the Souls or Genti of deceased Persons, to whom their particular Families paid some sort of Ado∣ration. These Gods were honoured within Doors, by burning in the nature of First-fruits some of that which was served to the Table, or publickly sacrificing a Sow to them, as to those who pre∣sided over the Streets and High-ways: They had also the publick Penates of the City or Em∣pire, which Aeneas brought from Troy, and whom Varro believed to have been brought be∣fore
from Samothracis to Troy. Dionysius of Ha∣licarnassus, after having said that the Greeks in order to express in their Language what the Ro∣mans meant by their Penates at Rome, called them : And after having assured us, that they were first brought by Aeneas from Troy to Lavinium, from whence they were carried to Alba, and thence to Rome; he at last asks, what was the Nature and Shape of those Gods, to which he answers that Timeus wrote, that they were Iron and Brass Caduceus's, and Earthen Ware made at Troy; Ca∣duceaferrea & aerea, Trojanamque testam sictilens; . He replies in the 2d place, that we must restrain our Curiosity, and out of respect abstain from penetrating too far into the Mysteries of Religion; and in the last place he adds, that they were the same Gods as those of Samothracia; that Dardanus brought them to Troy, from whence Aeneas carried them into Italy, viz. the Shapes of those great Gods, and the Image of Minerva; sacrae magnorum Deorum, & effigies Minervae: This Image of Minerva was twofold. Ʋlysses and Diomedes took one away from Troy, during the Siege, and the other re∣mained there: Others say, that the Trojans had made another Palladium very like unto the true one, and that it was the Copy, and not the O∣riginal which the Grecians took away. Virgil brings the Houshold-Gods giving their Assistance at the Battle of Actium, where Au∣gustus defeated Antony and Cleopatra: Hinc Augustus agens Italos in praelia Caesar, Cum Patribus, populoque, Penatibus & magnis Diu. Hereby Virgil acknowledges, that Empires, Ci∣ties, particular Houses, and King's Palaces, were as so many Temples, where the Houshold-Gods were present; where a continual Fire was burnt, and where they were honoured by frequent Li∣bations and Incenses upon all occanons. Lucan observes, that in time of Peace, the Arms were fixed in the Place appertaining to the Houshold-Gods, as being entrufted to their keeping, Diripiunt sacris affixa Penatibus arma, Quae pax longa dabat. And that it was esteemed to be abominable Sa∣crilege to commit Murder in the Presence of Vesta, that is in the Entry, and before the per∣pecual Fire of the Houshold-Gods. PENELOPE, the Daughter of Icarus, the Iacedamonian, and of Periboea: Its said this Name was given her from certain Birds called Penelopes or Turkeys, and that she was named Arnea, i. e. disowned and rejected, from the Verb , to Reject: For her Father understanding by the Oracle, that his Wife Periboea should bear a Daughter, which should one Day be a Shame to her Sex, he caused her to be exposed upon the Water, shut up in a Chest; but the said Birds hearing the Cries made by the Infant, they drove the Chest ashoar with their Wings; and having opened it with their Beaks, they fed her for some time: She was Ʋlysses his Wife, and a Model of Chastity and Faithfulness to her Hus∣band; for Ʋlysses having been absent Twenty Years, she was courted by several Princes who were taken with her Beauty; but she to dis∣engage her self from their Importunities, put off her second Marriage till such time as she had finished a piece of Linnen-Cloth, which she had begun, and she cunningly undid in the Night what she wrought in the Day; and so she con∣tinued in this State till Ʋlysses his Return, who entring into his own House, disguised like a Pea∣sant, killed them all. Hereupon you may ob∣serve the different Opinions that have been en∣tertained of Penelope: Some, that is to say, Ho∣mer and many others, who followed him, have represented her as a Model of Chastity; while others, the Chief of whom are Duris the Sa∣mian, Tzetzes, Pausanias and Horace, have ta∣ken her for a loose Woman, and a Prostitute. However, the same Pausanias in his Laconica says, that her Father Icarus erected a Statue of Cha∣stity Thirty Spartan Stadia's high, in memory of the Conjugal Chastity of his Daughter Penelope, who had rather, being left to her Choice, to follow her Husband to Ithaca, than to tarry with her Father at Laaedemon. PENTHEUS, the Son of Echion and Agave, who, because he ridiculed the Festivals of Bac∣chus, called Orgia, and would have them repu∣ted Follies and xtravagancies, was cut in pieces upon Mount Citheron by his own Mother and Sister, who being transported with Bacchick Fary took him for a wild Boar. PERILLUS. See Phalaris. PERIPATE ICI; Peripateticks, they were Athenian Philosophers, and the Followers of Aristotle, who disputed walking in the Li∣caeum; they were so called from the Greek , which signifies to walk; but after∣wards they took the same of Academicks, be∣cause they studied in the Academy. PERITIUS, (Mensis is understood) the Peritian Month was a Month among the Mace∣donians, that answered that of February, and such as was adopted by the Syrians, in Memory of Alexander the Great, or rather the Macedo∣nians introduced it amongst them after they had been conquered by them, insomuch that they gave the greatest part of the Cities and Ri∣vers of Syria, the Names of the Cities and Ri∣vers of Macedon.
PERMESSUS; a River in Boeocia, that rises in Mount Helicon, which was consecrated to Apollo and the Muses. PERSAE; the Persians, the People of the famous Empire of Persia, who adored the Sun, and to whom they erected Altars under the Name of Mithra, which was a kind of Dress for the Head, like a Bishop's Miter, Soli Invicto Mithrae, and Numini Invicto soli Mithrae, as you may read in ancient Inscriptions: They also wor∣shipped the Moon, Venus, Fire, Earth, Water and Wind, yet without any Temples; Statues, or Altars, and offered Sacrifices to them upon some Hillock, or high Place, as believing them∣selves hereby to be nearer unto their Gods. When the Lacedaemonians beat the Persians in the Battle of Platea, they erected Statues in Persian Dresses, to support the Weight of the Galleries and Porticoes which they built, as a perpetual Mark of their Servitude. PERSEUS; the Son of Jupiter and Danae, the Daughter of Acrisius, King of Argos, who coming to know by the Oracle, that the Child his Daughter should bring forth, would one Day kill him, took a Resolution to shut up his Daugh∣ter in a Brass Tower, that hereby she might have nothing to do with Men: But this Precau∣tion signified nothing, for Jupiter who loved her, went to see her, and for that End being trans∣formed into a Golden Shower, he begat Perseus upon her. Acrisius coming to the Knowledge hereof, shut up both Mother and Child in a Cof∣fer, and commanded them to be thrown into the Sea; but they were saved by some Fishermen, who found the said Chest floating upon the Wa∣ter, near the Isle of Seriphus, where Perseus was brought up by Dictis, the Brother of Polydectes, King of that Island. Perseus being grown up, was much beloved of the Gods; Minerva made him a Present of her Miror, to serve him for a Shield, and Mercury gave him the Wings which he wore at his Head and Feet, and a Cymeter which Vul∣can had forged for him, and with which he did great Exploits: For by the Help of this Shield, wherein as in a Miror he saw the Picture of Medusa sleeping, with the Gorgons her Sisters, he catched hold of her by the Hair, and cut∣ting off her Head, afterwards made his Escape; but in his return, upon the Coast of Ethiopia, seeing Andromede ready to be devoured by a Sea-monster; and being struck with a compas∣sionate Love for that unfortunately fair Crea∣ture, whom the Nereides, who were incensed at her Mother's having despised their Beauty, had tied to a Rock; he turned the Monster in∣to a Stone, with one of the Looks of Medusa, after he had first stumned him with a Blow with his Sword.Perseus was not only skilful in Arms, but he also made learning to Flourish in his Time, having founded a publick School upon Mount Helicon, where Youth were instructed in good Literature; and hence the Poets and A∣strologers took occasion to place him among the Stars. We have in the Person of Perseus the Idea of a great Captain; for the Arms we have spoken of, are as so many Hieroglyphicks of the ex∣traordinary Qualifications, that are necessary for a Person, to form great Designs, and to succeed therein; Prudence is figured out unto us by Minerva's Miror, that served him instead of a Shield; Strength and Greatness of Courage joined with a Forwardness, that must engage him to the Execution of his Design, was represented by the Sword forged by Vulcan, and what has been said concerning Medusae's Head, which turn∣ed Men into Stones with her Looks, imports so much, that the very Looks of a Person who is indued with so many Accomplishments, strikes a Dread and Terror into others, and stops them so as if they were Stone-statues. PERSEPHONE. See Proserpina. PERSIUS; a Latin Satyrical Poet, who has left Satyrs behind him that are very ob∣scure: He flourish'd under Nero, and died at 29 Years of Age. PERTINAX, named Publius Helvius, sur∣named the Wheel of Fortune because he experi∣enced the Inconstancy thereof. He was a Ro∣man Emperor the Son of a Freed-man named Helvius who kept a Shop of small Wares. His Father brought him up in good Literature, which afterwards he taught at Rome, but as his Inclinations carried him more unto Arms than unto Letters, he quitted his Profession, and fol∣lowed the Military Art, wherein he signalized himself in divers Wars, which made the Empe∣ror Marcus Aurelius give him the Government of Asia and Syria; after whose Death his Suc∣cessor Commodus banished him from Rome, but he recalled him some time after and made him Governour of the City. Upon the Death of Commodus, Aelius Laetus Captain of the Guard went to Pertinax his Lodging, and made him a Tender of the Empire, and obliged him to go to the Camp where he was proclaimed Impe∣rator Augustus, and the same was joyfully con∣firmed by the Senate and People. At his Ac∣cession to the Imperial Throne he went about to reform the Extorsions and Violences practised by the Praetorian Bands over the poor Citizens, but this drew their Hatred so far upon him, that they adventured to kill him in the Middle of his Palace, after he had reigned Three Months. By the Medals which we have of his, it may be ob∣served that he had a fortunate Countenance, a handsom Head, large Forehead, curled Hair, a long and venerable Beard; that he was tale, burly, and pretty big-belly'd, as may be known by his Medals and the Paintings of Capitolinus. All this seemed to promise him a healthful Con∣stitution, a large Capacity with the Respect of
the People, which his venerable Air must gain him. But his Empire was so short, that he had not an Opportunity to make his Inclinations known. However, he shewed much of an in∣trepid Spirit in the Sedition, wherein he lost his Life; for when he saw the Mutineers enter into his Palace, he went to meet them, and uncon∣cernedly spoke to them, with much Courage and Gravity, insomuch that they were all appea∣sed, save one who stirred up the Soldiers anew, and brought his Companions to cut off so good a Prince. PETRONIUS; lived in Nero's Time; tho' that Emperor loved this Poet very well, yet he was put to Death by his Command, as Corne∣lius Tacitus says. PHAEDRA. the Daughter of Minos King of Creet, who fell in Love with Hippolytus her Son in Law; she discovered her Passion to her Nurse that was her Confident, who attempted to engage Hippolytus his Consent several times, but to no purpose: Phaedra out of Shame and Despair hanged her self, having first tied to her Cloaths some Letters wherein she charged Hip∣polytus with a Crime, of which she her self only was guilty. PHAEDRUS, a Latin Poet and the Freed-man of Augustus, who turned the Fables of Esop and several other Things into Jambick Verse. PHAETON, the Son of Sol and the Nymph Clymene, or of Cephalus and Aurora; Lucian in a Dialogue between Jupiter and Sol ex∣plains the Fable to us. Jupit. Wretch, what have you done, to leave your Chariot to be guided by a young Fool, who has burnt one Half of the World, and froze up the other, insomuch that had not I struck him down to the Ground with a Thunder-bolt, there had been an End of Mankind. Sun. I confess, Jupiter, I was mistaken, that I could not manage my Son, nor endure the Tears of a Mistress; but I did not think so much Mischief would have come of it. Jupit. Did not you know the Fury of your Horses, and that if they turned never so little out of the Way, an universal Ruine followed. Sun. I know it very well, and therefore I put Phaeton into the Chariot my self, and gave him all necessary Instructions, but the Horses not finding their Conductor with them, took head, and he became dazzled with the Splendor of the Light, and frightned with the Abyss he saw be∣neath him. But he has been sufficiently punish∣ed, and I also in his Punishment. Jupit. In the mean time, give Phaeton's Si∣sters Order to bury him on the Banks of the Eridanus, where he fell, and as a Recompense, I will change them into Poplar-trees, from which Amber shall distil, as a Symbol of their Tears. The same Lucian in his Judicial Astrology seems to refute this Fable, saying, that Phaeton busied himself in observing the Sun's Course, and the various Influences thereof, and that he left this Art imperfect by his Death, adding that whatever is said of him is not likely at all. PHAETUSA, Phaeton's Sister and one of the Heliades, who according to the Fable, was changed into a Poplar. PHALANX, a great square Battalion formed by the Ancients, which was so compact that the Soldiers had their Feet set close to one another, with their Shields joined and Pikes turned cross-ways, insomuch that it was almost impossible to break them: It consisted of 5000 Men. Livy says, that this sort of Battalion was invented by the Macedonians, from whence came the common Epithet given it of Macedo∣nian Phalanx. PHALARIS, says Lucian, was born of a noble Family in the City of Agrigentum in Sicily; after he had been brought up in all the genteel Exercises of his Time, and such as were suit∣able to his Condition, he was admitted into the Government, as others were, where he behaved himself so well that there was never any Com∣plaints made of his Administration: But as he understood that his Enemies and such as envy∣ed his Prosperity, had laid secret Ambushes for him, and sought all manner of Ways how they might make away with him, he was constrained for his own Safety to make himself Master of the State, and to exercise. Justice very rigorously upon those who would have destroyed him: One Perillus devised with himself, he could not do him more acceptable Service than to invent some new sort of Punishment, and as he was an excel∣lent Statuary he made a brazen Bull so very arti∣ficially, that Phalaris cried out as soon as he saw it, that it was a Present fit for Apollo. But Perillus taking him up, said, If you did but know what I made it for, you would not talk at that rate. Shut up a Criminal within it; and put Fire un∣derneath, you shall hear the Bull bellow, which is the only Thing it wants to imitate Nature to Perfection.Upon which Words Phalaris who detested so abominable an Invention, caused him himself to be shut up in his Bull, to make a Trial thereof, and having again taken him out alive, that by his Death he might not pollute a Pre∣sent which he had a mind to consecrate to the Gods, he gave it to Apollo, and caused this Story to be graven upon it. Suidas represents Phalaris to us as a very cruel Prince, and will have it, that his Subjects shut him up and tormented him to Death in the same Bull, wherein he had inclo∣sed and put so many others to Death. PHALERUS, an ancient Gate of the City of Athens where Altars were erected to the unknown Gods, of whom St. Paul speaks, Go∣ing along, said that Apostle, and contempla∣ting your Devotions, I found an Altar on which
was this Inscription, To the unknown God; I therefore declare him unto you, whom you worship without knowing of him. The Inscripti∣on was not barely the same as St. Paul relates it; for it was, to the Gods of Asia, Europe and Affrica, strong and unknown Gods: But be∣cause the Apostle had nothing to do with many unknown Deities, and that no more than one unknown God was for his Purpose, he makes use of the singular Number. Meursius assures us, That the People of Athens being converted to the Christian Faith, consecrated the Temple, where this Altar had been erected, to the un∣known God. Its certain, that Pausanias, Philo∣stratus and Suidas make use of the Plural Num∣ber, when they speak of the Inscription upon this Altar, and Diogenes Laeertius attributes the Building of Altars without a Name to Epime∣nides: But 'tis to Spimenides that they commonly attribute the Erecting of the Altar of the unknown Gods. But yet it is true, that Lucian, Theophi∣lact, Isidorus Pelusiota, Occumenius and St. Chryso∣stom make use of the singular Number, when they speak of this Altar. PHAROS; it was a famous Tower in A∣lexandria, on the Top of which they lighted Fires in the Night to guide Ships that came near the Shoar: The Colossus of Rhodes served in∣stead of a Pharos. PHEGOR; is as much as Priapus in He∣brew, according to St. Hierom; from whence came the Word Beelphegor, which signifies the Idol of Priapus. PHILOCTETES; the Son of Pae, to whom Hercules at his Death upon Mount Octa, gave his Bow and Arrows, which were dipp'd in Hydra's Gall, after he had engaged him by Oath, to discover his Grave to no Body: But when they were to go to the Trojan War, and that the Oracle gave an Answer, the Town was impregnable, without they had the Ashes and Arrows of Hercules with them; he was forced to shew the Place where he had hid them; and that he might not violate his Oath, he pointed at them only with his Feet, for which he was severely punished: For being on his Journey, one of the said Arrows wounded him in the Foot, wherewith he had discovered Hercules his Ashes: His Wound stunk so, that it was not to be endu∣red, which made the Grecians leave him in the Isle of Lemnos; however finding that the Siege of Troy advanced but little, they caused him to be brought thither, and he was cured by Macaon the Son of Aesculapius. PHILOMELA; the Daughter of Pandi∣on, King of Athens, who was ravish'd by Tereus, King of Thrace, who had married her Sister Pregno. He cut out her Tongue, and shut her up in Prison, that he might enjoy her at his Pleasure: But she had the Ingenuity to let her Sister know her Misfortune, by drawing the same upon Tapistry: Progne deferred to take Revenge upon her Incestuous Husband, till the Festival of Bacchus, when with a Company of the Bacchantes, she went to set her Sister at Li∣berty, and laying hold of Itys, Tereus his Son, she drest his Flesh for him to eat; which he per∣ceiving, endeavoured to kill his Wife; but the Gods changed Tereus into a Lapwing, Progne to a Swallow, Philomela to a Nightingale, and Itys into a Pheasant. Ovid. Metam. Lib. 6. PHILOSOPIA. Philosophy. The Study of Nature and Morality, grounded upon Rea∣soning and Experience: Its said of the Ancient Philosophy, that it became impious under Dia∣goras, Vicious under Epicurus, Hipocritical un∣der Zeno, Impudent under Diogenes, Interested under Demochares, Voluptuous under Metrodo∣rus, Fantastical under Crates, Buffoonry under Menippus, Libertinism under Pyrrho, Litigious under Cleanthes, and Restless under Arcesilus: The Ancient Philosophers were of divers Sects, viz. Epicureans, Storcks, Platonicks, Peripareticks, Pyrrhonians, &c. Lucian in his Dialogue of Fu∣gitives brings in Philosophy, speaking to Jupiter in this manner; Father, see if I have not cause to complain, when you saw the World full of Error and Unjustice, you had Pitty upon it, and you lent me to bring Men to change their beastly Lives for a better, for if you do remem∣ber, you told me, My Daughter, thou seest what a Condition Men are brought to by their Ignorance and Malice, go to them, for thou art alone capable to undeceive and cure them. I did not go at first to Greece, but I began with the most difficult Work, which was that of the Barbarians; afterwards I went towards the Indians who are a great People, and whom I brought down from their Elephants Backs to hear me; the whole Nation of the Brachmanes, who are Neighbours to the Necreans and Oxy∣draci, received my Doctrine and live still ac∣cording to my Laws: From the Indians I went into Ethiopia, thence to Egypt where I taught the Egyptian Priests and Prophets the Worship of the Gods, afterwards I passed to Babilon to instruct the Caldeans and Magi, then to Scythiae; from whence returning by the Way of Thrace I conversed with Eumolpus and Orpheus, and sent them before me into Greece, with Orders that the first should instruct the Greeks in my My∣steries, and the other teach them Musick: I delay'd not to follow them and they received me there neither well nor ill: However in time I won over the Seven wise Men. PHINEUS, the Son of Agenor King of Ploenicia, who first married Harpalyce, the Sister of Calais and Zethes the Children of Boreas; but he was divorced from her and took to Wife Idea the Daughter of Dardanus King of Scythia, who falsly accused Phineus his Children by the first Venter for attempting to ravish her. Phinens
believed her, and put his Sons Eyes out, but the Gods revenged the Crime upon the Father himself, whom they also struck blind, and tor¦mented him cruelly with Hunger, for as of∣ten as he went to eat, the Harpies took away part of his Victuals, and defiled the rest. O∣thers say, that Phineus having lost his Sight, and his Sons being dead, the Harpies his Daughters wasted his Estate, till Zethes and Calais his Cousins, the Sons of Boreas drove those Women out of the City, and reinvested him in the Pos∣session of his Estate, which occasioned the Fable. PHLEGETHON, one of the Rivers of Hell according to fabulous Antiquity, being de∣rived from the Greek Word , I burn. PHLEGYAS, the Son of Mars and King of the Lapithae in Thessaly, who to be revenged of Apollo, that had debauched his Daughter, burnt the Temple of that God at Delphos: But he was punish'd for it; for Apollo killed him with his Arrows and thrust him headlong into Hell, where he is in continual Fear of the falling of a Rock which hangs over his Head. There was another of this Name who governed a certain People in Thessaly, that were drowned by Nep∣tune, as a Punishment for their Contempt of the Gods. Virg. Eneids L. 9. PHOBETOR; the Son of the God Sleep, who represented to the Imagination all sorts and species of Animals. PHOCI. Neptune's Sea-Calves, whose Keep∣er Protheus was. PHOEBAS; Apollo's Priestess at Delphos, that delivered Oracles, to such as consulted her, upon a Tripod. PHOEBE; the Moon which borrows its Light from Phoebus her Brother. PHOEBUS, the Sun or Apollo, the Son of Jupiter, and Diana's Brother, born at the same Time with Latona: He is the God of Parnassus and the Muses; being thus called by the Greeks from , that is, the Light of Life: He was also the God of Divination, some remains where∣of are still retained, in that upon Twelfth-Night, when they are about to chuse King and Queen, they cry in some Countries Phoebe Domine, Who shall be King? PHOENIX, a Bird taken by the Moderns to be fabulous, and concerning which the Anci∣ents have spoken much, they would have it, that there is but one of the Kind, and that it lives several Ages. They say 'tis as big as an Eagle, with a golden Neck, the Wings of a Fire Colour, intermix'd with Azure, a white Tail in∣terspersed with Carnation Feathers, and having a twinkling Star upon its Head. She erects her own Funeral-Pile of Wood and Aromatick Gums, claps it with her Wings, in order to set it on fire, and so burns her self: From its Ashes arises a Worm, and from this Worm another Phoenix. In the Consulship of Paulus Fabius, and Lucius Vitellius, the Phoenix after a long Series of Years, appear'd in Egypt, and gave ample Occasion to the fine Wits of Greece and Asia to Discourse up∣on this Wonder: I'll here recount what is re∣ceiv'd for Truth; but I shall also add such Things as are proper to be known, tho' they are not so well attested. Those who have described this Bird, set her out different from others, both in Form and Colour, and say she was consecrated to the Sun. As for the Length of her Life, the most common Opinion is, That she lives 500 Years, but some have stretched it out even to 14 Ages. They add, There is never but one of them at a time in the World, and that the first appear'd in the Reign of Sesostris, the second in that of Amasis, and third under Ptolomy, one of Alexander's Successors, and the third of the Ma∣cedonian Race, who reigned in Egypt: They say also, that she came to Heliopolis, or the City of the Sun, accompanied by a vast Multitude of o∣ther Birds, who admired the Strangeness of her Feathers: There was not 250 Years from Pto∣lomy to Tiberius; and therefore some believe, that this same was not the Phoenix of Arabia, nor the true one, since it had not the Marks attributed to the others; for 'tis said, that the Phoenix, when she is grown very old, and sees her End draw near, builds a Nest in her own Country, to which she communicates some se∣cret Principle of Life; insomuch that another Phoenix arises therefrom, whose first Care is to give unto its Parent the Honours of Burial: For which End she makes choice of a great Quantity of Perfumes, which she carries by little and little, because of their great distance from the Place, and then bears away the Deceased's Body, and goes to burn it upon the Altar of the Sun: This is uncertain, and intermixed with Fables, but for the rest, 'tis not doubted, but this Bird has been sometime seen in Egypt. PHORBAS; the Chief of the Phlegyae; a cruel Man, and a Robber, who having seized on an Avenue, by which they went over Land to the Temple of Apollo at Delphos, forced all Pas∣sengers to fight him, in order to exercise them, said he, that they might act their Part, the bet∣ter at the Pythian Games: And when he had overcome, he put them to a cruel Death, by tying them by their Heads to Trees; but Apollo to punish this wicked Fellow, encountring him, knocked him down with his Fist. PHORCUS and PHORCYS; a Son of Neptune and the Earth (according to Hesiod) King of Sardinia; who having been overcome in a Fight by Sea, the Poets said he was a Sea-God, and the Father of the Gorgones. PHOSPHORUS, the Planet of Venus; its a Greek Word, which the Latins turned into that of Lucifer, the Shepherds Star.
PHRIXUS, the Son of Athamas, who to avoid the Anger of Ino his cruel Mother-in-Law, that would have killed him, fled away with his Sister Helle upon a Ram, who had a Golden Fleece, and arrived at Colchos, where he offer∣ed the Ram in Sacrifice to Jupiter, or as some will have it, to Mars, who placed him among the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac: As for the Gol∣den Fleece, he left it to the King of the Coun∣try, who hung it up in a Temple, consecrated to Mars, under the Keeping of a Dragon. PICTURA; Painting: Its not to be doubt∣ed, but Painting is as ancient as Sculpture, but 'tis very hard to know the real Time and Place where it first appear'd; the Egyptians and the Greeks, who make themselves to be the Inven∣tors of the best Arts, have not failed to assume the Glory of their being the first Painters also: In the mean time, as 'tis very difficult to see clearly into a Matter that is obscured with the Revolution of so many Years, which conceal its Original, we ought to be content to know in respect to Painting; that after it had had like unto other Things, its faint Beginnings, it was brought to Perfection among the Greeks, and the principal Schools for this illustrious Art were at Sicyone, Rhodes, and Athens: From Greece it was brought into Italy, where it was in great Request in the Time of the Republick, and un∣der the first Emperors, till at last Luxury and Wars having ruined the Roman Empire, it lay quite buried as well as other Arts and Sciences, and began not to revive in Italy till Cimabue fell to work, and retrieved out of the Hands of some Greeks the deplorable Remains of it: Some Flo∣rentines having seconded him, were those who first appear'd and brought it into Reputation; however it was a long time before any one came to excel in it. Chirlandaio, Michael Angelo's Master, acqui∣red the greatest Reputation, tho' his Manner was very dry and Gothick; but Michael Angelo his Scholar coming up in the Reign of Julius the 2d, obscured all that went before, set up a School at Florence, and educated several. Pietro Perugino had also Raphaele d'Ʋrbino for his Scholar, who excelled his Master very much, and even Michael Angelo himself: He erected a School at Rome composed of the most excellent Painters. At the same time that in Lombardy was set up, and grew famous under Giorgione and Ti∣tian, whose first Master was Giov Belini: There were also other particular Schools in Italy under different Masters, as that of Leonardo da Vinci at Milan: But the first Three are reckoned the most Famous, from whence the rest sprung. Be∣sides these there were Painters on this side the Alps, who had no Correspondence with those in Italy, such as Albert Durer in Germany, Hol∣bens in Switzerland, Lucas Van Leiden in Hol∣land, and many others, who painted in France and Flanders, after different Manners: But Italy and Rome were the principal Places where this Art flourish'd in its greatest Perfection, and where excellent Artists were brought up from time to time: Raphael's School was succeeded by that of the Carachii, which has continued almost to this time in its Perfection. Before a Painter in Flanders called John Van-Eyck, but better known by the Name of John de Bruges, had found out the Secret of painting in Oil, all the Painters wrought in Fresco and Distemper or Water-Colours; and the Invention of Painting in Oil was not known to the An∣cients; the Secret not being found out till the Beginning of the 14th Century. We may say that Painting did then receive great Assistance, and an admirable Advantage: For hereby the Colours of a Picture hold a long time, and re∣ceive a Lustre and Union, which the Ancients could not give to their Works, what Varnish so∣ever they used to lay on for that Purpose: This Secret which lay hid so long, consists of nothing else but the grinding of the Colours with Nut or Linseed Oil. PICUS, King of the Latins, the Son of Sa∣turn, and Father to Faunus, who reigned 57 Years: He married Canens, the Daughter of Janus and Venilia, according to Ovid: But his Sentiments do not at all agree with Chronology herein; for Canens would have been above 500 Years old, if she had lived in the Time of Picus: The same Poet tells us, that Picus was be∣loved of Circe, and that not conforming himself to comply with her Love, she transformed him into a Bird of the same Name, which is a Wood-Pecker. PIERIDES; an Epithet given to the Muses, upon the Account of their having been born in that part of the Country of Macedon which was called Pieria. PIETAS; Piety, whom the Romans wor∣shipp'd for a Goddess. Antoninus Pius caused her to be represented in the Dress of a Roman La∣dy, holding a little Incense Box, named Acerra, in her Hand, and standing before an Altar where there was a Fire lighted, to offer Incense upon it. She may be also seen graven upon the Mo∣ney of the said Emperor, holding Two Children in her Arms, and with Two more, one on each side: We have also Piety represented divers ways, upon the Medals of Marcus Aurelius, Do∣mitian, and Sabina, Adrian's Wife. She appears in the Dress of a Roman Lady, in a sitting Po∣sture, holding a Javelin without any Spear to it in one Hand, and having little Children at her Feet, which she seems to instruct. As also under the Picture of Marcus Herennius, who carried his Father upon his Shoulders, and of Ae∣neas, who did the same by his Father, whom he pulled out of the Flames of Troy. By the Mo∣ney which Titus the Son of Vespatian coined, Piety
appears bringing the Two Brothers Titus and Domitian together, and making them give one another the Right-hand: She was also exprest holding Two Children in her Arms, with a Stork that carries her Parents about in their old Age, and feeds them, which is a Symbol of Piety. At Rome there was a Temple dedicated to Piety by Attilius, in the Place where that Daughter lived, who sustain'd her Father in Prison with the Milk of her Breasts. PILADES; take what Lucian has writ of him in his Praise of an House: After this comes an illustrious Example of Friendship, which seems to have been taken out of Sophocles and Euripides; Pilades and Orestes who were thought to be dead, hid themselves behind Agamen∣non's Palace, they secretly stole in, and killed Aegystus, for Clytemnestra was already dead, and laid out upon the Bed half naked: You may imagine how astonished the whole Court was at this Assassination, some wept, others cried a∣loud or seemed to do so, these same endeavour∣ed to make their Escape, the others resisted in vain; but the Painter has artfully passed o∣ver what was most criminal, and would not re∣present the Son killing his Mother, but drew him killing the Adulterer and his Father's Mur∣derer. PINARII, the Pinarians; they were Her∣cules his Priests and Sacrificers, who offered Sa∣crifice to that God Morning and Evening; but the Pinarians happening to come last and at the End of the Sacrifice, Hercules ordered they should serve the Potitii when they sacrificed, to him; and thence comes their Name, quasi , à fame. PINDUS, a Mountain in Thessaly consecra∣ted to Apollo and the Muses. PIRAEUS, a very fine Port at Athens, ca∣pable to contain 400 Ships, it was joyned to the City by a Wall 2000 Paces long, and by a great many Buildings that made it the finest Part of Athens; the Piraeus had been fortified divers Times, and they built Porticoes and Temples to the Gods there. PIRENE, a Fountain rising from the Foot of Mount Acrocorinthus consecrated to the Mu∣ses, whose Waters are very clear and exceed∣ing pleasant to the Taste. PIRITHOUS; the Son of Ixion King of the Lapithae a People of Thessaly, who entred into strict Ties of Friendship with Theseus. He se∣verely punished the Centaurs, who had injured the Lapithae at a Feast whereunto they had been invited on the Day of his Friend's Marriage with Hippodamia: He also assisted him to take a∣way Helen, and the other in his turn helped him to fetch Proserpina back from Pluto, but this Undertaking met with bad Success, for Pluto seized them: Some will have it, that Pirithous was devoured by the Dog Cerberus, others, that he was condemned to endure the same Punish∣ment as Ixion, and that Theseus by the means of Hercules set him free, when he went into Hell to bring away Cerberus according to Eury∣steus his Command. PISISTRATUS, Hippocrates his Son, who in the Absence of Solon seized upon the Govern∣ment of Athens, by the Favour of the People whom he won to his Interest by his Liberality to them. He made very good Laws which he ad∣ded to those of Solon; he was a very great Lover of Learning and learned Men, being the first who erected a Library at Athens, which Xerxes, when he took that City, carried into Peraia; he imployed Aristarchus to put Homer's Books in order, which were before all in Confusion. PISONES, the Piso's, an illustrious Fami∣ly of Rome, so called from Pease, which the first of that Family had taken the Pains to sow. PITHIA; Apollo's Priestess, who delivered the Responses of that Deity to those that consul∣ted him. PITHO; the Goddess of Eloquence or Perswasion, being derived from the Greek Word , to perswade. The Romans called her Swa∣dela or Swada. PLATO; a famous Philosopher and the Chief of the Academicks: He was called Aristo∣cles, and named Plato from his great Forehead and broad Shoulders: He was the most famous of all Socrates his Disciples, and ecclipsed the rest with the Splendor of his great Reputation; he was of a good Family in Athens, and greatly excelled all his Companions in the Vastness of his Understanding; however, not thinking that was enough to make him perfect in the Study of Philosophy, he resolved to travel and went to all Places where he thought he might improve in any thing, and so he learnt what was most rare and curious among the Egyptians, and from thence went into Italy where the Pythagoreans were in great Esteem; he heard the most Learn∣ed amongst them, and easily apprehended what was most valuable in their Doctrine. He divi∣ded his Philosophy into Three Parts, viz. Moral, which consisted principally in Action, Physicks, that related to Speculation, and Logick which served to distinguish Truth from Falshood. Of all the Philosophers his Doctrine comes nearest of any to Christianity: It will surprize you when you read that Plato had Sentiments of God so conformable to the Truth of our Religion, from whence some have thought that in his Travels to Egypt, he was a Hearer of the Prophet Jeremy, or that he had read the Books of the Prophets, And I my self, says St. Augustine, have follow∣ed this Opinion in some of my Works; but af∣terwards I came to understand by Cronology, that Plato was not born till about 100 Years after the Prophecies of Jeremy, and that the Greek Version of the Septuagint was not done
by Ptolomy King of Egypt's Order till near 60 Years after Plato's Death; insomuch that he could neither see Jeremy who was dead so long before, nor read the Scriptures which were not yet translated into the Greek Tongue, unless you will have it said that he took care to be in∣structed therein, as he did in the Egyptian Books not by getting them translated, but by con∣versing with the Jews viva voce. What fa∣vours this Conjecture is that the Book of Gene∣sis begins thus. In the Beginning God created Hea∣ven and Earth, but the Earth was without Form, and void, and Darkness was upon the Face of the Deep and the Spirit of God moved upon the Face of the Waters. And Plato in his Timeus where he speaks of the Creation of the World, says, That God did first join the Fire and Earth to∣gether: It's clear that by Fire he meant Hea∣ven. But what fully perswades me, continues the same St. Augustine, That Plato had some Knowledge of our Books, is that Moses asking the Angel the Name of him who commanded him to go and deliver the Hebrews, he recei∣ved this Answer, I am that I am, thou shalt tell the Children of Israel, I am hath sent me to you: But this is that which Plato firmly establishes in his Works, and I do not know it is to be found in any Book older than Plato, except the holy Scriptures. His Writings are almost all divided into Dialogues, in which he introduces his Master Socrates. He died of the Morbus Pe∣dicularis and was burried in the Academy of A∣thens where he had taught Philosophy. PLAUTUS, a Comick Poet, admired by all the Ancients for the Eloquence of his Stile, he bore the Name of M. Accius, with that of Plautus, because of his splay Feet, as Sextus Pom∣peius says. He was born in a little Town of Ʋm∣bria called Sarcinas: He was much in Esteem at Rome for the Stage, at the same time that Pub∣lius Scipio and Marcus Cato were in great Repu∣tation for their Politeness; his Comedies are full of Jests and witty Railleries, for which Ci∣cero commends him, and Varro assures us, that if the Muses would have spoke Latin, they had spoke like Plautus, and Aulus Gellius in his Noctes Atticae calls him the Father and Prince of the Latin Eloquence: He imitated the Greek Au∣thors in his Comedies, and amongst others Di∣philus, Epicharmus and Menander. Horace says, he made Money of his Comedies, and when he had got a good deal, he with that turn'd Mer∣chant, but proving unsuccessful that Way, he was necessitated to turn a Mill, and grind Corn to serve a Bakehouse: He died during the Consulship of Publius Claudius and Lucius Portius, while Cato was Censor, in the 119 Olympaid, and the Year of Rome 565. PLEIADES, they were the Seven Daugh∣ters of Atlas and the Nymph Pleione, who find∣ing themselves pursued by Orion that would have ravished them, they prayed to the Gods to pre¦serve them from his Insults, which they did by changing them into Stars, and placing them in Heaven: 'Tis a Constellation formed of Se∣ven Stars, which are near together towards the 18th Degree of Taurus. They are rainy and stormy Stars, and very frightful to Mariners; they call them in Latin Vergiliae, à vere, because they rise about the Vernal Equinox, and set in Autumn. PLEIONE, the Daughter of Oceanus and Tethys and Atlas his Wife, by whom he had Se∣ven Daughters called Pleiades. PLINIUS; Pliny the Elder, born at Vero∣na, was a Minister of State under the Emperor Vespatian, he had a very great Knowledge of natural Things, of which he wrote extraordi∣nary Books, but wherein divers Matters are to be met with that are false, which he had by hear∣say, and took from the Relation of others; he was suffocated by the Flames of Mount Vesuvi∣us, as he approached too near it to observe that Wonder. PLINY the Younger, his Nephew, wrote a Book of Epistles, a Treatise about illustrious Men, and a Panegyrick dedicated to Trajan. PLUTARCHUS, Plutarch of Cheronea flourished under the Emperor Trajan and gain'd great Reputation by his Books: The Lives of illustrious Men both among the Greeks and Ro∣mans, which he compares with one another, are the best of his Works and deserve Commenda∣tion above the rest. Tho' he is every where agreeably instructive and shews he had a gene∣ral Knowledge in all Things. PLUTUS; the God of Riches; Aristopha∣nes in a Comedy thus cailed, says, that this God having at first a good Eye-sight, stuck to no Bo∣dy but to the Just. But Jupiter taking his Sight from him, Riches afterwards fell indifferently to the Share of the Good and Bad: They formed a Design for the recovering of Plutus his Sight, but Penia, which is Poverty, opposed it, and made it appear that Poverty was the Mistress of Arts, Sciences and Vertues which would be in Danger of being lost if all Men were rich: They gave her no Credit, or seemed not to believe her, so that Plutus recovered his Sight in Aeseulapius his Temple, and from thence forward the Tem∣ples and Altars of other Gods, and those of Jupiter himself were abandoned, every Body sacrificing to no other than to God Plutus. Lu∣cian in Timon or Misanthropos brings Jupiter and Plutus talking together thus. Jup. I am amazed to find you angry, because you are left at Liberty, seeing you former∣ly complain'd of Usurers, who shut you up under Lock and Key, without letting you as much as see the Light, and made you endure a Thousand Torments. You said, that 'twas it which made you pale and disfigured and was the
Cause that you did endeavour to make your E∣scape. You also blamed the Covetous, who died for Love of you, and in the mean time durst not enjoy you, like the Dog in the Fable, who being tied to the Rock, could not himself eat Hay, and would not suffer the Horse to do it: You said, that they were jealous, and debarred themselves of all Recreations, without consider∣ing that what they loved would one Day be the Prey of a Thief or some unworthy Heir: Are not you ashamed thus to swerve from your old Maxims. Plutus. If you will hear me, you shall find I have Reason for what I do. For some let me go through Negligence, and others spare me through Stupidity, for want of knowing that if they used me not I should be of no Benefit to them, and that they will be forced to leave me, before they are advantaged by me. Jupit. They are sufficiently punished for their Fault, without your troubling of me to punish them, seeing the one like Tantalus die of Thirst in the midst of the Waters, and the other like Phineus see Harpies carrying away their Victuals, before they have tasted of it. Mercury. Let us go, why do you halt? Are you lame as well as blind? Plutus. I go always in this manner, when I am sent to any Body and there I come very late, and many times when there is nothing for me to do; but when the Business of my Return is in Agitation, I go as fast as the Wind, and they are much astonished that they cannot see me more. Mercury. That is not always true, for there are some People who grow rich while they sleep. Plutus. I do not go then upon my Feet, but I am carried; and 'tis not Jupiter that sends me, but Pluto who is also the God of Riches, as his Name imports; for he on a sudden makes great Riches to pass from one Person to ano∣ther, &c..... Mercury. That happens frequently, but when you go alone, how can you find the Way seeing you are blind? Plutus. I mistake also sometimes and often take one for another. Mercury. I believe it, but what do you do then? Plutus. I turn up and down, to the Right and Left, till I find some Body that seizes me by the Collar, and who goes to render you Thanks for his good Fortune, or some other God that shall never think of it. Mercury. Was not Jupiter therefore mistaken, when he thought you did enrich Men of Merit. Plutus. How could he think that one blind as I am, could find out a meritorious Person which is so rare a Thing? But as the Wicked are very numerous, I meet with them sooner than others. Mercury. Why is it that you run so fast in your Return, since you do not know the Way? Plutus. They said I never saw well but then, and that Fate gave me Legs for no other End than to flee away. Mercury. Tell me farther, why it is, since you are blind, pale, meager and lame, that you have so many Admirers who die for Love of you, and who place their Happiness in the Enjoyment of you. Plutus. 'Tis because Love hinders them to see my Deformity, and that they are blinded with the Lustre which does surround me. PLUTO, Sanchoniathon makes him to be Saturn and Rhea's Son: He adds that he was at first called Mouth, which in the Phoenician and Hebrew Tongue signified Death, that they made a Deity of him after his Death, and that the Phoenicians named him sometimes Death and some∣times Pluto, as Eusebius says, Nec multò post Sa∣turnus alterum ex Rhea filium, nomine Mouth, vitâ functum consecrat; quem Phoenices modò Mortem, modò Plutonem nominant. Diodorus Siculus seems to give a Reason why they gave the Name of Death to Pluto, and that was because he was the first that had instituted Funeral Solemnities for the Dead, Plutonem verò funerum & sepulturae ac parentationis ritus ostendisse ferunt. The Greeks made a Pluto of a King of the Molossi, whose Name was Aidoneus or Orcus, who was the Person that stole Proserpina, and whose Dog named Cerberus devoured Pirithous, and had done the same by Theseus, if Hercules had not come to his Relief. The Greeks called this God Pluto, because all manner of Riches are at length swallowed up by the Earth from whence they came. Lactantius says, that Pluto was not only called Orcus, but also Diespiter, being as much as to say Dis pater. And that they surnamed him Agesilaus, because all Laughter is banished out of Hell. PODIUM, Balisters which were set round about the Temples of the Ancients. POESIS, Poetry. Cicero confesses that Poetry is an heavenly Gift and the Influence of a Divine Spirit, that Mankind is satisfied of this Truth, and that 'tis agreed that the same is no other than a Divine Rapture which transports Man's Spirit and raises him above himself, but yet so as that we are not indeed obliged to give the Name of Poetry to such Pieces as are writ in Verse, but yet in reality are nothing but Prose, for want of this Divine Spirit: 'Tis the Opinion of Horace in his Satyrs. ...... Neque enim concludere versum Dixerim esse satis...... Ingenium eui sit, cui mens divinior, atque os Magna sonaturum, des nominis hujus honorem. Plato will have Poetry to be a Divine Gift and Inspiration, and that the Poets were not only
Historians and Philosophers, but Divines in An∣cient Times: St. Hierom informs us, that several of the Books of Scripture had been writ in Verse and tho' it were no other in it self than Prose, the Air, the Turn, the Fire and Majesty of Poetry that is to be met with there, may well allow us to say, that it was Poetry: 'Tis not on∣ly the Measures of Feet that make Poetry, but lively Expressions, bold and surprizing Figures, and rich Descriptions: Such sort of Poems there were among the Greeks and Romans, which are no other than short Prose, but had such a great and majestick Air of Poetry as was now men∣tioned. POETAE, Poets, they were formerly cour∣ted by and lived with great Princes, as their Di∣vines, Philosophers, Historians and Privy Coun∣sellers. Elian upon the Reputation of Plato de∣clares, that Hipparchus, Prince of the Athenians, sent a Gally to fetch Anacreon to him: Hiero of Syracuse, got Pindar and Simonides to live with him. Elian assures us, that Ptolomy Philopator, King of Egypt having built a Temple to Homer, he set him therein upon a Throne, and pictured all the Cities round about him that contended for his Nativity. Lastly, He says, that Galato represented Homer with a Stream running out of his Mouth, whither the rest of the Poets came to fetch Water. Plutarch informs us, that Alex∣ander had always Homer's Iliads at his Bed's Head, with his Dagger, saying, it was instru∣ctive to him in the Military Art. The Romans had a particular Esteem for the Poets, Scipio A∣fricanus had Ennius always with him: Cicero speaks of many great Roman Commanders who made use of Poets either to write their History, or with their Verses to adorn the Temples and other sacred Monuments which they dedicated to the Glory of the Gods. When the Govern∣ment of the Republick fell into the Hands of the Emperors, the famous Latin Poets were much more familiar with them than the Greek Poets had ever been with their Kings. And in what Favour Virgil and Horace were with Augustus is well known. There were Poets in the Land of Canaan be∣fore Moses, for Bochart has very well observed, that Moses in the Book of Numbers hath inserted a victorious Song of a Canaanitish Poet, after he had gained the Victory over the Moabites and Ammonites: There is no doubt but that there were Poets in the East, and that there the Spring-head was, from whence came all the Greek Poe∣try. The less civilized Nations of the West had also Poets, who very often had the Manage∣ment of their Philosophical and Theological Schools. Homer lived above 300 Years before Rome was built, and there were no Poets at Rome till 400 Years after the building thereof; so that Poetry began not to be cultivated in that City till 700 Years after Homer. Plutarch assures us, that in the most Ancient Times, Men never exprest great and divine Things any otherwise than in Poetry, making use even of Verse for their History and Philo∣sophy it self; for the Poets, for 6 or 700 Years before the Philosophers, were the Preser∣vers of all the Religion and Morality of the Hea∣thens. St. Augustine himself does not deny to the ancient Greek Poets the Title of Divines, and Lactantius is of Opinion, that whereas the Poets, as being more ancient than the ancientest Historians, Orators or Philosophers, writ so much Theological Truth, it has proceeded from their collecting together the Stories that went abroad in the World, which arose from an In∣tercourse with the Children of Israel, and their Prophets. POLLUX, the Son of Jupiter and Leda, and the Brother of Castor and Helen. Lucian ex∣plains the Story of Castor and Pollux in a Dia∣logue, between Apollo and Mercury. Apollo. Will not you teach me to know Castor from Pollux; for I am continually mistaken be∣cause of their Likeness to one another? Mercury. He who was Yesterday with us was Castor, and this is Pollux. Apol. How can one distinguish them, seeing they are so like? Merc. Pollux has his Face disfigured with the Blows he received in Wrestling, and especially from Bebrix, in the Expedition of the Argo∣nauts; the other is a handsome Fac'd Fellow, without ever a Scar. Apol. You have obliged me to let me know the Particulars of it; for seeing each of them has his half Shell, his white Horse, Dart and Star, I always mistake them; but tell me, why are not they both at the same time with us. Merc. It is, because it was decreed concerning Leda's Two Sons, that one should be mortal, and the other immortal, they divided the Good and the Evil between them like good Brothers, and so lived and died by turns, and their Business is to assist Mariners in a Storm. Men swore by Pollux in this manner. Aede-Pol, that is, per aedem Pollucis; and the Women by Castor, Ecaestor or Mecastor. The Romans more particularly profest to give them Honour, because of the Assistance they believed to have received from them, in the Battle they fought near the Lake of Regillus, against the Latins, and therefore they erected a very fine Temple for them. They performed a great many fa∣mous Actions, as their delivering their Sister Helen out of the Hands of Theseus, who had stole her, and clearing the Seas of Pyrates; they sa∣crificed pure white Lambs to them; they were translated to Heaven, and made one of the Signs of the Zodiac, which is represented by Two Boys. Its the Third from Aries, and in May the Sun en∣ters into it. Pollux and Helen were the Children
of Jupiter and Leda; Caestor was the Son of Leda, and her Husband Tindarus; it was pretended they proceeded from an Egg, because they were nursed in the uppermost Room in the House, which they called . Diodorus Siculus relates, that the Argonauts being overtaken with a great Storm, Orpheus made a Vow to the Samothracian Gods, there∣upon the Storm ceased, and Two Coelestial Fires appear'd upon the Heads of Castor and Pollux, who were of the Number of the Argonauts; from whence came the Custom of invoking the Samothracian Gods in a Storm, and giving those Two Coelestial Fires the Name of Castor and Pollux. Lucian in a Dialogue between Apollo and Mercury, observes, that these Two Brothers were also invoked in Storms, because they them∣selves had used the Seas; as being in the Com∣pany of the Argonauts. Cicero relates a won∣derful Piece of Revenge taken upon one Scopas, for speaking irreverently of those Two Brothers, called Dioscorides also, he having been crushed to pieces by the Fall of his Chamber, while Si∣monides who had made their Elogy, was called out by Two unknown Persons: The Greek and Roman Histories are full of the wonderful Appa∣ritions of these Two Brothers, either to gain a Victory, or to give News thereof, after the ob∣taining of it. But Cicero himself in another place tells us, how we are to entertain these Relations: He says, that Homer himself, who lived a little after these Two Brothers, affirmed, that they were buried at Lacedaemon, and conse∣quently that they could not come and acquaint Vatienus of the Gaining of the Victory; that they should rather have communicated the News to Cato, than to such an insignificant Fellow: lastly, That we should believe the Souls of such great Men to be Divine and Eternal Spirits, but that after their Bodies had been burnt and re∣duced to Ashes, they could neither ride on Horses, nor engage in Battle. POLYHYMNIA, or POLYMNIA; One of the Nine Muses, who presided over the Hymns and Songs that were play'd upon the Lute and Harp. Hesiod attributes the Art of Geometry to her, and Plutarch History. POLYNICES, the Son of Oedipus, King of Thebes, and Brother of Eteocles; Eteocles af∣ter the Death of Oedipus, deprived his Brother Polynices of the Kingdom of Thebes, tho' they had agreed to reign by turns; Polynices retired to Argos, married there the Daughter of King Arastus, and afterwards marched with a formi∣dable Army against Eteocles, to call him to an Account for what he did. Jocasta their Mother endeavoured in vain to reconcile them, so both sides made themselves ready to give Battle: The Prophet Tiresias declared, the Thebans would get the Victory, if they sacrificed Menoeceus the Son of Creon to Mars; Creon denied his Son, but Menoeceus offered himself, then the Battle began, wherein Eteocles and Polynices killed one another, and Jocasta finding them to be dead, also slew her self. POLYPHEMUS; one of the Cyclops, the Son of Neptune, and the Nymph Thoosa, accord∣ing to Homer. Lucian gives a Description of him in his Dialogues of Sea-Gods, where he in∣troduces Doris and Galatea speaking thus. Doris. They say, Galatea, that Polyphemus is in Love with you; you have a fine Lover of him. Galatea. Doris do not jear, as mean as you think him to be, he is Neptune's Son. Dor. What, tho' he were Jupiter's Son; he is as hairy as a Bear, and has but one Eye. Galat. Hair is a sign of Strength, and his Eye looks very graceful in the middle of his Fore∣head; so that he looks as well as if he had had two. Dor. It seems to me as if you were enamou∣red on him, and not he on you. Galat. Not in the least; but I cannot endure your, nor your Companions Jealousie; for while he was feeding his Flocks in the Shade upon Mount Aetna, as we were playing on the River side, he found me more beautiful than you, and that I suppose makes you ready to burst for Spight. Dor. You have Vanity enough to believe that any Body will be jealous of you; what is there in you worth taking notice of, but your clear Skin, from whence you have obtained the Name of Galatea: He took you to be handsome, be∣cause your Complexion is just like his Butter and Cheese. Galat. But for all that, I have got one of Nep∣tune's Sons to be my Lover: Besides, he is an excellent Musician. Dor. Galatea, pray never talk of his Musick, we heard him the other Day, when he drew near you to sing. Good God, a strange Musici∣an indeed! A pleasant Harp made of a Deer's Skull, whose Horns served for Pins to it! As great an Imitatrix as Eccho is, she was ashamed to answer him, for his Voice and Instrument never agreed; and this fine Spark to make him appear the better, carried in his Bosom, a little Bear like himself: I do not envy you upon the Account of this stinking one-eyed Cyclops, who devours his Guests. As Polyphemus one Evening was gathering his Flock together, he found Ʋlysses and his Com∣panions in a Grott, and taking them to be Rob∣bers, he closed up the Mouth of it with a Rock; but then discerning some of them by the glim∣mering of the Fire, which they concealed, he de∣voured them; hereupon Ʋlysses to avoid the like Usage, gave him some Wine, which he had no sooner drank, but he thought the Cave turn'd upside down; and Ʋlysses taking Advantage over
this his Giddiness, put out his Eye with a Fire-brand, and saved himself under the Belly of a Beast, as he was driving them to Pasture. POMONA; a Nymph of Latium, reckon∣ed to be the Goddess of Gardens and Fruits. POMPEIUS; Pompey, the Son of Strabo, whom Historians compare with Alexander; he was surnamed the Great, from his great Actions and excellent Endowments: He built a stand∣ing Theater at Rome; for before they erected none but as there was occasion for them: Dio accuses him of boundless Ambition, and Envy mixed with Vanity, since he envyed those Ho∣nours to Caesar, which he had acquired: He was defeated by Caesar in the Plains of Pharsalia, and fleeing into Egypt to King Ptolomy, he was assas∣sinated and killed in a Bark as he was going a∣shoar, his Head was sent to Caesar, who shed Tears at the sight thereof. PONDUS; Weights, wherewith liquid and dry Things are weighed. As the Weights of the Romans and Greeks agreed very much with their Money, you may see under the Word Mo∣neta, or under each particular Coin, what has been said concerning them. PONTES, Bridges. There were Eight of them in Rome: The Sublician Bridge, which was a Bridge of Wood: For the Word Sublicae signified Wooden Piles which were driven under the Water: It was the first that was built upon the Tiber; Ancus Martius made it of Pieces of Timber set together without Iron or Nails, it stood at the Foot of Mount Aventine, and join∣ed the Janiculum to the City: 'Twas that which Horatius Cocles defended against the Tuscan Ar∣my, but being ruined through length of Time, it was rebuilt of Stone by Emilius Lepidus, and called after his Name: The Emperor Tiberius rebuilt it in his Time, it being destroyed by the frequent Inundations of the Tiber: Happening afterwards to fall down again, Antoninus built it all of Marble, and 'twas called Pons Marmora∣tus; Malefactors, Vagabonds and the Argian Images were thrown off of this Bridge into the Water. 2. That called the Triumphal otherwise Vatican Bridge, that stood upon the Middle of the Tiber, over which those that triumphed pas∣sed, and is now ruined. 3. Tons Palatinus, which was near Mount Palatine, and otherwise named Senatorius. M. Fulvius made the Piles thereof, and L. Mummius finish'd the Arches during the Time of his Censorship. 4. Pons Fabricius, which was divided into two, when the Island of the Tiber was made, it being so called from him who built it, when he was chief Surveyor of the high Ways. It joined the Island to the City, and it is at this Day named Di qua∣tro capi, from the Four Marble Figures, each of which have Four Heads standing at the End of the Bridge in the Island, or the Jews Bridge, because they live near it: Others called it Pons Cestius or Equilinus, the Equiline Bridge. 5. Pons Janiculensis and Aurelius built of Marble by Antoninus Pius; and coming to be ruined, was rebuilt by Pope Sextus IV. and called after his Name di ponte Sixto. 6. Pons Elius, so called from the Emperor Elius Adrianus who built it, the same is called at this Day, Ponto S. Angelo 7. Pons Milvius, now Milvio, which Elius Scaurus built: It was upon this Bridge that Cicero seized the Ambassadors of the Allobroges, with Letters about them, whereby Catiline's Conspi∣racy was discovered, and it was near unto this Bridge that Constantine defeated the Emperor Maxentius. At Three Miles Distance from Rome stands Salaro Bridge under which runs the Teveron or Anio. PONTIFEX; Authors differ about the Etymology of this Word, some deriving it from posse facere, i. e. from the Authority which the Pontiffs had to sacrifice; others, as Varro, from Pons, because they built the Sublician Bridge that they might go and offer Sacrifice on the other Side of the Tiber. Pontifices à ponte arbi∣tror dictos; nam ab iis Sublicius est factus & re∣stitutus saepè, cùm ideò sacra & uls & cis Tiberim ritu fiant. Numa instituted Four Pontiffs of Patrician Families which continued to the Year 454. when in the Consulship of Apuleius Pansa and Valerius Corvus, they created Four more of Plebeian Race at the Importunity of the Tri∣bunes of the People, as Livy says. This Num∣ber of Eight lasted till the Dictatorship of Sylla, who added Seven more, and so the Colledge came to consist of 15 Pontiffs, but with this Di∣stinction that the first Eight were more honour∣able, and called Pontifices Majores, whereas the others took the Title of Pontifices Minores. There was a sovereign Pontiff called Pontifex Maximus instituted by Numa, who was the chief Person and sovereign Judge in Matters of Reli∣gion, and to whose Care the Direction of all Ce∣remonies both Publick and Private and all the Articles of their Faith was wholly committed; he prescribed the Ceremonies and particular Worship wherewith each God was to be honour∣ed, after the same by a Decree of the Senate had been received at Rome, and to him belonged the Composing of the Rituals or Books of Ceremo∣nies: It was he that approved of the Vestal Vir∣gins, and appointed them their Habits, that corrected, chastised and condemned them to be buried alive, when they violated their Vow of Chastity: All the Orders of Priests and Sacri∣ficers were under his Inspection. Anciently he took upon him to perform the Functions of an Augur, but C. Servilius, the great Pontiff, be∣ing one Day about to solemnize the Inaugurati∣on of Cornelius Dolabelia, a Storm fell suddenly and broke up the Assembly, and thereupon as an
Effect of their Superstition, it was ordered that the great Pontiff should not any more inter∣meddle with the Business of Inauguration, un∣less he were Augur and grand Pontiff both: He blest and consecrated the Images and Statues of the Gods, before they were set up in the Tem∣ples to be adored; he also blest the Resemblances of some of Jupiter's Thunder-bolts, in order to preserve them from Storms: Besides these things that related to Religion, it was his Business to digest the Annals or Histories that were kept for every Year, as Festus says, Annales maximi non magnitudine; sed quòd eos Pontisex Maximus con∣fecisset. The Choice of a chief Pontiff was at first in the Power of the other Pontiffs, who elected him out of their own Body; but Cn. Domitius Tri∣bune of the People deprived them of that Right, and transferred it to the People, because they would not confer this Dignity upon him in his Father's Place that was dead, and this Suetonius informs us in Nero's Life: Cn. Domitius in Tri∣bunatu Pontificibus offensior, quòd alium quàm se in patris sui locum cooptassent, jus sacerdotum subro∣gandorum à collegiis ad populum transtulit: There are some who believe with more Likelihood, that the chief Pontiff had been always created in an Assembly of the People held by the Tri∣bune: It being that which Cicero seems to say in the Agrarian Law. But if the People present∣ed, the Colledge of the Pontiffs had a Right to examine him, whether he were fitly qualified for that Dignity, viz. that he were of an un∣blameable Life, had never shed Blood, and skil∣led in both the Civil and Divine Law. His Consecration was performed with extra∣ordinary Ceremonies, they made him go down into a Pit made in the Earth, clad in his Ponti∣fical Habit, and laid a Wooden Trap-door that was full of Holes over him, whereon the Sacrifi∣cers killed a Bull, whose Blood dropping like Dew through the said Holes, wetted the Pontiff all over; he rubbed his Face, Eyes, Mouth, and even his Tongue therewith: That being done, they took up the Trap-door, and the Flamines lifted the grand Pontiff out thence, all besmeared with Blood, and in this State they saluted him with these Words, Salve, Pontifex Maxime, and con∣ducted him to his House where he treated them splendidly: This Prudentius tells us in the Mar∣tyrdom of St. Romanus towards the latter End. Summus Sacerdos nempè sub terram scrobe actâ in profundum consecrandus mergitur mirè infulatus: He was the Chief of all the Priests, and to him appertained the sovereign Jurisdiction of Reli∣gion, and Conferring of such Offices as did be∣long to the Worship of the Gods. He was car∣ried in a Chair which they called Sella Curulis, and his Door was adorned with Lawrel like the Emperor's Palace: They carried him in a Litter to the Capitol: He was not obliged to give any Body an Account of his Actions, and this was the Rea∣son that the Emperors themselves from Julius Caesar took the Office of chief Pontiff upon them, till Gratian, who of himself laid it down. The other Pontiffs looked after Matters of Religion in Conjunction with the chief Pontiff, and they consulted them as the Interpreters of the Gods and Divine Mysteries, in Marriages and Adopti∣ons; and Tacitus tells us, that Nero consulted the Pontiffs in order to know whether he might marry a Woman who was with Child, before she were delivered; Consulti per ludibrium Ponti∣fices an concepto ne dum edito partu ritè nuberet. POPAE; were such Persons as attended the Sacrifices, whose Business it was to provide Vi∣ctims, and to kill them after they had knocked them down: They were half naked, their Shoul∣ders, Arms, and upper Part of their Bodies be∣ing uncovered as far as their Navels, and the rest covered to the Mid-leg with a Linnen A∣pron, or the Skins of the Sacrifices, wearing a Crown upon their Heads which was usually made of Lawrel: Thus they were represented on Tra∣jan's Column: But in the mean time there are other ancient Figures which represent them with a Priest's Albe reaching down from their Arm∣pits and tucked up, to which their sacrificing Knife was fastned: This Apron was called Limus, because at the lower End of it, it had a Purple Welt which was sowed in such a manner as repre∣sented a Serpent. And this Servius tells us upon that Verse in the 12th Eneid of Virgil. Velati limo & verbenâ tempora vincti. Limus, says he, vestis est quâ ab umbilico usque ad pedes teguntur pudibunda Poparum: haec autem vestis in extremo sui purpuram limam id est flexuo∣sam habet: unde & nomen accepit, nam limum obli∣quum dicimus. POPLIFUGIUM; the Flight of the People, which happened according to some Au∣thors, when Romulus was killed as he was haran∣ging the People, and that an horrible Clap of Thunder made them fly up and down for Fear, or when after the Desolation of the City oc∣casioned by the Gauls, the Romans were put to Flight by the Tuscans, according to Macrobius Sa∣turn. L. 3. C. 2. PORRICERE; ('twas a Term used at ancient Sacrifices) which signified to throw the Entrails of the Victim into the Fire of the Sa∣crifice, after they had been inspected, in order to observe good or bad Omens from them. Inter caesa & porrecta; between the cutting of the Victim's Throat and inspecting his Entrails; the same being a Latin Proverb to denote any Accident which may happen when we are just finishing of a Thing, and hinders the Compleat∣ing of it.
PORTA; a Gate, Pliny says, that in his Time there were 37 Gates belonging to the Ci∣ty of Rome: There are still 9 of the ancient Gates in being besides that on the other Side of the Tiber and the Vatican. 1. The first and prin∣cipal was of Old called Flumentana or Flaminia, now del Populo, upon the Banks of the Tiber, to∣wards the Winter-west, according to Marlian's Description L. 1. C. 8. 2. Was called Collati∣na being on the Right-hand, leading towards the Hill of Gardens and through which they went to Collatia a City of the Sabines, and the great Road was called via Collatina. 3. Quirinalis, be∣cause through it they went to Mount Quirinal; it is now called porta Salara, because through it they bring Salt into the City. 4. Viminalis, be∣cause of Mount Viminal, the same being now cal∣led Momentane, or St. Angelo. 5. Esquilina, or Taurina and Tiburtina, because they went thro' it to go to Tibur. 6. Porta Coelimontana, thro' which they went to Mount Coelius. 7. Porta Latina or Ferentina, which lead to the Country of the Latins. 8. Capena and Fontinalis at the Foot of Mount Aventine, and near the Tiber, and there they had divers Fountains, which made Juvenal call it Madida Capena. By this Gate they entred into the great Road called via Appia; and 'twas through it that such as trium∣phed and the whole Cavalcade that attended them, entred, and so they called it also Triumpha∣lis. 9. Ostiensis and Trigemina, because of the Three Horatii who killed the Three Curatii, that entred at it. There were Three Gates in Trans-Tiberina, 1. Ripa, where the Barks that came from Ostia and the Sea landed, and the same was formerly called Portuensis and Navalis. 2. Stood on the Top of the Janiculum, and was formerly called Aurelia, being so named from the Road, which one Aurelius a Man of Consular Dignity paved: Through this Gate they went along by the Tus∣can Sea as far as Pisa. 3. Septimiana which stood at the Foot of the Janiculum, and was so called from Septimius Severus who built it. PORTICUS, a Portico or Gallery, joined to private or publick Buildings: The Magnifi∣cence and Beauty of their Portico's was some∣thing extraordinary among the Romans. They had private ones for the Conveniency of private Houses, and the publick ones served for an Or∣nament to their Theaters and publick Buildings. These Portico's were sometimes covered and sometimes open: The covered ones consisted of long Galleries supported usually by one or more Rows of Marble Pillars, and within side inrich∣ed with Statues, Painting, and other Orna∣ments, with stately and magnificent Arches. On the Sides were several. Windows shut with a precious Stone, (which was more transparent than our Glass.) In Winter time they opened them towards the South to let in the Sun, and in Summer on the North-side: These covered Portico's served for People to walk under, and to recreate themselves without being exposed to the Injuries of the Weather: They were called Stadiatae Portici. The open Portico's which were called Subdiales Ambulationes, served for Places to wrestle in: Of all the Portico's built at Rome, the most con∣siderable were those of Pompey, Augustus and Nero: Pompey built his before his Court, and it was the pleasantest Walk in all the City and the coolest in Summer, and this made the Poets by way of Excellency call it Pompeia umbra, as O∣via does, Tu modò Pompeiâ lentus spatiare sub umbrâ, Cum Sol Herculei terga Leonis adit. Augustus's served for an Ornament to his Palace and Library: The Pillars were of Numi∣dian Marble, and there were the Statues of Da∣naus his 50 Daughters, ranged in their proper Order. Nero adorned his Palace with Three Portico's each of 3000 Paces long, and for that Reason they were called Porticus milliariae. The Athenians were also very curious in Por∣tico's, and therein it was that their Philosophers kept their Schools: The most famous was that which they called Poecile, where they had a Brass Statue of Mercury and the finest Paintings that could be seen, and among the rest that which represented the Battle of Marathon: There it was Zeno kept his School, for which Reason he was called the Stoick, and those of his Sect Stoicks, from the Greek Word  that signifieth a Portico. The Ancients had also Subterranean Portico's built like arched Galleries, to cool themselves in in Summer time; they called them Subterraneae porticus, or crypto-porticus, PORTORIUM, Custom or Impost laid upon the Importation and Exportation of Goods. PORTUMNUS; a Sea-God called Meli∣certus and Palaemon by the Greeks, the Son of Ino who was looked upon as a Deity presiding over Ports, there were Games celebrated in Honour of him and certain Combats in Greece called Portumnales and Isthmian Games, because they were performed in the Isthmus of Corinth. POST-SCENIUM, the back Part of the Theater, whither the Actors retired and undrest themselves. POST-VORTA; a Goddess worshipped by the Romans, because she foresaw what was to come. POTITII, the Potitians, they were Her∣cules his Priests consecrated by Evander, who were present at the Sacrifice offered by Hercules after he had found his Oxen which the Thief Cacus had stole: He invited Two considerable Families to this Sacrifice, to wit, the Potitians
and Pinarians. This Priestly Office was after∣wards transferred into the Hands of the publick Slaves, which happened in the Year of Rome 441. when Appius Claudius having corrupted the Po∣titians with Money they lost this Office which had been appropriated to their Family by E∣vander. These Priests were clad with the Skins of Beasts. PRAECIAE and PRAECLAMITATO∣RES, Criers; being Officers that went along the Streets of Rome before the Flamen dialis, to cause all People to give over their Work on pub∣lick Holy-days, for if they saw any one at Work, the Service of the Gods could not be performed. PRAECO; the Publick Crier, he was an Officer whose Business it was in the Assemblies of the People to call the Classes and Centuries according to their Order, and to cause Silence to be kept in the Temples during the Time of Sacrificing. PRAEFECTUS PRAETORIO; he was the chief Commander of the Praetorian Bands, and may be called Collonel of the Guards. The Institution of this Office is attributed to Augustus who according to Dio established Two of them out of the Order of the Knights: Tiberius made but one, viz. Sejanus his Favou∣rite, who perswaded him to keep all the Com∣panies of the Guards together, (they being be∣fore dispersed up and down the City and in the neighbouring Parts) in a Place near unto the Walls, towards Porta Viminalis, which was cal∣led Castra Praetorianorum: His Pretence for it was, that the Soldiers being dispersed in that manner must necessarily be debauched; and if any sudden Accident happened, they would be now more in Readiness to give their Assistance. These Companies of the Guards made 10000 effective Men at first, and in time amounted to a compleat Army, which made them formidable to Rome. The Emperor Commodus made Three Praefecti praetorio, according to Lampridius, but afterwards other Emperors made but Two, and this lasted till Constantine's Time. These Pre¦fects at first were taken out of the Order of Knights only, and 'twas a fundamental Law that could not be dispenced with; whence it was that Mark Antony according to the Relation of Julius Capitolinus, exprest his Displeasure that he was not able to make Pertinax, who was his Succes∣sor, Praefectus praetorto, because he was a Senator. Doluit Marcus, quòd cùm Senator esset, Praefectus praetorio a se fierinon posset. The Emperor Com∣modus being afraid to confer this Office upon Paternus, dexterously disappointed him of it by conferring upon him the Honour of the Laticla∣vium and making him a Senator, as Causabon explains that Passage, Per Lati-clavi bonorem à praefecturae administratione snbmovit: Heliogabalus conferred this Charge upon his Juglers, ac∣cording to Lampridius, and Alexander Severus made use of Senators, which was never practised before, says the same Author in his Life, or at least very seldom; for except Titus the Son of Vespasian, who was a Senator and a Man of Con∣sular Dignity, that was constituted Praefectus praetorio under his Father, as Suetonius says, or Cremerus Aretinus, according to Tacitus, we do not find in History that any Senator enjoy'd it till this Emperor's Time. When the Emperor instituted this Officer, he made a short Speech concerning the Dignity of the Charge, and the Duties of the Person en∣trusted with it, then he presented him with a Sword and Belt, and sometimes put a naked Sword into his Hand, saying as Trajan did to Licinius Sura, Receive this Sword, and imploy it for my Service, if I govern well, but if o∣therwise, make use of it against me. This Dion Cassius informs us in Trajan's Life: This Officer was degraded by divesting him of the Sword and Belt, as Galba did by Tigillinus and Sabinus who were Praefecti praetorio, as we read in Philo∣stratus. These Officers commanded the Guards and all the Armies and administred Justice, the Emperors leaving to them the Management of all Affairs: They may be compared with the ancient Mayors of the Palace in France, who were the second Persons in the Kingdom, and to whose sole Management the Kings of the first Line left all Things; they thinking it enough to shew themselves once a Year to the People. But Constantine the Great did a little moderate the Power of the Praefectus praetorio, for to punish him that had declared himself in Favour of the Tyrant Maxentius and demolished the Cittadel at Rome which Sejanus had caused to be built; and having divided the Empire into Four Go∣vernments, he constituted Four General Go∣vernours or Praefecti praetorio over them, each bearing the Name of their particular Govern∣ment. These Governments were those of Gaul, Sclavonia called Illiricum, Italy and the East, so that there was a Praefectus praetorio Gallia∣rum, or a Praetorian Prefect of the Gauls, one of Italy, another of East Sclavonia, called Illiricum Orientale, who had his Residence at Thessalonica, and the Fourth of the East, that resided in Syria. These Two last had all the East under their Go∣vernment, which was divided into 60 Provinces; and the first Two all the West divided into 58. They had Lieutenants under them, whom they commanded in an absolute manner, and they were called Vicarii. When Constantine had established these Four Governours, he de∣prived them of the Command of the Army which originally did belong to them, and re∣quired every one of them to administer Justice within his Government with supream Po∣wer. There are other Authors who attri∣bute this Change to the Emperors Valenti∣nian,
Gratian, and Theodosius, but Zozimus does it to Constantine. They had a Tribunal where they administred Justice, and they passed Sentence by Word of Mouth and not in Writing as other subordinate Magistrates did, Non pronuntiabant ex tabellâ, sed verbo. They had the Priviledge of the Sword which they wore by their Sides, that is, to pass a final Sentence of Death without further Appeal. In the Place where they administred Justice there stood a Table covered over with Scarlet Tapistry and Gold Fringe round it, up∣on which there was a Book shut, on the Cover whereof was the Emperor's Picture, and on each Side Two gilded Candlesticks with lighted Wax-Candles; 'twas in this manner he administred Justice, that so a greater Solemnity might be added to the Majesty of the Roman Empire. This Book was that which the Emperors gave to these Governours, when he sent them into their Governments, and therein was contained the Duties of their Office. Lazius tells us that the Marks of the Praetorian Praefect's Digni∣ty, were the Priviledge of the Sword, the Rods, the Curule-Chair, the Scepter or Ivory-Staff, the Pretext-Robe, the Laticlavium and the Trabea; also the Insula or Mitre to wear on their Heads, and a Company of Archers for a Guard: When these Praefects went from Rome to their Governments, they left their Children with the Emperors as a Security of their Fidelity. PRAEFECTUS URBIS; The Prefect or Governour of the City; he was formerly one of the chief Magistrates of Rome, who governed it in the Absence of the Consuls and Emperors. His Business was to look after the Provision, Ci∣vil Government, Buildings and Navigation: His Power extended to a 1000 Stones Throw without Rome, according to Dion: He was the proper Judge in the Causes of Slaves, Patrons, and Freed-men: He convened the Senate, jud∣ged the Senators, and defended their Rights and Prerogatives, as Cassiodorus will have it: He was obliged on the first Day of the Year to go and make the Emperor a Present in the Name of all the People, of some Gold Cups, with Five Pieces of Money, as Symmachus says, Vobis solemnes pateras cum quinis solidis ut Numi∣nibus integritatis offerimus. PRAEFERICULUM, a Vase used at the Sacrifices of old, that had a prominent Mouth, like unto some Vessels now used. PRAEFICAE MULIERES: They were a sort of mourning Women, who at Funeral So∣lemnities praised the Deceased, made a Lamen∣tation, beat their Breasts, and ditorted their Faces to incite others to mourn. See Funus and Exequiae. PRAENOMEN; it was that which was put before the general Name, and signified as much as our proper Name which serves to di∣stinguish Brothers one from another, as Peter, John, James. This Praenomen was not brought in use till long after the Name; and therefore it was a Custom among the Romans to give to their Children the Name of the Family, on the the 9th Day after their Birth, if they were Boys, and on the 8th to Girls, according to Festus and Plutarch, and these Days they called Dies Lu∣strici, because it was a Ceremony whereby they acknowledged them for their lawful Children: Whereas the Praenomen was not given till they took upon them the Virile Robe, that is, a∣bout the Age of 17, as appears by the Epitome of the 10th Book attributed to Valerius Maxi∣mus: This also is manifest by Cicero's Epistles, where his Children are always called Ciceronis pueri till that Age, after which they were called Marcus filius, Quintus filius. And whereas Cicero in his last Epistle of L. 6. calls his Nephew Quin∣tum Ciceronem puerum; its very likely that he misapplies the Word puer, either to distinguish him from his Father, who was also called Quin∣tus, or perhaps, because it was but a very short time since he had taken the Virile Robe upon him. There was usually Care taken in confer∣ring this Praenomen, to give that of the Father to the Eldest Son, and that of the Grand-father and Ancestors to the Second, and so on. PRAEPOSITUS sacri cubiculi; this Name may be given with us to the Lord Chamber∣lain, who marched, at the Performance of any Ceremonies, after the Master of the Horse-Guards; as you have it in the last Law of the Code, and in the Law Penul. eodem, where his Charge is inserted, which was to keep himself in the Emperor's Chamber, and to take care of his Bed and Cloathing. See Panciroli, Notitia Imperii, & Bollanger, L. 3. C. 13. PRAETEXTA; a Robe so called, which was a long and white Vest, edged with a Purple Border, the Sons of Persons of Quality wore it at Rome till the Age of Fifteen; and their Daughters till they were married: The Magi∣strates, Augurs, Priests and Senators were it on solemn Days, as Authors inform us. PRAETEXTATI, were such Children as still wore the Robe called Praetexta. Praetextata verba, and Praetextatus sermo; they were lascivious and wanton Expressions used by Children, when a young Woman was married. Praetextata Comoedia; a Comedy, wherein Kings and Magistrates, who had a Right to wear the Robe edged with the Purple Border, were represented upon the Stage. Praetextatae actiones, were such Things as ap∣pertained to the Actions of Kings and Magi∣strates. PRAETOR; a great Magistrate in Rome, At first all the Magistrates were called Praetors: But afterwards the Generals of the Army, and even the Emperors themselves were called Prae∣tors.
Afterwards they constituted Praetors to ad∣minister Justice to the Citizens, and others to Strangers: And lastly, there were Praetors made for the Government of Provinces. His Power was very great, for the Praetor could alter Laws, repeal them, and make new ones; from whence you have in the Law mention made often of the Praetor's Edict. For the better understanding the Dignity of the Praetors, it will be proper fully to examine the Reason of their Name, Institution, Num∣ber, Dignity, and what their Power and Charge was. The Word Praetor was peculiarly applied to this new Magistrate, for before it belonged to the Consuls, and all Persons in Authority, whether in Civil or Sacred Things; hence it is that we read in some ancient Epitaphs, Praetor Sacrorum, Praetor Juventutis: Which is confirm'd by Asconius Pedianus; Non solùm veteres omnem Magistratum, cui pareret exercitus, Praetorem ap∣pellarunt: Sed quemcunque in re profanâ sive etiam sacrâ praefectum; The Ancients not only called those Praetors who commanded the Armies, but also such as had the Charge either of Sacred or Civil Things. The Occasion of creating this Magistrate, was a Multiplicity of Business upon the Consul's Hands (and this was Anno 388,) and the Necessity the Republick found it self un∣der of granting to the People a Consul of their own Order; for the Senate did not allow it but upon Condition that a new Magistrate should be created, that is, the Praetor, who was taken out of the Patrician Order: But in the Year 416, Q. Philo, a Plebeian, got himself advanced to the Office of Praetor, notwithstanding the Oppositi∣on made by the Consul Sulpicius against him. There was no more but one of them from the Year 388, till 510, according to Lipsius; but Bu∣siness coming to increase so much by reason of the great Number of Citizens and Strangers that came to live in Rome, and one being not enough, they thought it proper to constitute another, and their Business was distinct; for one admini∣stred Justice to the Citizens of Rome, and for that Reason was called Praetor urbanus; and the other took Cognizance of the Suits that happen∣ed between the Citizens and Strangers, and he was called Praetor peregrinus: The first was more honourable than the other, and so he was entit∣led, Praetor honoratus, and his Edicts named Jus honorarium, as the Lawyers say. But towards the Year 520, when Sicily and Sardinia were reduced into Provinces, they appointed Two new Praetors, whom they sent thither in the Qua∣lity of Governours and Judges; and this was likewise done, when the Spaniards were conquer∣ed, as Livy informs us, who says they made Six Praetors for that Year; sex Praetores eo anno pri∣mùm creati. Sylla also encreased the Number of them with two more, but the Triumvirs in∣creased them to 64, according to Dion: How∣ever, Augustus reduced them to 12, and Tibe∣rius being sollicited to increase the Number, re∣fused it, as Tacitus says, L. 1. Tiberius after∣wards named 12 Praetors, the Number established by Augustus, and as the Senate pressed him to in∣crease them, he swore he would not do it: However he increased them to 15, in the Year 786, ac∣cording to Dion: The Emperor Claudius enlar∣ged the Number to 18; but upon the Declensi∣on of the Empire, they were reduced to 3 only, as we may see by the Laws of the Emperors Va∣lentinian and Macrinus, set forth, L. 2. C. de Off. Praet. The Praetorship was the second Office for Dig∣nity in Rome, since 'twas conferred by the same Auspices as the Consulship, and that the Praetors were in History called Collegae Consulum, as Livy observes, L. 7. Decad 1. The exterior Ensigns of this Office were the Robe called Praetexta, the Curule Chair, and six Lictors. This Office was Annual, and he who discharged the same with Honour, and without any Disgrace, had a Right for all his Life-time to wear the Praetexta, and white Trabea, but such as were guilty of Male-Administration were forced to lay it down, as it happen'd to Bembius Pamphilus. All their Busi∣ness in general consisted in Three Things, viz. to administer Justice to Citizens and Strangers, to preside over Games, and to take Care of the Sacrifices: Justice was administred by these Three Words, Do, Dico, Addico; Do signified to receive and admit the Plaintiff to commence his Suit; Dico to summon, or give a Summons up∣on Oath, or deliver it to the Person in Possession, to dispatch Matters of Adoptions and Emancipa∣tions, and to make Edicts as a Supplement to the Civil Law; and Addico to adjudge, condemn, and pronounce Sentence: He was to oversee the Games, as Livy has it, L. 8. Decad 1. as also Martial and Juvenal: They took Care of the Sacrifices offered to the Goddess called Bona Dea, as Plutarch says in Caesar's Life, and Cicero, L. 1. Ep. 10. ad Articum. PRAETORES CEREALES, or FRU∣MENTARII; Praetors, whose Business it was to see that Rome was supplied with Corn; they were establish'd by Julius Caesar. PRAETORES AERARII; the Officers. of the Treasury or Exchequer. PRAETORIUM; the Place where the Praetor administred Justice; it was also his Pa∣lace, and sometimes his Pleasure-house: Besides which it signified the Tent or Pavillion of the General of the Army, where the Council of Warmet. PRAETORIANI; the Soldiers, who were the Emperor's Guards: Scipio Africanus was the first who established a Company of the Bravest of his Army, whom he chose for his Guards, and who did not forsake him in Battle.
PRAXITELES; a Native of Great Greece, and honoured with the Priviledge of a Roman Citizen, an excellent Statuary, whose Works were all Master-pieces: Among others there was Cupid's Statue, which the Thespians bought for 800 Golden Minae Atticae, and was brought to Rome by Julius Caesar: But the most Conside∣rable was the Statue of Venus, which half open∣ed her Lips, as if she smiled: The Industry of the Artist overcame the Stone it self; insomuch that the Hardness of the Marble exprest the most delicate Features of so beautiful a Body: There was a Mole upon the Goddess's Thigh, which was the more conspicuous, because the rest was of white Marble finely polished. Lucian in his Dialogue of the Lovers, does also discover unto us the Cause of this Mole: The Sacristan, he or she that officiated there, for they say, 'twas a Woman, told us somewhat that amazed us; she said that a young Man of Noble Birth, but one whose Infamy buried his Name in Oblivion, being prompted by some evil Genius, fell in Love with this Statue; wherefore he spent all his time in the Temple to contemplate her, having his Eyes always fixed upon her..... His Passion continuing; all the Temple Walls and Trees round resounded nothing but his Love: It extoll'd Praxiteles above Jupiter, and gave all that it had for an Offering to the God∣dess: It was believed at first that his Devoti∣on lead him thither, but he being at length transported with Madness, hid himself one Night in the Temple, and some Mark of the Violence of his Passion was discovered next Day, but he seen no more; and whether it were that he fell down over the Rocks, or into the Sea, is uncertain. PRIAMUS; the Son of Laomedon, he was with his Sister Hesione taken Prisoner by Her∣cules, and ransomed for Money; he ascended his Father's Throne, and reign'd over the Trojans, and all Asia: He married Hecuba, by whom he had several Children; and Paris amongst the rest, who going to Greece, under Pretence of demanding Hesione his Aunt's Liberty, took a∣way Helen from Menelaus, which caused the Gre∣cians to engage in that War against the Trojans, that lafted Ten Years: At last Troy was destroy'd, and Priamus killed by Pyrrbus the Son of Achilles, near unto the Altar of Jupiter Herceius. PRIAPUS; the Poets made him to be Venus and Bacchus's Son; he was not a Man, but the Representation of those Parts that serve for Generation, which Isis caused to be made and worshipped, when after the rest of Osiris his Body was found, which had been cut to pieces by his Enemies, there was none but this wanting, the Picture whereof he required should be adored: this Worship spread it self every∣where, and this infamous Figure was to be seen in most Temples; in Vineyards and Gardens over whom Priapus was said to preside. Diodo∣rus adds, that in order to the advancing the Credit of this Monster of Impurity, they made him to be the Son of Venus and Bacchus. Strabo speaks of a City in Troas that bore the Name of Priapus, because he was much honour∣ed there, and that it abounded with excellent Wines: But this Author says afterwards, that the Worship of Priapus was new, that Hesiod did not know him, but that he was very like un∣to the other petty Deities of the Athenians: But this Worship could be no where new except in Greece, if according to Diodorus Siculus, it prevailed in Egypt in the Days of Isis. Strabo observes, that even before this Priapus, the Greeks were not without some other the like Represen∣tations. Some have thought, that the Image and Worship of Priapus began to obtain in the World, after Sesostris, King of Egypt had sub∣dued a great Part thereof, and left all those im∣modest Pictures, as an Instance of their Lasci∣viousness and Victories, in all the Provinces: Venus prostituting herself to Bacchus, and being ready to lie in, she retired to Lampsacus, a City in Phrygia, where she was brought to Bed of Pria∣pus, who was born with a prodigious large Geni∣tal: Venus left him in that City, where after he grew up, he was so mightily beloved of the Women, that the Lampsacians banished him out of their City; but finding themselves taken with a strange Distemper in their privy Parts, and having consulted the Oracle thereupon, they recalled him, and set up his Statue in their Or∣chards and Gardens to frighten the birds away, they represented him like a Man stark naked with disheveled Hair, holding a Sickle in one Hand, and his Genital in the other: They sa∣crificed an Ass to him, because Priapus, accord∣ing to Ovid, going about to violate the Chastity of Vesta when asleep, Silenus's Ass bray'd, awaked her and prevented her being debauched by him. PRIMICERIUS CUBICULI; the first Groom or first Gentleman of the Bed-Chamber. PRIMICERIUS NOTARIORUM, Secretary of State; who kept a general Register of the whole Empire. Tacitus in the first Book of his Annals tells us, that the Emperor Au∣gustus had made a Journal of the Empire, where∣in was contained the umber of Roman Sol∣diers and Strangers that were in Service, that of the Armies, Kingdoms, Provinces, Imposts, Revenues, and at last a State of the Charge; the whole was writ by Augustus his own Hand: The Emperors at first left the keeping of this Journal to their Freed-men, which were called Procuratores ab Ephemeride, and afterwards Vir spectabilis Primicerius Notariorum, who had se∣veral Secretaries under him called Tribuni No∣tarii.
PRIMIPILUS, chief Captain or first Cen∣turion who had Charge of the Banner; Collo∣nel of the first Legion among the Romans. PRIMITIAE; the first Fruits of the Earth, which were offered to the Gods upon an Altar made like a Trivet. PROBUS, a Roman Emperor, that suc∣ceeded Tacitus; he was a Pesant's Son of Dal∣matia, but his Valour, Spirit and other excellent Endowments supplied all the Defects of his Birth, in so advantagious a manner, that it pro∣ved to be no Impediment to him. In Gaul he took Revenge upon 400000 Germans, whom he defeated, for the Cruelties they had exercised towards those that were faithful to the Empire, in divers Irruptions made by them: God gave him a famous Victory over the Sarmatians in Il∣lyricum, and over the Goths in Thrace: Bonosus and Proculus rebelled against him, one in the Provinces near the Rhine, and the other in that Part of Gaul which is about Lyons. But they both unhappily perished: It's indeed true, that the Inroads made by the Franks into all the Pro∣vinces of the Empire, allayed the Joy of his Victories: Death put a Stop to the Triumphs which Probus hoped to have won over the Per∣sians in the Fifth Year of his Reign, according to Vopiscus, and the Beginning of his Seventh ac∣cording to Eusebius, Orosus, Cassiodorus, Aurelius, Victor and Eutropius. He was killed by his own Soldiers, fearing he should subdue all the E∣nemies of the Empire, left they should become useless. PRO-CONSUL; a Magistrate who was sent to govern a Province with a consulary and extraordinary Power: He had all the Ensigns of a Consul's Power conferred upon him, as the Purple-Robe, the Curule-Chair, and the Ivory-Scepter, but he had no more than Six Lictors: His Equipage was provided at the Charge of the Publick, and the same was called Viaticum, which consisted in Pavillions, Charging-Horses, Mules, Clerks, Secretaries, &c. as Cicero in his Oration against Rullus explains it, Deinde ornat apparitoribus, scribis, librariis, praeconibus: prae∣terea mulis, tabernaculis, tentoriis, supellectili, sumptum haurit ex aerario. This Office lasted no longer than one Year, but the Person many Times exercised it till the Arrival of his Suc∣cessor, and there were but 30 Days allowed him for his Return to Rome. PROGNE; the Daughter of Pandion, King of Athens, who was married to Tereus, King of Thrace, by whom she had a Son named Itys. Te∣reus going one Day to Athens, she desired him to bring her Sister Philomela along with him, which he did, but he ravished her by the Way, and then cutting out her Tongue, he shut her up in a dark Prison, and pretended she died by an extraordinary Accident. Philomela having found out a Way to let her Sister know the Disa∣ster that had befallen her, by writing to her an Account of it upon a Piece of Linnen with her own Blood; she dissembled her Grief till the Feast of Bacchus, where making one of the Bac∣chantes she freed her Sister, and made Tereus eat his own Son Itys, who intending to revenge the same, the Fable says, the Gods transformed Progne into a Swallow, and Philomela into a Nightingale; as for Itys, he was changed into a Pheasant, and Tereus to a Lapwing. PROMETHEUS, the Son of Japetus and Clymene and Deucalion's Father; Lucian in a Dia∣logue, called Prometheus or Caucasus brings in Vulcan, Mercury, and Prometheus speaking in this manner. Merc. There is Caucasus to which we are to tie the Criminal: Let us seek out some Rock that has no snow upon it, that so we may drive the Nails the deeper, and he be exposed every way in order to make his Punishment the more exemplary. Vulc. I see it; but he must not be put so low, that the Men which he has made can come and unloose him, nor so high as not to be seen. It will do very well in my Mind, upon the side of this Mountain, above that Abysm, we will tie one of his Hands to yonder Rock, and the other to that over against it. Merc. You say well, for they are both steep and unaccessible. Prom. Come hither, that you may not be forced to it, and get up presently, that you may be tied. Prom. Have pitty upon an unfortunate Man, who is unjustly punished. Merc. Do not pretend to tell us what to do? Do you think that Caucasus is not big enough for us Three to be tied to it; Or are you glad to have Companions in your Misery, which is a Com∣fort to the Unfortunate? Here, take his Right Hand, Vulcan; tie it fast; and there is the Left, we will tie it also: 'Tis very well. The Vulture will come to tear your Bowels, as a Reward for your excellent Invention. Prom. O Earth which hast brought me forth! And thou Saturn and Japetus, must I suffer so much for nothing? Merc. For nothing, Wretch! Was it nothing to deceive Jupiter at a Feast, and to give him Bones covered with Fat, that you might re∣serve the best part for your self: Besides, who re∣quired you to make a Man, that subtile and wary Animal, and especially Women; and af∣terwards to steal Fire from Heaven, which be∣longed to the Gods: Nay, after all this, you come to plead your Innocence, and to say they do you much Wrong in punishing you? Prom. Have you the Courage, Mercury, to persecute me in this manner, and to revile me in respect to Things for which I have deserved well: I swear by the Gods, that I was brought up at the Charge of the Publick, in the Pryta∣neum. I was concerned to see Jupiter so vexed,
and out of Humour, because he had not the best part in the Feast; he was going to sacrifice, not a meer Man, but a God, and one of his old Com∣rades, who served him in time of need....Let us now speak of the Creation of Man; and if any will say, that he ought not to be made at all, or that he should have been made after another manner; I will examine both the one and the other, and as to the first say, that the Gods have been so far from losing any thing thereby, that they have been great gainers; and that 'tis more to their Advantage that there should be Men, than if there were none at all. To carry the Matter a little higher, you must know, that at first there were none but Gods in the World, and that the Earth was no more than a vast De∣sart covered with thick Woods: Wherefore, as I have been always studious of the publick Bene∣fit and Advantage, I mixed some Earth with Water, as the Poet says, and working them to∣gether, I made a Man like unto us by Minerva's Help. This is my Crime....And now let us speak about stealing the Fire; and first did not I steal it to give it to Men, and is it not the Na∣ture of that Element to communicate it self without being lost. The same Lucian in the following Dialogue, makes Prometheus speak to Jupiter in this man∣ner. Prom. Free me, Jupiter, for I cannot do it my self. Jupit. Villain, shall I set you at Liberty? Must I do it because you have made that Piece of Workmanship, which has occasioned so much Mischief, stole Fire from Heaven, and deceived your Master at a Feast? Prom. Have not I suffered enough, to have been tied so long to Caucasus, and to have mine Entrails fed upon by the Cruellest of all the Vultures. Jupit. That's not the Hundredth Part of what you have deserved; you ought to have been crushed to Pieces by Caucasus and not tied to it, and not only to have your Liver gnawed by 12 Vultures, but also your Eyes and Heart. So much for the Fable, now to the History. Diodorus Siculus says, that Prometheus go∣verned part of Egypt in the Reign of Osiris: The Nile overflowing, all the Country under Pro∣metheus his Government had been drowned, if Hercules had not stopt it's Irruptions by the Ditches which he made. The Nile was former∣ly named Oceanus; but this Inundation gave it the Name of Eagle; it was called Egypt in suc∣ceeding Times, and Nilus from the Two Kings who bore that Name. Prometheus his Trouble that the River called the Eagle had spoiled his Country, gave the Poets occasion to feign, that Prometheus his Heart was tore by an Eagle, till such time as Hercules came to free him from that Punishment. Ideo poetarum nonnulli Graecorum factum hoc detorsere ad fabulam, quòd Aquilam Pro∣methei jecur depascentem Hercules confixerit. The same Historian says elsewhere, that the Reason why the Poets feigned Prometheus stole Fire from Heaven and communicated the same to Men, was because he invented Instruments to make Fire with: Ignarii repertor est instrumenti, vide∣licet quo ad eliciendum ignem utimur. Jupiter to punish the Thief put him in Chains, but Her∣cules having made his Peace with Jupiter set him free. Lucian gives an Account of the most probable Way whereby Man was made by Prometheus, viz. that he was the first that made Statues of Earth with so much Art and Skill, which was attributed to Minerva, that those earthy Men seemed to have both Life and Motion: The Poets from hence feigned that Prometheus was the Maker of Men. Appian in his History of the Mithridatick War, relates, that Pompey when in Pontus, had the Curiosity to go and see Mount Caucasus, to which, it was said, Prometheus was tied. Arrian reports, that the Macedonians, who under Alexander conquered Asia, having entred into a Cave in the Country of Paropami∣sus, they were informed by the Inhabitants of the Neighbourhood, or invented it themselves, that 'twas the Place where Prometkeus had been chained, and where an Eagle tore his Heart, till Hercules, having shot the Eagle with his Ar∣rows, came and delivered him. This was a Story invented by Alexander's Flatterers, to transport Caucasus from Pontus to the Eastern Countries, that so they might say, Alexander had past over Caucasus. It may be said, that the Fable of Prometheus was transferred from Egypt into Pontus to Mount Caucasus, where they also feigned that a River called the Eagle over-flowing the Country, Prometheus was put in Chains by his Subjects, and at length set at Li∣berty by Hercules. As they will have Prometheus to have been the Person who brought the Worship of the 12 Gods into Greece, it's more probable he was an Egyptian by Descent, and that the History or Fable appertaining to him, was successively car∣ried into Scythia, Pontus and Greece. Fulgentius Placiades, who wrote Three Books of Mytholo∣gy, at the Time that the Vandals conquered and ravaged Africa, says that Prometheus, that is Providence, formed the Body of a Man of Earth, that going up to Heaven with Minerva, which is Wisdom, he from thence brought Fire to the Earth, i. e. the Souls of Men. Prometheus makes a Man, and a Vulture rend his Heart, be∣cause his Mind and Heart were continually en∣gaged in the Contemplation and Love of Wis∣dom: Lastly, Prometheus formed Pandora, which is the Soul, and bears the said Name because of her being enriched with all the Gifts of Heaven: Thus it is that Bishop explains the Fable of
Prometheus, but it is too remote from the Hi∣story. In the Protagoras of Plato, we have it related, that Prometheus having imploy'd all the Proper∣ties of Nature in the Formation of Animals, and having nothing more to make but Man, he took Knowledge from Minerva, Fire from Vulcan, and Mercury supplied him with Modesty and Justice. Simonides says, After God had made Animals, and created Man, and had nothing more to be∣stow upon Women, he borrowed the Qualities of each Animal for them: On some he conferred the Nature of a Swine, on others that of the Fox: To one he gave the Stupidity of an Ass, to another the Inclination of a Martern, or a Mare: Others he made like unto Monkeys, and on those, whom he was minded to favour, he bestowed the Nature of Bees. PRO-PRAETOR, a Roman Magistrate, who had all the Power of a Praetor conferred up∣on him, and all the Ensigns of Honour belong∣ing to the said Office. See Praetor. PROSCENIUM; was a raised Place on which the Actors play'd, like that which we call the Theater or Stage: This Proscenium consisted of Two Parts in the Theaters of the Greeks; one was the Proscenium particularly so called, where the Actors play'd: The other was the Logeion, where the Singers came to rehearse, and the Mimicks acted their Parts. The Prosce∣nium and Pulpitum were the same thing in the Theater of the Romans. PROSERPINA, was sometimes confound∣ed with Diana: Diodorus Siculus relates the Sto∣ry of her being stole away by Pluto, as a Thing attested not only by the Poets, but also by Hi∣storians: He alledges it was in Sicily, and near the City of Enna that Proserpina was carried a∣way, and that Ceres going to search for her lighted her Torches by the Fire of Mount Etna. Sachuniathon in the Theology of the Phoenicians informs us, that Proserpina was much earlier known in Phoenicia than in Greece or Sicily, he makes her to be Saturn's Daughter, and says, she died a Virgin and very young. From hence it's probable did arise the Fiction of the Greeks, that she was stole by Pluto: Saturnus liberos procreavit Proserpinam & Minervam, ac prior quidem virgo diem obiit. The History of Proserpina passed from Phoeni∣cia into Greece near 200 Years after Moses his Death, if we believe St. Cyril, Arch-bishop of Alexandria, who says, that Aedoneus or Orcus, King of the Molossians stole her: Centesimo, & nonagesimo quinto anno post Mosen ferunt fuisse Proserpinam virginem raptam ab Aedoneo, id est, Orco Rege Molossorum. Eusebius also says as much in his Chronicle: And so the Fable or History of Proserpina, like all the rest of the Fables, came from the East to the West, from Phoenicia to Greece, and from Greece into Sicily: Appian of Alexandria speaking of the River Strymon, and of those fine Countries in Macedon and Thrace that were watered by it, says, it was from thence Proserpina was stole as she was gathering Flo∣wers: Ʋbi raptam dicunt Proserpinam, dum flores legeret. Macrobius says, the Ancients called the upper Hemisphear of the Earth by the Name of Venus and the lower Hemisphere by that of Proserpina. As they are no more than different Appella∣tions, 'tis not necessary we should take the Trouble to find out the exact Rules of Genea∣logy herein. Rhea was the Mother of Ceres, and Ceres the Mother of Proserpina, and yet all the Three are no other than the Earth: So the Grandmother, Mother and Daughter are no∣thing but the same Earth. The Truths are real and natural, the Genealogies are Poetical and Figurative: Some consider the Earth in a different manner, and will have Rhea to be the whole Globe of the Earth, that Ceres is no more than the Surface which is sown and mown, and Proserpina no other than the Hemisphere of our Antipodes. 'Tis the Opinion of Vossius. But that Proserpina is the same as the Earth, we learn from the very Name thereof, for it comes from the Greek , and of Perse∣phone they made Proserpina: Hesychius says, that Persephone comes from , ferre utili∣tatem & fructum. Vossius very ingeniously de∣duces this Word from the Hebrew Peri, that signifies Fructus, and saphan tegere, because the Earth covers the Seeds sown in it. But as Pro∣serpina is taken for the lower Part of the Earth which is buried in Darkness, hence it is that they take her also for Hell, and the Queen of Hell, as Horace does. Quam penè furvae Regna Proserpinae, Et judicantem vidimus Aeacum. L. 2. Od. 13. 'Tis upon the same Account that Plutarch also takes her for the Earth, and Cicero says, that the Name of Pluto, i. e. Riches, was given her by the Greeks; because the Earth is the Trea∣sury of all the Riches of Nature all comes from and returns into it. The Romans imitated the Grecians by giving the Name of Dis, which signifies Rich to Pluto. They offered Dogs, and black and barren Victimes in Sacrifice to Pro∣serpina. PROTEUS, a Sea-God, the Son of Ocea∣nus and Tethys, who looked after Neptune's Flocks: He was an excellent Prophet; and those who had a mind to consult him about Future Events, must surprize and bind him; for he had the Artifice to assume divers Shapes, in order to a∣void giving an Answer to such as came to con∣sult him: Lucian pretends that Proteus was no other than an excellent Dancer, who made 1000
different Postures, and whose active Body and quick Intellects knew how to counterfeit and imi∣tate every thing so admirably well, that he feemed to be the very Thing, which he imita∣ted, which was, the Occasion of the Fable. Herodotus does not doubt but that Proteus was an Egyptian King and Deity: He says, 'twas he that received Paris and Helen with their Trea∣sures, and who kept Helen during the Seige of Troy, and restored her to Menelaus, when af∣ter the Destruction of that City the Greeks came to know that Helen had never been there. Dio∣dorus Siculus agrees with him as to the Reign of Proteus in Egypt during the Siege of Troy; but he says, that the Greek Fable concerning the Trans∣formations of Proteus, took its Origin from the different Habits which the said King affected to wear above other Kings of Egypt, he one while putting on a Lion's Skin, another while he drest himself like a Bull or Dragon, and carried Trees sometimes by way of Ornaments, sometimes Fire or Perfume, which made the Greeks say, they were so many different Shapes which he was metamorphosed into; and as this King was much addicted to Astrology, they feigned also that he foretold Things to come. Lucian in his Dialogue of the Sea-Gods, makes Proteus and Menelaus speak thus. Menel. I do not admire, Proteus, that a Sea-God as you are should transform your self into Water, or even into a Plant; but to become Fire, that I cannot understand; to be turned into a Lion, may be better allowed of. Prot. Menelaus, 'tis true. Men. I know it very well; for I am a Witness of it my self: But to be plain with you, I believe there is a Cheat in it, and that you are only a meer Juggler. Prot. What Cheat can there be in such things as are so manifest and certain? St. Augustine by the xample of Proteus his Fable shews, that the Poets ought not to be re∣jected by the Lovers of true Philosophy; for the Proteus of the Poets was an excellent Repre∣sentation of Truth, which escapes from us, and disguises her self after a thousand different ways, by being concealed under false Appearances, from which it cannot be separated, without great Difficulty: But at length, after these Obstructi∣ons, she discovers unto us her Beauty and Soli∣dity, that we may afterwards relish the Sweet∣ness of her. Orpheus called him the Principle of all Things, and the Ancientest of all the Gods, and says he keeps the Keys of Nature: The Ro∣mans named him Vertumnus, because of the Va∣riety of Shapes which he assumed: He was belo∣ved by the Goddess Pomona. PROTESILAUS; the Son of Iphiclus, and Laodamia's Husband, a Grecian Prince, who wa∣killed by Hector at the Siege of Troy, as he was coming out of his Ship. Lucian in his Dialogues of the Dead, makes Protesilaus, Pluto, and Pro∣serpina talk after this manner: Prot. Ah! Pluto, and you the Daughter of Ceres, do not reject the Prayers of a Lover. Pluto. Who are you that talk thus? Prot. The Chief of the Grecians that died at the Siege of Troy. Pluto. And what would you have? Prot. Leave to go upon Earth a little while. Pluto. They are the same Requests as all the Dead make, but not one obtains them. Prot. 'Tis not a Desire of Life that makes me speak, but the Passion I have to see my Mistress, whom I left in her Nuptial Chamber, and hasted away to go along with the Greeians; and was so unhappy as to be killed by Hector, as I was co∣ming ashoar: The Love which I have for that fair Creature gives me no rest, and I would de∣sire leave once more to spend a Moment with her. Pluto. Have not you drunk of the Waters of Lethe, as others have done? Prot. I have, but the Disease was too strong for the Remedy. Pluto. She will not be long before she comes, and so spare you the Pains of going to seek her. Prot. I have not Patience to tarry; Pluto, you know the Impatience of Lovers, for your self has formerly been in Love. Plut. What good will it do you to see her again for a Moment, and then lose her for e∣ver? Prot. Perhaps I may perswade her to come along with me, and so I shall thereby increase thine Empire with one Ghost more. Pluto. That's not just, Protesilaus, and 'tis ne∣ver granted. Prot. 'Tis because you do not recollect your self better; for you did restore his Euridice to Orpheus, and Alcesta to Hercules who was my Re∣lation. Pluto. Would you appear before her in this Condition, which will make her die for very fear? And do you think that she will mind you, or be able to know you? Proserpina. Let us do him this Favour, Pluto, and command Mercury to carry him up, and when he comes upon the Earth, to strike him with his Rod, that he may assume his former Shape, and become such an one as he was when he went out of her uptial Chamber. Pluto. Since Proserpina will have it, I give my Consent. Mercury, take him and conduct him thither; but let him remember that there is but one Day allowed him to tarry. They sacri∣ficed to him in Chersonesus, according to the Te∣stimony of Lucian himself, in his Dialogue of the Assembly of the Gods. PROVIDENTIA; Providence, which the Ancients made to be a Deity, as Cicero says,
Nat. Deor. They pictured her like a Roman Lady, holding a Scepter in one Hand, and with the o her seemed to point at a Globe that was at her Feet, intimating that she governed all the World like the good Mother of a Family. The Emperor Titus caused her to be graven with the Helm of a Ship, and a Globe in her Hands. Maxi∣mianus represented her by Two Ladies, holding Ears of Corn in their Hands, with this Inscripti∣on, Providentia Deorum, Quies Augustorum. A∣lexander Severus describes her under the Form of a Goddess, holding an Horn of Plenty, and having a Vessel full of Ears of Corn at her Feet. The Symbol of Providence was an Ant, holding Three Ear of Corn in her Mouth. PRYTANEUM; was a Place in Athens where the Magistrates administred Justice, and where those who had done some signal Services for the Commonwealth, were maintained at the Publick Charges. PSECADES; Chamber Maids, who per∣fomed their Mistresses Heads, with some Liquid Perfumes, which they poured Drop by Drop up∣on them: For the Word Psecas comes from the Greek Verb , which signifies, to drop. PSYCHE: The Amours of Cupid and Psyche are known to every Body: Apuleius and Fulgen∣tius give very pleasant Descriptions of them. We have a Picture wherein this Marriage is repre∣sented, and where Cupid walks on Psyche's Right Hand, with his Head vailed, his Face uncover∣ed, and in his Hand a Turtle-Dove, which was the usual Symbol of Conjugal Love; and Psyche, who was by his Side, is vailed from Head to Foot, this being the Custom among the Ancients, for People that went to be married, and especially for those of the Female Sex: These Two Lovers are fastned together with a strong Chain, to in timate there is no stronger nor more durable Union than that of Marriage; one of them hold, the Chain in one Hand, and a Torch in the other. Petronius gives the like Account of the Nuptial Solemnities of these Lovers: They had already, said he, vailed young Psyche's Head; the Con∣ductor already went before her with a Torch, and a Company of Women elevated with the Power of Wine, gave a Hundred joyful Accla∣mations, and made the Bed of the new married Couple ready. Psyche has the Wings of a Butterflye fixed to her Shoulders, as all the ancient Monuments thereof shew: The Reason that may be given for this Fiction is, because the Ancients repre∣sented Nature, and the Properties of the Soul, under the Emblem of Psyche; for the Word in Greek signifies the Soul, of which the Butterflye is also a Symbol, because they looked upon the Soul to be like a Breath, which the Lightness of this little flying Insect very well expresses. We see in Hesychius that Psych: in Greek signifies as much as a Spirit, and a little flying Insect, such as the Butterfly is. Fulgentius, Bishop of Carthage, giving a Moral Explication of this Fable, says, that those Two Sisters represented the Flesh and Free∣will, that Psyche who was the youngest, signified the Soul, because it comes not thither before the Body is formed; that Concupiscence figured out by Cupid, joins it self to the Soul, in order to cor∣rupt it, and hinders it to make use of her Eyes, which are the Sences and Liberty, in order to know God, of whom she is so much beloved: But being at length illuminated by their Coun∣cels, she discovers a Flame, which was before hid in her Heart, and becomes capable of a Hundred Evils, like the Oil of the Lamp that discovers the Mystery of Love, and caused Psyche so much Trouble. PUGILATUS; an Exercise in use amongst the ancient Greeks and Romans, that consisted in boxing. PUGILES; they were those that fought with Hands and Heels, and endeavoured to throw one another down, and to tumble in the Dirt. PULPITUM; a Pulpit, Theater, Stage: It was a Place erected on which the Actors acted their Plays, and where Victory was represented: It was that part which we in English call the Stage, wherein we do not comprehend the Pit nor the Galleries, which are properly what the Ancients called the Theater. PULVINARIA; they were Cushions upon which the Statues of the Gods were laid in the Temples, at the Time that they gave Thanks for some signal Victory; whence came that Latin Expression, Ad omnia pulvinaria supplieare, to make general Processions to all the Temples of the Gods, where their Statues were taken down and laid upon Cushions. PUTEAL LIBONIS: Acron takes it to be a Bank that was near unto the Statue of Janus with Three Heads; Porphyry for a Bar, Tribunal, or Court of Judicature; others for a Cover, wherewith they covered Wells or Wa∣ter-Pits. Vigenere thinks it to be the Brink of a Well: 'Twas a Place much frequented by the Merchants of Rome. PUTICULI, or PUTICULAE; they were Ditches, or Holes in the Earth made like Wells, between Mount Esquiline, the Walls of the City, and the Street which lead to the Gate called Querquetulana, where the Poor were buried; and which infected all the Neighbour∣ing part of the City: For the removing thereof Augustus gave this Place to Macenas, who built a stately House, and made very fine Gardens there, as Horace informs us:
Huc priùs angustis eject a cadavera cellis Conservus vili portanda locabat in arcâ: Hoc miserae plebi stabat commune sepulchrum. Nunc licet Esquiliis babitare salubribus, atque Aggere in aprico spatiari, quo modò tristes Albis informem spectabant ossibus agrum. PYGMEI; Pigmies; they were a People that dwelt in the Mountains of the East-Indies, according to Pliny; and according to Strabo, in the utmost Parts of Affrica; the People of that Country were not above a Cubit high; and hence they gave them the Name of Pigmies: They did not live above Eight Years, and the Women were fit for Copulation at Five. As soon as their Children are born, they hid them in Caves, for fear of the Cranes, who swallow'd them down whole like small Turnips: They are very temperate, and 'tis a great deal for one of them to eat the Leg of a Lark; for usually they roast no more than two or three Bits at a time, or a little more as their Family is larger or smal∣ler: Their Spits are made of the Prickles of an Hedge-hog; but the largest sort on which they roast their Larks, are the Darts or Quills of a Porcupine: They drink out of small Cups made of Cherry-stones; and their Drink consists of two or three Drops of Rose-water; which they gather in the Spring, and keep the Liquor in Ostridge Egg-shells, which serves them instead of other Vessels: Their Plates are made of Crab-shells, the finest of which are those which are most gilt; and their Dishes consist of small Acorn-Cups. Its from this Country the Dwarf-Trees come; for all their Forests are but Bushes, which Nature has made on purpose, that they may not break their Necks in climbing up. They have also Vines growing there, which they love, because they believe they creep upon the Ground only, in Consideration of their Weak∣ness: They are well proportioned, considering their low Stature; and laugh at us upon ac∣count of the Danger we run when we fall: They are at an irreconcilable War with the Cranes, who with a Stroak of their Bills pierce to their very Brains; but they break their Legs, which are very small, and get under them in the Conffict. PYLADES. See Pilades. PYLAEMENES, whom Homer the Prince of the Greek Poets, makes mention of in the Second Book of his Iliads, was in the famous Trojan War the General of the Paphlagonians. . The brave Pylamenes was General of the Paph∣lagonians. He speaks of him also in the 5th Book, and says he was killed by Menelaus with his Pike. Livy and Strabo upon Homer's Authority, make him to be descended from the Heneti, a People of Paphlagonia, and say that he died under the Walls of Troy. Diclys Cretensis makes him King of Paphlagonia, the Son of Melius, and related to Priamus, boasting that he was of Agenor's Race, whose Daughter Amalixo, was married to Dardanus, from whom the Trojan Kings were descended. He adds, that this Pylaemenes was killed with a Dart by Achilles, in a Battle that was fought during the Siege of that City. This afterwards became a common Name to the Kings of Paphlagonia, since the first Pylaemenes, as that of Pcolomy obtained among the Egyptian Kings, of Arsaces among the Parthians, and of Caesar and Augustus among the Romans. Its not to be doubted, but there were several Kings of the Name of Pylaemenes in Paphlagonia, before the Coming of the Romans into Asia; but their famous Actions having not been celebrated by any Historians that have been preserved to our Time, we find no mention of any of them before the War of the Romans against Aristonicus, the Brother of Attalus, under the Conduct of the Consul Licinius Crassus, of whom Orosus speaks; and in this War Pylaemenes, who then reigned, assisting the Romans against Aristonicus, was dis∣possest of his Kingdom by Mithridates and Ni∣comedes. Authors do not well agree concerning the Re∣establishing of Pylaemenes upon his Throne, and the End of the Kingdom of Paphlagonia. Paulus and Rufus say the Kingdom was given him after Mithridates had been conquered and expelled; and that after his Death it was reduced into a Province: Strabo, an Author worthy of Credit, and that lived near that time, relates, that De∣jotarus, a Son of one Castor Philadelphus, was the last King of Paphlagonia; and it appears by one of Cicero's Orations, that this Castor was a Grandson of one Dejotarus, whose Cause he pleaded against the unjust Usurpations of Castor, who had dispossest his Grandfather Dejotarus of the Tretrarchy of Gatatia. Justin seems to dif∣fer from all these Authors; for he says, that Ni∣comedes and Mithridates setting forth their Pre∣tensions to Capadocia before the Senate, and the Senate discerning the Artifice of those Kings, who under false Pretences had seized upon King∣doms that of Right did not belong to them, took away Capadocia from Mithridates, and Paph∣lagonia from Nicomedes; from whence forwards Paphlagonia had no Kings: And this Strabo says also. PYRACMON; one of Vulcan's Smiths, who is always at the Anvil to forge the Iron; and this his Name does imply; for  in Greek signifies Fire, and  an Anvil.
PYRAMIS; is an heap of Square Stones, always rising up in a taper manner, like a Flame; whence comes the Name, for  in Greek sig∣nifies Fire: There are some Pyramids of a vast height; and Pliny speaks of one, for the Build∣ing of which 32000 Men were imploy'd for Twenty Years: He says it took up Eight Acres of Ground. This Author informs us, that the Kings of Egypt, who put themselves to such great Expence, did it for no other End than to keep the People from Idleness, and thereby to pre∣vent the Insurrections that otherwise might have happened. See Obeliscus. PYRAMUS; a Babylonian, who was pas∣sionately in Love with Thysbe; these Two Lo∣vers having appointed a Meeting under a Mul∣berry-Tree, Thysbe came thither first, and was set upon by a Lion, from whom she made her Escape; but happening to let her Vail drop, the Beast tore and bloodied it; Pyramus coming and finding the Vail of his Mistress bloody, thought she had been devoured, and so in despair killed himself: Thysbe returning and finding her Lover dead, fell also upon the same Sword. Ovid. L. 4. Metam. describes their Love, and says, that their Death made the Mulberries change Colour, and turn Red from White, which Colour they bore before. PYRRHICHA; a kind of Dance inven∣ted by Pyrrhus, which was performed with Arms, wherewith they struck certain Shields by the Cadency and Sound of Musical Instru∣ments. PYTHAGORAS; a Philosopher, who intermixed some Tables, Allegories, or Enigma∣tical Expressions with his Works; wherein he imitated Numa Pompilius, the Second King of Rome. He was, indeed, both a King and Phi∣losopher, and was so very much addicted to the Doctrine which Pythagoras published to the World, that many who were gosly ignorant of the Series of Time, took him for one of Pythago∣ras his Disciples: but Dionysius of Hallicarnassus has refuted this Error, and shewed that Numa lived Four Generations before Pythagoras, having reigned in the 16th Olympiad, whereas Pythago∣ras did not teach in Italy till after the iftieth: In order to let you know the Doctrine and Life of Pythagoras, I'll give you what Lucian says up∣on this Occasion, in his Dialogue of the Sects or Sale Philosophers. Jupiter. Let these Seats be put in order, and clean every lace, as long as there is an Obli∣gation to make Things ready for the Sects, that so they may come and shew themselves. Mercury. See, here are Buyers enough, we must not let them cool: With whom shall we begin? Jupit. With the Italian Sect: Let that vene∣rable Old Man with long Hairscome down. Merc. Ho Pythagoras, come down, and walk round about the Place, that you may shew your self to the People. Jupit. Make Proclamation. Merc. Here is a Coelestial and Divine Life; who will buy it? Who has a mind to be more than a Man? Who is he that would know the Harmony of the Universe, and rise again after his Death. Merchant. Here are great Promises, indeed, and the Person looks with a good Aspect; but what does he chiefly know? Merc. Arithmetick, Astronomy, Geometry, Musick, Magick, and the Knowledge of Prodi∣gies; you have an accomplish'd Prophet here. Merchant. May one ask him a Question? Merc. Why not? Merchant. Where were you born? Pythagoras. At Samos. Merchant. Where did you study? Pythag. In Egypt, amongst the Wise Men of that Country. Merchant. If I become a Chapman, what will you teach me? Pythag. I'll teach you nothing, but I'll cause you to call to mind again what you did formerly know. Merchant. How is that? Pythag. By purifying your Soul, and cleansing it from all its Dregs. Merchant. Suppose it be already purified; how will you instruct me? Pythag. By Silence: You shall continue Five Years without speaking. Merchant. Go and teach Craesus his Son; I'll continue to be a Man, and not become a Statue: But yet, what will you perform after so long Si∣lence? Pythag. I'll teach you Geometry and Mu∣sick. Merchant. Its very pleasant, indeed, a Man must be a Fidler before he is a Philosopher: And what will you teach me after that? Pythag. Arithmetick. Merchant. I understand that already. Pythag. How do you reckon? Merchant. One, Two, Three, Four. Pythag. You are mistaken; for what you take to be 4 is 10, (that is 1, 2, 3, 4, make 10.) A perfect Triangle; and the Number we swear by. Merchant. By the Great God Four! I never heard any Thing so strange, and so divine as this. Pythag. After this, you shall know that there are Four Elements, Earth, Water, Air, and Fire; and know also their Form, Qualities and Motion. Merchant. How! Have the Air and Fire any Form? Pythag. Yes, and visible enough; for, if they had no Form they could not move: Then you
shall know that God is Number and Har∣mony. Merchant. You tell us strange Things. Pythag. Again, you are another Thing than you appear to be; and there are several Men in you. Merchant. What say you, that I am not the same Person that speaks to you? Pythag. You are the same now, but you have been another formerly, and will pass again into other Persons by a perpetual Revolution. Merchant. I shall then at this rate be immor∣tal: But enough of these Things: What do you live upon? Pythag. I eat nothing that has Life in it, but every thing else, except Beans. Merchant. Why will not you eat Beans? Pythag. Because they have something that is divine in them: 1st, They resemble the Privy Parts; which you may easily observe, if you will take a green one, and pull of the Cod: Besides, if they be boiled and exposed to the Moon for some Nights, they turn to Blood; but what is most remarkable, is, that they make use of them at Athens, to chuse their Magistrates by. PYTHICI; the Pythian Games in Greece, instituted in Honour of Apollo, because he killed the Serpent Python with his Arrows: The Con∣querors were crowned with Fruits consecrated to Apollo. PYTHIUS; an Epithet given to Apollo, upon the Account of his killing the Serpent Py∣thon: His Priestesses were also called Pythiae. PYTHON; an horrible Serpent, that sprung from the Impurities of the Earth after the Deluge, and which Apollo shot to Death with his Arrows. Q. Q Is a Consonant, and the 16th Letter of the Alphabet, which is pronounced like K and C before A, O, Ʋ, and has this peculiar to it, that 'tis always followed by an Ʋ. There is so great a Likeness between the C and Q, that many Gramarians have been inclined to reject the Q as a superfluous Letter, pretending that the C and Ʋ would serve to express what we mean by the Q: And so we see the Greeks have rejected this Letter, which is only taken from the Koph or Koppa of the Syrians, and that in the French it has another Force than the K a∣lone would have, and that which the C it self has before A, O, Ʋ: Ramus also asserts that in the University of Paris, they always pronoun∣ced it in Latin in the same manner as they do now in France, till the Royal Professors were e∣stablished by Francis I. insomuch that they used qalis, qantus and qis. And it is observable that every Body at first opposed the other Pronoun∣ciation, which was then introduced by the Royal Professors as a new Thing, that would by no means be received, tho' afterwards it always obtained. However the Q still retains the same Sound as the K or C before O and Ʋ, as in quum, which is the same as Cum, and this made Cicero, as Quintillian has it, to make Sport with a Cook's Son who sued for a great Imployment, tell him by way of Raillery, Ego quoque tibi jure favebo, because they could not distinguish in point of Pronunciation, whether he meant the Particle quoque or the Vocative coque, from co∣quus a Cook. Some without just Reason have been inclined to reject the Q; as Varro was, according to the Relation of Censorinus, and Licinius Calvus ac∣cording to that of Victorinus, who would never make use thereof; for it's always of Use, since it serves to joyn the Two following Vowels in∣to one Syllable, whereas the C imports that they are divided; and this is that which makes the Difference between the Nominative qui, and the Dative cui; the Infinitive sequi, and the Preterperfect Tence secui from seco. And this is again testified by Priscian and Terentianus Meu∣rus whom some place in the Fifth Century, but he could not be higher than the Middle of the Fourth, since St. Augustine cites him as being already dead in those Books which were writ be∣fore 390. And this Difference between the C and Q, is so true, that you may see the Anci∣ent Poets put the C in the Place where we put a Q, when they were minded to divide the Words into more Syllables than they really were. Lucretius has used cuiret with Three Syllables, for quiret; and so he makes also acua Three Syl∣lables, being put for aqua. Again Plautus in his Cistell. Act. 2. Sc. 1. uses it in relicuiis. Quod dedi datum non vellem, quod relicuüm non dabo. For if the Trochaick Verse be not read in this manner it will not have it's due Number of Feet. As the Q was put in the Place of C and Ʋ, so there have been some Grammarians who would have it to pass for a dou Letter, and a∣mongst the rest Capella, Diemedes and Longus. Their Reason for it being this, that the Ancients wrote qi, qae, qid without an Ʋ, as you may still find Examples hereof in some old inscriptiens: From whence it follows, that the Ʋ was enclosed in the Q, and consequently the same is a double Letter, for otherwise the first Syllable in aqua, equus, &c. would be long, whereas the same is short in Verse. For it was the Custom of the Ancients often to take a single Letter for the Characters which formed the Name of the Letter,
as Joseph Scaliger says, for Example they put the K for ka, tho' the K for all that was no double Letter. We may farther say, that when the Ancients wrote qis, they did perhaps pro∣nounce it also qis, as if it had had a K in it, and that the Writing had changed with the Pronun∣ciation, says Quintilian; and this Reason ap∣peared so much the more true, seeing that in Cruter's Inscriptions we find not only the Q but also the C put alone for qu; Cintus for Quintus, suis for siquis; as on the Contrary the single Q is put for the C; as Qurtius for Curtius, sequlum for seculum, and mequm for mecum; and the qu put for the c also, as liquebit for licebit or liqebit. Q was a Numeral Letter among the Ancients, and signified 500, when there was a Tittle set over it, it implyed 500000. QUAESTOR, an Officer among the old Romans who had the Charge of the Publick Mo∣ney, as our Treasurers, or Lords Commissioners of the Treasury have now a days. Lipsius op∣poses the Opinion of those who attribute the In∣stituting of this Office to Romulus or Numa or Tullius Hostilius: It may much more truly be re∣ferred to Valerius Publicola, who after the Ex∣pulsion of the Kings appointed a Place for the Publick Treasure in Saturn's Temple, under the Custody of Two Officers whom they called Quae∣stors, chosen from among the Senators, and were to be created by the People. Livy and Dyonisius of Hallicarnassus place the Institution of this Office no higher than about the Year 269. But Tacitus, L. 11. Annal. speaks very dearly concerning it: Under the same Con∣suls, Dolabella proposed that those who were admitted to the Quaestorship should once a Year give a Shew of the Gladiators at their own Charge. Formerly this Office was conferred upon none but such as had deserved well, and 'twas free for every Citizen to pretend to this Honour, if he thought himself capable of it: This Office was instituted at first in the Time of their Kings, and this may be seen by the Law which Lucius Brutus introduced, whereby the People were obliged to meet together by Pari∣sies or Wards: Then the Consuls took care to supply it, and at last the People, who chose Valerius Potitus and Emilius Mamercus, into it, 60 Years after the Expulsion of the Tarquins. (Some think there is a Mistake in the Date.) Their first Business was in the Armies; but the Empire growing great, there were Two new ones created who were to stay in Rome, the Num∣ber was again augmented after the Conquest of ly and the Provinces, insomuch that they a∣mounted to 8 in all. At last Sylla being desi∣rous to fill up the Senate which was exhausted by the Civil Wars, and having given an Ac∣count to them how Things stood with them in particular, made up the Number of Quaestors to because that Charge was as a kind of an An∣troduction into that Body: The Quaestorship was always conferred either upon Persons of Merit, or Reputation, till it came to be as it were ex∣posed to sale by the Shews they gave: Julius Caesar raised the Number of them to 40 in or∣der to fill up the Senate; and their Business was to assist the Generals of the Army that went to War, to receive the Money that arose from the Spoils and Booty taken from the Enemy, and to pay the Soldiers. The City Questors received the Taxes and Impositions laid upon the People, went to meet Foreign Embassadors, took care to treat them in their Journey, and to furnish them an House at the Charge of the Common-wealth. QUAESTORES PARRICIDII; they were Questors sent into the Provinces by Order of the Senate to try criminal Cases; their Power was great, they had Lictors and other Officers to attend them; they were chosen annually, tho' they continued them sometimes longer. QUERCETULANA See Porta. QUINQUATRIA; they were certain Feasts celebrated at Rome in Honour of Pallas, like unto those called Panathenaea by the Atheni∣ans: This Name was given them because they lasted for Five Days; on the first of which they offered Sacrifices and Oblations without the Effusion of Blood; the Second, Third and Fourth were spent in the Fights of the Gladia∣tors, and on the Fifth they went in Procession through the City: These Feast Days began on the 18th of March, and Scholars had a Vacation for all that While, and presented their Masters with a Gift which was called Minerval: They al∣so acted Tragedies now, and there were Dis∣putations held between the learned Poets and Orators concerning polite Learning, wherein the Conqueror received a Prize appointed for that Purpose by the Emperor Domitian: Here it was Stacius vauntingly gloried that he had con∣quered, and received a Present from the Empe∣ror himself. Lux mihi Romanae qualis sub collibus Albae, Cùm modò Germanas acres, modò Daca sonantem. Praelia, Palladio tua me manus induit auro. QUINQUENNALES LUDI; Games celebrated every Five Years, in divers Cities in Honour of such Emperors as had been dei∣fied. QUINQUE-VIRI MENSARII; Five Men appointed extraordinarily by the Consuls, to discharge the Debts of the People that had been ruined by the Usuries exacted from them. QUIRINALIS, see Mons. QUIRINUS; the Surname of Romulus, and he was so called from a Javelin, which the Sabins named Quiris, according to the Testimo∣ny of Festus, or else from the Sabins themselves
who were called Cures, to whom he gave a Part of Rome to live in, and this after they had coa∣lesced into one Body with the Sabines, made the Romans be called Quirites; or lastly, upon the Account of God Mars; from whom Romulus said he was descended, and who was called Quiris, because he was pictured holding a Lance in his Hand: Junius Proculus swore he appeared to him upon the Via Albina in an august and glori∣ous Manner, with glittering Arms, and com∣manded him to tell the Romans that God Mars his Father had taken him up to Heaven, that they should set up Altars, and worship him as a God by the Name of Quirinus. Lactantius gives an Account of the Prayers that were made to this new Deity, which he has taken out of Ennius, O Romule, Romule, dico ô! Qualem te patriae custodem Dî genuerunt, Tu produxisti nos intra luminis auras: O pater, ô genitor, ô sanguen Dîs oriundum. They celebrated a Feast called Populi-fugium in Memory of his Deification, beause of the Storm which made the People run into their Tents: It was kept on the Fifth of July. QUIRITES; thus the People of Rome were called, from Cures a City of the Sabines with whom Romulus made an Alliance and sha∣red his City with them; so that the said Two People being united into one Body were called by one common Name Quirites. R. R Is a Liquid Consonant and the 17th Let∣ter of the Alphabet, it was formerly a Numeral Letter and signified 80, and when there was an Accent above it implied 80000. RAMNENSES; a Troop of 100 Horse, that took their Name from Romulus. RATITI; Pieces of Money that weighted Four Ounces, on which was graven the Figure of a round Vessel called Ratis. RECINIUM, and RECINUM, and RECINUS; was a kind of a square Mantle or Vail wore by Women or their Heads: Salmasius will have it to be a sort of a Gown wore by Roman Ladies and tucked up before with a square Pin, of a Purple Colour. RECUPERATORES; Judges delega∣ted by the Prator to take Cognizance of a Fact. REDDIIIO: The Third part of the Sa∣crifice of the Heathens, when they put in the Entrails of the Victim, after they had inspected the same. REGIFUGIUM; a Feast celebrated eve∣ry Year at Rome, on the 24th of February, in Commemoration of the Expulsion of Tarquinius Superbus, and the Overthrow of the Monarchy: It was also performed on the 26th of May, when the King of the Sacrifices, in the Place where the Assemblies were held, offered Bean-flour and Bacon; and when the Sacrifice was over, they hasted away with all speed, to denote the pre∣cipitate Flight of King Tarquin. REGIO; a Part of the City of Rome. Tul∣lius Hostilius was the first that divided Rome into Four Parts; the same being called Suburana, Es∣quilina, Collina and Palatina: Things continued in this State till Augustus his Time, who divided it into Fourteen Parts, over each of which he settled Two Surveyors, called Curatores viarum, who were made annually, and took their Divi∣sions by Lot: They wore a Purple Robe, and had each of them Two Lictors, that walked be∣fore them in the Division where they presided: They had Slaves under them, who were to take care of the Fires that should happen. Their Charge was to provide for the Tranquillity of their respective Divisions, and to keep them clean, to take care that new Buildings did not increase too much, and were not built higher than the Law did prescribe: They had 2 Officers called Denunciators, to assist them in each Divi∣sion, who gave them an Account of all Disor∣ders that happened; also a Watch to prevent all unlawful Meetings in the Night, and to seize Vagabonds and Rogues. These Fourteen Divi∣sions contained 424 Streets, 31 of which were called Great or Royal Streets, which begun at the gilt Pillar, which stood at the Entry into the open Place, in the Middle of the City; and to each of these Streets belonged Four Vico-Magi∣stri, who took care of them, and carried the Or∣ders of the City to each Citizen. Alexander Se∣verus increased the Number to Fourteen more Surveyors, who served as Assessors to the Gover∣nour of the City. The first Division began at the Gate Capens, and was 12222 Feet in Circumference: The same contained Nine great Streets, over which pre∣sided Two Surveyors called Curatores Viarum, Two Denunciators, and 36 Vico-magistri: It ex∣tended without the City as well as within: There stood the Temple of Mars Gradivns that was supported by 100 Pillars, and was the mag∣nificent Work of Sylla, where the Senate met to give Audience to Foreign Embassadors: Near it was the Stone called Manalis, a manando, be∣cause that in the Time of a great Drought they carried it about in a Procession made for Rain, which failed not to fall quickly after, as Festus tells us. Manalem vocabant lapidem petransque extra portam Capenam juxta aedem Martis, quem cùra propter nimiam siccitatem in urbem protrahe∣rent, sequebatur pluvia statim, eumque, quòd aquas manaret, manalem lapidem dixêre: Near unto this
Gate ran the little River Almo, where the God∣dess Pessinuntia was washed at her coming out of the Ship which brought her to Rome, over it passed an Aqueduct which water'd it continual∣ly, and made Juvenal call this Gate Madida Ca∣pena: Not far from thence stood the Temples of Tempests, Hope, and the Muses or Camenae, and the Altar of Apollo: In the same Division there were Three little Groves called Luci, that had been consecrated to the Honour of the Gods, viz. Lucus Cuperius Hostiliani, Lucus Egeriae, & Lucus Camoenarum: Also Four Temples, viz. those of Isis, Serapis, Fortunae Reduci, and of Mars Quirinus, to distinguish it from that without the Gate Capena, which was called Mar∣tis Gradivi Templum. The First was to denote the Peace and Tranquility they expected to enjoy in the City, and the Second to shew that they would imploy their Arms without against their Enemies. Ten Aediculae, of which we know but the Names of Five only, to wit, Aediculae For∣tunae obsequentis, Honoris, Virtutis, Rediculi & Herculis: That of Rediculi was built without the Gate Cepena, after Hannibal's Retreat. Seven great open Places called Areae, viz. those of Apollo, Thallus, Gallus, Isis Eliana, Pinaria, Carsura and Mercury. Six Publick Baths or Stoves, viz. those of Vettius Bolanus, Torquatus, Mamertinus, Abascantianus, Mettianus Secundia∣nus, Antiochianus, with 82 private ones more. 83 Lakes or Ponds, into which the Waters of their Springs ran. 4 Arches, viz. those of Dru∣sus Nero, Trajan, Verus Partbicus, and Janus Bi∣frons. 14 horrea publica, Publick Granaries. 16 Bake-houses or Hand-mills, called Pistrinae. The Circus of Caracalla, and the Women's Se∣naculum; the Mutatory of Caesar at the Gate of Capena, called Mutatorium Caesaris, which was a Pleasure-house; some famous Sepulchres, as those of the Cornelii, Attilii, Calatini, Servilii, Caeciliani, Horatii, &c. 121 Palaces or fine Houses, called Domus. 1250 Insulae, or Houses not contiguous to any others, about which a Man might walk round. The second Division called Coelimontium, was so named from Mount Caelius; and contained 13200 Feet in Circumference, and had 2 Sur∣veyors, 2 Denunciators, 32 Vico-Magistri, and 5 Watches: It contained 12 Streets, 30 private Baths, to say nothing of the publick ones, 65 Lakes or Ponds; 3106 Insulae or separate Houses, 2 sacred Groves; 32 publick Granaries, 23 Hand-mills; 133 Noble-mens Houses, and a∣mongst others those of Vetellianus, Phillip, Late∣ranus, Caesar Dictator, Tiherius Claudius Centi∣malus, and the Poet Stella; 8 Aediculae; 5 Tem∣ples, viz. those of Tullius Hostilius, Bacchus, Faunus, the Emperor Claudius, Goddess Carnea upon Mount Coelius, where stood also the Curia Hostilia in which the Senate often met; as like∣wise Campus Martius where there were Horse-Races, when the Land below was overflow'd with the Tiber, Between Mount Caelius and Mount Palatine there was a great Street called Subura, which be∣gun at the open Place in the Middle of the City and ended in the Via Tiburtina all along the Ex∣quiliae: The greatest Part of the Nobles of Rome lived in this Street, and from hence might be seen divers Barbers and Ropemakers Shops, which made Martial say, L. 2 Epig. 17. Tonstrix Suburae faucibus sedet primis, Cruenta pendent quâ flagella tortorum. They also sold all sorts of Fruits and Fowls there, as we are informed by the same Poet, L. 7. Epig. 30. The third Division called Isis and Serapis Mo∣neta, was 12450 Foot in Circumference: It be∣gan near Mount Coelius and took up a great Part of the Exquiliae: It had as well as the fore∣going ones 2 Surveyors, 2 Denunciators, 32 Vico-Magistri, and 8 Streets; it contained the Tribe Gratiae Aureae the high Place, or that of the Play∣ers, called Summum choragium; the Entry into the Via Sacra near the Carinae at the End of the Es∣quiliae; the Lucus Cuperius of the Academy where they were instructed in the use of the Catapults; 2 Temples, that of Isis and Serapis Moneta, and that of Concordia Virilis, near unto which stood the Portico of Livia, each were built as an Eter∣nal Monument of the Concord that continually remained between her and Augustus her Hus∣band. 8 Aediculae, viz. Aediculae Bonae Spei, Se∣rapis, Sangi Fidoni, Minervae, Isidis, Veneris, Esculapii and Vulcani; the Portico of Claudius Martialis, Vespatian's Amphitheater, otherwise called the Colisaeum, where Fourscore Thousand People might easily see the Plays; the great Games called Ludi Dacici and Mamertini; the Camp of the Soldiers of Missena, and their old Camp; the School of the Quaestors and of Gallius, the Baths of the Emperors Titus, Trajan and Phil∣lip; 70 private Baths, 33 Mills, 29 Granaries, 160 Palaces, among which was Nero's Golden-House and Portico, those of Brutus, Pompey, Titus with the Portico where the Statue of Laocoon and his Two Children stood, besides 2807 Insulae or separate Houses. The fourth Division called Via Sacra or Tem∣plum Pacis, took up 1800 Feet in Circumference, extending it self between Mount Palatine and the Exquiliae, and containing no more than 8 Streets; It had 2 Surveyors, as many Denuncia∣tors, and 32 Vico-Magistri: The principal Parts thereof were the ViaSacra which began at the Ca∣rinae and passed by the Exquiliae to the Aedicula Strenia, and extended as far as the Capitol along the Colisaeum and Titus his triumphal Arch, pas∣sing by that of Septimius, and so made a Part of the Forum Romanum and Comitia: It was called Sacra,
because it was there the Peace was signed be∣tween Romulus and Tatius, King of the Sabines: Julius Casar covered it with Cloth from his Pa∣lace to the Capitol, as he did by the Forum Ro∣manum, in order to represent the Plays where with he presented the Publick: The Entrance into the Carinae was a Place well inhabited and adorned with fine Buildings, and so Virgil calls them Lautae Carinae: The chief Edifices were Titus his Baths and Palace, where there were Subterranean Halls 137 Foot long, 17 broad, end 12 high, built by Vespatian for the Colledge of the Pontifices, Pompey's House, and the School of the Freedman Lenaeus the famous Gramma∣rian: The old House of Cicero, who left it to his Brother Quintus to go live on Mount Palatine; The Aequimelium, which was a round Place be∣fore the Temple of Tellus at one of the Ends of the execrable Street, where formerly stood the House of Sep. Melius, a Roman Knight, which was demolished and rased by a Decree of L. Quin∣rius Cincinnatus the Dictator, because he endea∣voured to assume the Sovereign Power. Busta Gallica, the Burying-place of the Gauls, where they were defeated by Camillus; Tigillum soro∣rium, the Sister's Rafter, placed upon Two Walls, under which they made Horace pass in order to expiate the Crime he had committed in killing his Sister: Meta sudans, the sweat∣ing Goal, near unto Constantine's Arch; it was a Pile of Brick-work, made like an Obe∣isk, from whence Water dropped every way as Sweat does from the Body, and at the Top of which there stood Jupiter's Statue: Ten Temples, viz. that of Peace, of Remus, before which stood Two consecrated Myrtles, one of which was cal∣led Patricia Myrtus and the other Plebein; that of Faustina the Wife of Martus Aurelius the Em∣peror, of Tellus in the Carinae devoted by the Consul T. Sempronius, of Concord, of Venus Cloacina of the Sun, Moon, Augustus and Nerva in the Passage to the Forum transitorium: 8 Ae∣diculae, viz. those of the Muses, Hope, Mercury, Lucina Valeriana, Juno Lucina, Mavors, Juven∣tus and Isis. Vulcanalis, or the Place where Ro∣mulus planted that Lotos whose Roots reached as far as Caesar's Forum; the sacred Portico, Place of Victory; of Vulcan, and the Colossus of the Sun; the Odeum, which was a Place erected for the Practising of Musick, made Theater-ways, with Seats like the Steps of a Ladder covered with a Lantern and supported by Pillars: There such as played upon Musick were taught the Art by a Master of the Science, and the Actors by a Player before they appeared upon the Stages: Forum Cupedinis or Macellum Cupedinis, the Mar∣ket of Dainties; the Ancient Basilica of Paulus Aemilius, that of Constantine, the sacred Re∣pository of the Romans, Daphnis Bath, 79 Lakes or Reservatories of Water: The Arches of Ti∣tus and Vespatian, of Septimius Severus, and Con∣stantine: 28 Granaries, 24 Hand-mills,  great Houses, and 275 Insulae or separate Houses. The fifth Division called Esquilina, contained the Mounts Esquiline and Viminal, and was in Cir∣cumference 15950 Feet, containing fifteen Streets, and having Two Surveyors and as many Denunciators; the most considerable Things in it were these, viz. Puticuli or Puticulae, Pits dug in the Earth between Mount Esquiline, the Ci∣ty Walls and Street which lead to Porta Cuer∣quetulana, where poor People were buried, which caused a very ill Stench in all that Part of the City, so that Augustus with the Consent of the Senate and People of Rome, made a Present of it to Moecenas his Favourite, who built a fine House of Pleasure there, and the best Gardens in Rome, as Horace tells us, L. 1. Sat. 8. Hùc priùs augustis ejecta cadavera cellis, Conservus vili portanda locabat an arcâ: Hoc miserae plebi stabat commune sepulcrum..... Nunc licet Esquiliis babitare salubribus, atque Aggere in aprico spatiari, quò modo tristes Albis informem spectabant ossibus agrum. Virgil had a House near this Place, and so had A∣quilius the Lawyer, Propertius, Perseus, and Pliny the Younger. Here were several Temples, such as those of Jupiter Vimineus, of Juno Lucina, Minerva, Medicina, Esculapius, Venus Erycina that stood at the Gate Collina, round about which the Plays called Agonalia were celebrated, when the Tiber overflowed: The Amphitheater called Castrense, Aurelian's Circus, with an Obelisk, the Basilica of Sicinius, the Praetorian Camp, the Park where the wild Beasts were kept, which was called Vivarium, several publick Baths, 180 Great Mens Houses, amongst which were those of Servius Tullius, Q. Lutatius Catulus, and M. Lici∣nius Crassus. The Sixth Division was called Alta Semita, by reason of the Scituation thereof, and contained 15600 Feet in Circumference, began at the Two great Marble Horses, made by Phidias and Praxitele, and reached to the Gate called Vimi∣nalis, it had 14 Streets in it, and 48 Towers, with 2 Surveyors, 2 Denunciators, and 52 Vico-Magistri: The most noted Place, here was the Execrable Camp near Porta Collina, 10 Shops where Vermillion was sold, 15 Temples, viz. those of Health, Serapis, Flora, Venus, &c. a Portico 1000 Paces long, the Statues of Quiri∣nus 20 Foot high, as also that Leaden one of Mamurius; the Circus of Flora, the Forums of Salust and Dioclesian, the Baths of Paulus Emi∣lius, and the Senaculum of the Roman Ladies. The Seventh Division called Via Lata, reach∣ed from the Capitol, as far as the Place called Septa in Campus Martius, even to Trajan's Forum, and met with the Circus Flaminius, and the great
Street, from which the whole Division took its Name: It contained 23700 Feet in Circumfe∣rence, and 40 Streets, had 2 Surveyors, and as many Denunciators. Martial's House stood here. The Eighth Division called Forum Romanum, was the finest and most famous of all of them: It contained the Forum Romanum, the Capitol, the Tarpeian Rock, the Gate called Stercoraria, and the new Street: It was 14867 Feet in Cir∣cumference, had 12 Streets in it, 2 Surveyors, as many Denunciators, and 6 Watches: This Division took in also the following Places; the Milliarium aureum, Puteal Libonis, a Place much frequented by Merchants; the Curtian Lake, where Curtius in Armour threw himself into a Chasm of the Earth; the Horatian Pile, to which were fixed the Spoils of the 3 Curatii, and the Statue of Marsyas, one of Bacchus his Compani∣ons, 15 Temples, and among others that of the Capitol, &c. of Jupiter Feretrius, Juli∣us Caesar, where stood an Image of Venus pro∣ceeding from the Sea, devoted and built by Augustus; those of Concord, Vesta and Janus. Doliola, which were the Vessels wherein they laid up their Sacred Relicts, at the Taking of Rome by the Gauls; the Sepulcher of Romulus, of Acca Laurentia, and many Portico's: Four Courts where the Senate met, viz. Hostilia, Calabra, Pompiliana or Regia Numae, and the Senaculum aureum; Seven Basilicae, and the Graecostasis; the Prison called Tullianum, built by Servius Tulltus, 150 Pallaces, among which were those of Tarquinins Superbus, Manlius Capitolinus, Scipio Africanus, T. Annius Milo and Ovid. The Ninth Division called Circus Flaminius, took in the Sides of the Gardens, the Campus Mar∣tius, the Vaulted street, Straight-street, and was 30560 Feet about, containing 30 Streets, who had each of them their particular Officers, as the preceding ones had: They reckoned eight Temples here, and among the rest the Pantheon, and that of Janus near the Theater of Marcel∣lus: The Circus Flaminius, that of Alexander Severus; the Obelisk with the Dial in Campus Martius, 4 Theaters and Amphitheaters, and the Stables belonging to the 4 Companies of Cour∣riers: The Septa, Ovile, of Place where the People gave their Suffrages; the Prison of the Centumviri, and Lucullus and Agrippa's Gar∣dens. The Tenth Division was called Palatium, be∣cause it begun on Mount Palatine, and was 11600 Feet round, containing 7 Streets; 10 Temples, and among others that of Apollo Palatinus; 190 Noblemens Houses, such as those of Hosti∣lius, Ancus Martius, Valerius Publicola, L. Cras∣sus the Orator, Hortensius, Catiline, Julius Cae∣sar and Seneca. The Eleventh Division was called Circus Maxi∣mus, and besides the Great Circus took in all the Valley which lay between Mount Aventine and the Tiber, as far as the Gate called Ripa, and Salinae on one side, and on the other the Herb-Market, and the Foot of the Capitol, the Tem∣ple of Piety, and Columna Lactaria, whither they carried their Bastard Children; besides these it had 8 Streets, that Place called Argiletum, where there were some Booksellers Shops, 4 Temples, 30 Aediculae, and the Sink of a great Kennel that ran into the Tiber. The Twelfth Division which was called Pisci∣na Publica, reached from the greater Circus a∣long Mount Aventine, as far as Caracalla's Baths, and was 12000 Feet in Circumference, and con∣tained 12 Streets. This Publica Piscina was in the City between Mount Celius and Celiolus, where the Boys of Rome went to learn to swim; it was a large Receptacle of Water at the Foot of Mount Aventine, into which the Appian Water was conveyed, wherein they watered and washed their Horses: There were some Tem∣ples and inconsiderable Groves in this Part. The Thirteenth Division was called Aventinus, and in Circumference contained 163 Feet, and 30 Streets, with the same Officers as the other Divisions had: The chief Places which it inclu∣ded were Clivus Publici, by which they went up to Mount Aventine, and began at the Forum Ovia∣rium, and reached to the Temple of Juno Regi∣na: Scalae Gemoniae, to which they tied Male∣factors, from whence they were thrust down in∣to the Tiber; the End of the Armilustrium; The Doliolum on Mount Testaceus; Remuria, or the par∣ticular Place where Remus took his Augury by the Flight of Birds, and where he was buried. The Fourteenth Division was called Trans-Tibe∣rim, and beginning at the Janiculum contained the Vatican, the Isle of the Tiber, and that which they called Navalia; it was 3489 Feet in circuit, and had 28 Streets. The City of Rome in general contained these following Things, 700 Temples or Aediculae un∣der the Names of Templum, Aedes, Fanum, De∣lubrum, Sacellum, Aedicula; a great Number of Altars only comprized under these Words, Ara and Altare: The Differences of these Words will be found in their respective Alphabetical Order: Three Senaculum's, which were the Places where the Senate met; the first was in the Temple of Concord, the second near the Gate called Capena, and the third in the Temple of Bellona. Several Courts under the Word Curiae, the Chief whereof were the Hostilia, Julia, Pom∣peia, &c. where the Senate sometimes met: 21 Basilicae, which were stately Edifices, where∣of I have spoken in their proper order: 12 or 15 Nympheae, from the Word Nymphaea, which were Halls to marry in; 1780 Great Mens Houses, comprized under the Word Domus, and a vast Number of private Houses under the Word Insulae: 144 Jakes or Privies, which wer free for
every Body to use: An Hospital in the Island of the Tiber, where the Temple of Esculapius stood, called Nosocomium; as also an Hospital where superannuated and inferior Soldiers, who had served in the Army, were taken care of; they called it Taberna meritoria: 22 famous Por∣tico's to shelter People from the Rain; divers Arsenals, where they laid up Arms and Warlike Machines called Armamentaria: 29 publick Li∣braries; 5 Colleges and Publick Schools for the Breeding up of Youth: 254 Hand-mills, and 327 Granaries, where they had Magazines of Corn, in order to supply the Peoples Wants at reasonable Rates, in the time of Scarcity; 39 Brass Colossus's, and 51 of Marble; 6 great Obelisks, and 42 lesser ones, with divers Pyra∣mids: Several fine Gardens, and 32 Sacred Groves, 23 Water-Pools for Horses to drink of, whitening of Linnen, and quenching Fires; 14 Aqueducts; 105 Fountains, 1352 Lakes or Pools of standing Water, brought from several Springs; 17 great open Places, comprized un∣der the Word Forum; 117 publick Baths, and 909 private ones. RELIQUIAE; the Relicks, were the Ashes and Bones of the Dead that remain'd after the Burning of their Bodies, and which the Ancients kept very religiously in Urns, and afterwards laid them up in Tombs. REMURIA; the Place where Remus took his Augury from the Flight of Birds, and where he was buried. REMUS, the Son of Rbea Silvia, and Ro∣mulus his Brother, they were Twins, and orde∣red by the Command of their Uncle Amulius Sil∣vius to be thrown into the Tiber; but they were taken up and saved by Faustulus, who was Nu∣mitor's Shepherd, who carried them to his Wife, by whom they were carefully nursed: Some said that while the Cradle was upon the Brink of the River, a She-Wolf brought thither by the Cry∣ing of the Infants, gave them suck: Others have been of Opinion, that the Wantonness of Lau∣rentia, Fastulus his Wife gave Occasion to this Fable, because such Women were called She-Wolves. Authors vary in their Opinions concern∣ing the Death of Remus; some saying, that Ro∣mulus slew his Brother, because he ridiculed him upon the Account of the Fortifications he had made to his new City; while others will have him to have been killed by the Soldiery; but be it as it will, 'tis certain Remus cemented the Walls of Rome with his own Blood. REPETUNDARUM CRIMEN, or DE REPETUNDIS; Bribes taken by the Magistrates from the Allies and Subjects of the Romans, as also from the Citizens; this Crime was not at first made Capital, but became af∣terwards to be so, as may be seen by the Exam∣ple of Verres, RETIARII; Gladiators, who fought with a Trident in one Hand, and a Net in the other, wherein they endeavoured to entangle their Adversary. RADAMANTHUS; was feigned by the Poets to be the Judge of departed Souls in Hell, as Virgil says: Cnossius bic Rhadamanthus babet durissima regna, Cástigatque auditque dolos, cogitque fateri, &c. Strabo tells us, that Homer understanding that Radamanthus, an ancient King of Creet, had for∣merly made very good Laws in his Country, wherein sometime after he had been imitated by Minos, he took occasion to make them the Judges of all Mankind, in a Place where they all met, i. e. in the other World, and called them Jupiter's Sons, because that they, in order to give a greater Sanction to their Laws, gave out, that they were dictated by Jupiter. Plato, with admirable Dexterity, unfolds unto us the Truths concealed under these Poetical Fictions, when he makes Jupiter to say, that he was weary of the Complaints made him concerning the unrighteous Sentences pronounced upon Earth, which he would remedy by concealing from Men the Time of their Death, and passing no Sen∣tence upon them till after their decease, and that even by departed Souls themselves, that so nei∣ther Favour nor false Witnesses, Relations nor Interests might take place any more, as they did whilst they were alive: That he entrusted three of his Sons with the said Judicial Office, giving Rhadamanthus Power over the Asiaticks, Eacus over the Europeans, and for Minos he was to ter∣minate any Difficulties that might happen: And so the same Plato places Minos above his Two Brothers, and represents him with a Golden Scepter in his Hand, whereas he makes the other Two to carry a Rod only: Minos autem conside∣rans sedet solus aureum babens sceptrum, . RHAMNUSIA; Ʋltrix Dea; a Name given to the Goddess Nemesis, and taken from the Town of Rhamnus in Attica. RHEA, Numitor's Daughter, whom Amu∣lius Silvius made a Vestal; some call her Ilia; but most Authors name her Rhea and Silvia; this Vestal was got with Child in a Wood dedicated to Mars, wherein she offered Sacrifice by her self, and where an armed Man enjoy'd her: She was delivered of Two Children, whom Amuli∣us exposed to be destroy'd, and put those Laws in Execution that were made against the Ve∣stals, who prostituted their Virginity. Rbea was called also Astarte, Ops, Pessinuntia, &c. as Apuleius says, who confounds several God∣desses in the Person of Rhea; 'twas therefore ra∣ther a Multitude of Names, than a Multiplica∣tion of Deities, according to his Opinion, and
she was in reality Isis, Queen of Egypt, on whom all these Names were conferred at divers times, and in divers Countries, and whom they represented under the Notion of so many Dei∣ties. Strabo also mentions this multiplying of Names: Et Berecynthes & omnes Phryges, & qui Idam accolunt Troës, Rheam colunt, eique orgia celebrant. Vocatur ab eis Mater Deorum, & mag∣na Dea; à locis autem Idaea, Dindymene, Pessi∣nuntia, Cybele. But how ancient soever Rhea might have been in Phrygia, she was much more so in Egypt, where Diodorus Siculus makes Osir is and Isis to descend from her and Saturn; or more immediately Jupiter and Juno, and from them Osiris and Isis. We have an Account in the Phanician Theology of Sanchuniathon, who was more ancient, that Saturn having married his Two Sisters Astarte and Rhea, he had Seven Daughters by the first, and as many Sons by the other: And thus you see from whence it is, the Greeks have derived the whole Fable of Rhea or Cybele. Livy gives us the History at large of the Transportation of the Goddess Rhea, from Pessinuntia to Rome: Plato in his Timaeus says, that Saturn and Rhea his Wife were the Children of Oceanus and Tethys. RICA; a Vail where with the Roman Ladies covered their Heads. RICULA; a little Vail for the same use. RIDICULUS, and AEDICULA RI∣DICULI; the Temple of Laughter, built at Rome 2000 Paces without the Gate Capena, in Commemoration of Hannibal's Flight from be∣fore that City, because of the Rains and Storms that fell during his besieging of it, which made the Romans laugh and fall to ridicule him: The Romans were not the first who deified Laughter, seeing we are informed by Plutarch in the Life of Lycurgus, that the Laecedaemonians erected him a Statue, and the Hypataeans of Thessaly annually offered Sacrifice to him, as also the Romans did in the Spring, accompanied with loud Laugh∣ter: Pausanias mentions , a God of Laughter. ROBIGO, or ROBIGUS; a Deity worshipped by the Romans for driving away the Blast which happened to the Corn in the Ear, occasioned thro' too much Drought. Numa Pom∣pilius instituted a Feast in Honour of him about the Month of April, called Robigalia. ROGATIO LEGIS; the Proposing of a Law to pass, which was made to the Romans for their Approbation thereof; from whence came those Expressions so frequent in Cicero, Rogatio∣nem ferre ad populum, to propose a Law to the People, and Rogator legis, he that proposes the Law. ROMA; Rome; tho' the Founding of this City be attributed to Romulus, because he en∣larged it, and founded a Monarchy there; yet it may be proved by divers Authorities, that there was a City in Italy called Roma, before Romulus was born. Solinus will have this City to have been founded near Mount Esquiline by Roma the Daughter of Kittim, to which she gave her Name; but other Authors there are who attri∣bute the Foundation thereof to Roma, the Daugh∣ter of Ascanius: Sabellicus confirms this Proposi∣tion of Plutarch by a Quotation out of one Cephon Gergetius, who attributed the Founding of Rome to Romus, the Son of Aeneas. Plutarch speaks of another Foundress of Rome, named Roma; and says, that after Aeneas had landed at Laurentum, a Trojan Lady, whose Name was Roma, took the Opportunity in the Absence of Aeneas, and the other Trojans to perswade the Women to burn the Ships, that so they might be no longer exposed to the Dangers of the Sea; and this necessitated them to build a City at the Foot of Mount Palatine, which from the Name of the said Lady they called Roma. Caius Sem∣pronius in his Division of Italy, proves that Romu∣lus was not the Founder of Rome, but that it was the Daughter of Italus; for he says, that he was called Rumulus, and his Brother Rumus, and not Romulus and Remus, as is commonly thought. Rome when built or enlarged by Romulus, was di∣vided into Four Parts; one called Roma, the se∣cond Germalia, the third Velia, and the fourth comprehended Romulus his House. It is plain that Roma was that little City built by Italus his Daughter; Velia was that Part of Mount Pala∣tine, that looked towards that Place called Locus Romanus, and was so named from Vellus, a Fleece, because the Shepherds were wont to shear their Sheep there; Germalia was a low Place that looked towards the Capitol, where the Twins Cradle was found under a Fig-Tree called Ru∣minal, from the Word Rumo, to give suck, be∣cause it was under this Tree the She-Wolf gave suck to Romulus and Remus: From the House of Romulus, who was first King of Rome, built upon Mount Palatine, they call Princes Houses Pa∣latia. Romulus made Three Gates to his New City, viz. Carmentalis, Romana and Pandana; to which some have added Janualis. The Gate Carmen∣talis took its Name from Carmenta, Evander's Wife, who was buried there; the same was since called Porta Scelerata, because the Fabii went out at it, when they were defeated at Cremera: Porta Romana took its Name from Romulus, says Livy, but I rather believe it came from the Vil∣lage Roma; it was also named Mugonia, because of the Lowing of the Cattle sold at this Gate, and Trigonia, for being fortified with Three Angles: Pandana came from the Verb Pando, because it lay open to let in the Provisions that were continually brought into the City; the same was also called Libera and Romulida; and this confirms the Opinion which I have advan∣ced, that Porta Romana did not take its Name
from Romulus; for 'tis not very likely that of but Four Gates, Romulus would have called Two according to his own Name: Porta Janualis was so named from the Temple of Janus that stood near it. Rome was founded in the 3961. Year of the Julian Period, Anno Mund. 3301. 753. Years before our Saviour's Nativity; in the third Year of the sixth Olympiad, on the 11th and 12th of May, the Day after the Feast of Pales, be∣tween the second and third Hour of the Day, the Sun being in Taurus, the Moon in Libra, Saturn, Mars, Venus and Mercury in Scorpio, and Jupiter in Pisces, according to the Testimony of Solinus, Pliny, and Eutropius. Titus Terentius Firmianus, a learned Astrologer, rejects the foresaid Time and according to his Computation makes it to be on the 21st of April, at full Moon, and when the Sun, Mercury and Venus were in Taurus, Jupiter in Pisces, Saturn and Mars in Cancer, about the third Hour, and Plutarch ob∣serves, that the Moon on the said Day suffered a great Ecclipse. Romulus divided the Inhabitants of his City into Three Tribes or Classes, under Tribunes or Collonels, and each Tribe into Ten Curiae or Parishes, and each Curia into Ten Decuriae; the first being under the Command of an Officer named Curio, as the other was under one called Decurio; he picked out of all the Tribes such Persons, whose Birth, Age and Vertue made them remarkable, and called them Patricii or Patres, and the rest of the People Plebeians. This City was governed by Seven Kings for the Space of 243 Years, and became afterwards a Republick, which was sometimes governed by Consuls, and other whiles by Decemviri, Tri∣bunes, Dictators, and lastly, by Emperors: The Ancients represented Rome in the Form of a Goddess clad like Pallas, with a youthful Air, to intimate that Rome was always in the Vigour of her Youth, and did not grow old: They put an Helmet on her Head and a Pike in her Hand, with a long Robe, to denote that she was alike prepared for War and Peace, since she was drest like Pallas, whom they represented with a Hel∣met and Pike, and like Minerva who was ha∣bited with a long Robe: This Head of Rome is very often found on the Consulary Medals, and even on some Greek ones; the Inscriptions that are on the Greek Medals for Rome and the Senate, are, , the Goddess Rome, and  or : The God of the Senate, or the Sacred Senate: They also erected Temples throughout the Empire to the Honour of the Goddess Rome, and at last the meanest flattering Titles they used were Roma Victrix, Victorious Rome; Roma invicta, Invincible Rome; Roma Aeterna, Eternal Rome, and Roma Sacra, Sacred Rome. The Me∣dals of Maxentius represent Eternal Rome fitting upon Military Ensigns, armed with an Helmet and holding a Scepter in one Hand, and a Globe in the other, which she presents the Emperor, who is crowned with Lawrel, to let him know that he was the Master and Preserver of the whole World, with this Inscription; Conserva∣tori Ʋrbis aeternae. The Medals of Vespatian re∣present her with an Helmet on her Head, and lying upon the Seven Hills of Rome, with a Scep∣ter in her Hand, and the Tiber in the Form of an old Man at her Feet; but upon the Medals of Adrian she holds a Lawrel-branch in her Left-hand, and Victory upon a Globe in the Right, as being victorious over all the World. The People of Smyrna were the first who erected a Temple to the City of Rome under the Consul∣ship of Cato Major, when she was not yet come to that Pitch of Grandeur (she afterwards at∣tained to) before the Destruction of Carthage and the Conquest of Asia. See Regio. ROMULUS, the Son of Mars and the Ve∣stal Rhea, otherwise called Silvia and Ilia; Lu∣cius Terentius Firmianus, a Person well skilled in the curious Sciences of the Chaldaeans, having exactly observed the Life and Death of Romulus, says, He was born the 21st Day of Thoth, which is our August, at Sun-rising, and that he was begot the 23d of Cheac, which is our November, at Three in the Afternoon, in the first Year of the second Olympiad: Plutarch says, that the Sun, on the Day of his Conception suffered a great Ecclipse from Eight to Nine in the Morn∣ing: Ant. Contius will have him to be born in the first Year of the first Olympiad, and Fuccius asserts he was born in the 3d Year of the second Olympiad. He with his Brother were by Amu∣lius his Command exposed to be drowned in the Tiber, but Faustulus, who was Numitor's Shep∣herd, saved him and his Brother Remus, and they were both nursed by his Wife: The Story is, that they were suckled by a She-wolf, because of the Leudness of Laurentia, Faustulus his Wife, which gave occasion to the Fable; but the Thing has been even so represented on the Consulary Medals, where you have a She wolf and Two Twins sucking her: Romulus traced out the Plan of his new City and prescribed Laws to his Peo∣ple, who coalesced together from all Parts into a Body, for he made an Asylum of a Vale lying at the Foot of Mons Capitolinus, for all those that came thither; which increased the Number of his Subjects in a very little time: He regu∣lated Matters of Religion, dividing his People into Three Tribes, and each Tribe into Curiae or Parishes: Each Curia chose it's own Priests, Priestessess, Augurs, and Camillae, who were to supply what was requisite for the Charge of the Sacrifices and sacred Feasts that were solemnized throughout a Curia at certain Times. Pliny speaks of a Society instituted by Romulus, some∣what
like unto the Knights of the French King's Order, and they were called Fratres Arvales; Romulus was the Sovereign or Grand-master of the Order, the Ensigns of which was a Crown of Ears of Corn tied with a white Riband, and this Dignity they held for Life: He was killed in a Scufflle, others will have it that he was cut in Pieces by the Senate, who gave out that the Gods had carried him into Heaven; he was deified and worshipped under the Name of Quirinus, according to the Relation of Procu∣lus: Dionysius of Hallicarnassus says, he lived 55 Years, and Plutarch 54, and that he reigned 37. We have Medals of the Emperor Antoninus Pius where Romulus is represented habited like Mars with a Javilin in one Hand, and with the other holding a Trophy on his Shoulders with this Inscription Romulo Augusto. Gronovius excepts against all that has been said by such a Multitude of Authors concerning the Origin of Romulus for near 2500 Years. He pretends that a Greeck named Diocles was the first who invented the Fable of the She-wolf's suck∣ling Romulus and Remus, who were exposed by Amulius his order to be destroyed, and begotten by Mars upon Rhea Silvia a Vestal; and he is so assured that there is no need to refute this Fable, that he lays it down as an established Principle that Romulus was not born in Italy, but that he came thither from another Country; and the Proof he gives for it is, That no People of Italy would supply the first Inhabitants of Rome with Wives. But 'tis by no means to be thought, in case Romulus was owned to be the Grandson of Numitor, after his expelling of the Usurper Anulius, and re-establishing his Grandfather up∣on the Throne, but that he would have found the Albans inclined to make an Alliance with him, and to supply him and his People with Wives. Whereas it is supposed he had Recourse to the Sabines or some other People; who ha∣ving refused him, he resolved upon the entire Extirpation of them. Other Authors will have Romulus to be a Greek by Birth; for this his Name implies, as Salmasius says, who thought the Word Romulus to be a Diminitive of , that in the Eolick Dialect signifies Strength: Gro∣rovius is of Opinion, that Romulus was neither a Gaul nor Affrican, but a Syrian, since Josephus and Nicephorus translate the Name by , the Son of Romelia, of whom mention is made in Scripture. ROSTRA; Stages or raised and spacious Theaters which were adorned with the Prows of the Ships that were taken from the Antiatae in the first Sea-fight obtained by the Romans: It was the Place from whence Orations were made to the People. RUDIS; a knotty rough Stick, which the Praetor gave the Gladiators as a Mark of their Freedom, whence the Latin Phrase Rude donare, to make a Gladiator free, to discharge him from fighting any more; they were also called Ru∣diarii. RUDUSCULANA PORTA; an An∣cient Gate of Rome, built after a rustick clumsie manner, or called so because it was adorned with Brass, according to Valerius Maximus. RUMA or RUMINA; this Goddess presided over the Nursing of Children at the Breast; there was a little Temple built her at Rome wherein they offered Milk unto her. RUTUMENIA; an Ancient Gate of Rome, so called from a Charioteer of that Name, who proving victorious in a Horse-race from Veii to Rome, entred through this Gate into the City. S. SIs a Consonant, and the 18th Letter in the Alphabet; it was a Numeral amongst the Ancients, which signified Seven. It's called a hissing Letter by reason of its Sound, and has met with a different Reception from the An∣cients, some having been much for rejecting it, while others affected the Use of it. Pindar calls it , adulterinam, and has avoided the Use of it almost in all his Verses; Quintilian says, 'tis rough and makes an ill Sound in the Conjun∣ction of Words, which made it be often totally rejected, as dignu' omnibu' and the like are to be met with in Plautus and Terence. Some of the Latins also chang'd it into a T in Imitation of the Atheneans, saying Mertare for mersare, pultare for pulsare, &c. But others on the Con∣trary affected the Use of it every where, as Ca∣sinoenae for Camoenae, dusmosae for dumosae. And Quintilian says, that from Cicero's Time and so onward, they often doubled it in the Middle of Words, as in Caussa, Divissiones, &c. SABAZIA; the Feasts of Bacchus; see Bacchanalia. SABAZIUS; Bacchus, or according to some, the Son of Bacchus. See Bacchus. SABATHUM; the Sabbath; the Jeros reckoned their Years by Weeks, the Seventh whereof was the Sabbathick Year, wherein it was not lawful to till the Ground, and their Slaves then were made free: They had also their Year of Jubilee or Remission, which was every 50th Year, or as some will have 49th; insomuch that every Jubilee was also a Sabbathick Year, but more famous than the other, and the Years comprehending these Two Terms, i. e. the pro∣ceeding and following Jubilee were always com∣prized within the Number of Fifty, and then all
Estates, and whatever had been alienated, re∣turned to the Possession of the first Owner. SACERDOS; a Heathen-Priest, whereof there were different Orders consecrated to the Service of several Deities: There was a Society of Priests named Luperci, who were engag'd in the Worship of Pan Lycaeus, and on his Festival-Day, ran stark naked through the City, with Thongs in their Hands, which were made of the Skin of a Goat, that they had sacrificed to their God, and with which they lash'd the Women, who willingly received the Blows out of a super∣sticious Belief they had, that the same contribu∣ted to make them fruitful. Hercules his Priests, called Potitii and Pinarii, were instituted by Hercules, they being taken out of those Two Noble Families in Evander's Time, because they had assisted Hercules at a Sacrifice which he offe∣red to Jupiter, of the best Cow he had in his Herd. Fratres Arvales to the Number of 12 were appointed by Romulus to sacrifice to Ceres and Bacchus, and to pray to them to make the Earth fruitful; Romulus was their Institutor. Curiones, they were Priests establish'd with Su∣pream Power, as to Spiritual Matters, in the Curiae, to the Number of 30, into which the Three Tribes of the People of Rome were at first divided: Numa added Two Priests more in every Parish, to assist the Curiones, and these he called Sacerdotes publici: The Curiones had the Tenths and Parish-Offerings allowed them for their Maintenance; and this was called, aes Curionum, quod dabatur Curioni ob sacerdotium curionatûs, says Festus. Titii Sodales, the Titian Priests, to the Number of 25, whom Titus Ta∣tius introduced formerly to Rome, in order to retain somewhat of the Sabines Religion, as Ta∣citus says, L. 1. Annal. C. 7. However this Au∣thor seems to contradict himself when he attri∣butes the Instituting of this Priesthood to Romu∣lus, Titii Sodales faces Augustales subdidere, quod sacerdotium ut Romulus Tatio Regi, ita Caesar Ti∣berius Juliae genti sacravit. It may be said if Tatius instituted this Priesthood; Romulus, after his Death, having made the Sabines and Romans coalesce into one Body, ordered these Priests to offer an Yearly Sacrifice in Honour of Tatius, King of the Sabines. Varro will have these Priests to have been called Titii from some Birds of that Name, from which they took Auguries: Titiae aves quas in auguriis certis Sodales Titii ob∣servare solebant. They dwelt without the City of Rome, from whence they observed the Au∣gury of the said Birds. Flamines, Priests con∣secrated to the Worship of each particular Deity, every one of which bore the Name of his God, as Flamen Dialis, Martialis and Quirinalis, the Priests of Jupiter, Mars and Romulus. See Flamen. Salii, an Order of Priests instituted by Numa, who danced a Sacred Dance in Honour of Mars, carrying the Sacred Shields, named Ancilia, and striking upon them musically. This was a very ho∣nourable Priesthood at Rome, and held by the chiefest Men in the Empire. Augustales, 25 Priests instituted by the Emperor Tiberius, in Honour of Augustus, for whom they erected Temples and Altars, and instituted Sacrifices: The same was also done for other Emperors, who came afterwards to be deified thro' Flattery, for we find there were such as they called Sodales Flavii, Adrianales, Aeliani, Antonini, &c. SACRIFICIA; Sacrifices; they did not anciently sacrifice Animals, if we believe Porphy∣ry, but the Fruits of the Earth, or Perfumes which were altogether bloodless Sacrifices. Por∣phyry in his Books concerning Abstinence, treats of this Matter at large; he says, upon the Re∣lation of Theophrastus, that the Egyptians were the first who made an Offering of the First fruits to their Deity, and not of Incense and Perfume, much less of Animals, but of plain Herbs, which are the first Productions of the Earth. These first Sacrifices were consumed by Fire, and thence come those Greek Words , which signifie to sacrifice, &c. They af∣terwards burnt Perfumes called , from the Greek , to pray. They did not begin to sacrifice Animals till they had first eaten some Herbs or Fruits, that ought to be offered upon the Altar. Theophrastus adds, that before the sacrificing of Beasts, besides the Offerings made of Herbs and Fruits of the Earth; the Sacrifices of Libations were very common when they poured out Water, Honey, Oyl and Wine; and these were called Nephalia, Melitosponda, Elaeosponda, and Oenosponda. Ovid says, that the very Name of Victim imported, that the same was not killed till Victories were obtained over the Enemy; and that that of Hostia denoted that Hostilities had been committed: In short, while Men yet lived upon Pulse, they minded not the offering of Beasts in Sacrifice, since the Law of Sacrificing required that some Part of them should be eaten, Ante Deos homini quod conciliare valeret, Far erat, & puri lucida mica Salis. Qvid adds a fabulous Narration to this Historical Truth, viz. that Ceres was the first that sacri∣ficed a Hog, because he had spoiled the Corn: The same Poet in another Place brings in Pytha∣goras speaking against this Slaughtering of Beasts, whether the same were designed for Food or Sacrifice, he makes him say, that it might be very pardonable to sacrifice a Hog to Ceres, and a Goat to Bacchus, because of the Ha∣vock, made by those Animals in the Corn and Vineyards, but it must be extream Cruelty to offer innocent Sheep, and Oxen that are so useful for Tillage, though Men endeavoured to con∣ceal
their Fault in vain, under a Pretence of the Worship of the Gods. Nec satis est quod tale nefas committitur, ipsos Inscripsere Deos sceleri; Numenque supernum Caede laboriferi credunt gaudere juvenci. Horace also gives us to understand that the purest and plainest Way of appeasing the Gods, was to offer them Flower and Salt, and some Odoriferous Herbs. Te nihil attinet Tentare multâ caede bidentium... Mollibit aversos Penates Farre pio & saliente micà, Servius observes they threw Flower and Salt up∣on the Victims, the Fire and the Knives; for they roasted the Corn, and then mixed Salt there∣with, reducing the whole into salted Flower or Meal and this anciently was Mens Food, and the Matter of the ancient Sacrifices, which they sometimes continued to celebrate apart after the Instituting of Sanguinary Sacrifices, which was never used by the Ancients. Not but that Noah sacrificed Animals at his coming out of the Ark, as Moses ordered Sanguinary Sacrifices to be made at the Promulgation of the Law; but when Moses published the Law, all the World was overspread with Idolatry, and 'tis very probable that the Worship of false Deities was grown very common even before the Deluge. And thus it was convenient to offer Sanguinary Sa∣crifices to God, in order to hinder Men from doing the same to Idols or worshipping Beasts. The Example of Abel may be objected here∣in, of whom the Scripture seems to say, that he sacrificed the best and fattest of his Lambs unto God from the Beginning of the World, but 'tis much more probable that he only offered his Lambs to God, without killing them; and Gro∣tius has made it appear, that since Sacrifices were offered only of such things as were in use among Men, it is by no means probable, that Abel offered unto God the Flesh of Animals, which Men did not yet make use of for their Food. That which Flutarch calls Immolation was the Ceremony of throwing the salted Flower, called Mola Salsa, and Wine upon the Victim before he was slain; Macrobius says, that the first Sacrifices of the Egyptians had no∣thing that was bloody in them, and that when they were even necessitated to receive the Wor∣ship of Serapis and Saturn, to whom Victims were to be sacrificed, they would not allow their Temples to be built within the City. The most common Victims were Sheep, Lamb, Oxen, Cows and Bulls, because these were Mens most usual Food: Ovid observes that Perseus sacrificed Horses to the Sun; the Greeks an Hind to Diana, and the Arabians Dogs; and that an Ass was sacrificed to Priapus: He then goes on to Birds, which he says were offered in Sacrifice to the Gods, in Revenge for the Injuries they sometimes did them, or the Displeasure they conceived at their Discovering their Secrets by divers sorts of Auguries: Amongst the Birds that were sacrificed, there are no other menti∣oned than Doves: Goslings and Cocks were of∣fered in Sacrifice to none but Nox, and that even in the Night-time. The most remarkable of all the Pagan Sacri∣fices were those wherein Men were offered. Pau∣sanias says, that Lycaon, the second of that Name King of Arcadia, built the first City in Greece, which he called Lycosura, that he there sacrificed Men to Jupiter; and that from thence they took occasion to say, that he made that God eat Hu∣mane Flesh; who to punish him for the said Crime, transformed him into a Wolf. Porphyry says, that these Humane Immolations continued in Arcadia till the Time of Theophrastus, that they also spread themselves into Peloponesus, and that they were abolished by Lycurgus at Sparta who changed this barbarous Custom, and brought the People to be content with the Blood of some young Men, that were whipped for this Purpose. Pausanias speaks of an annual Sacri∣fice made to Diana Triclaria of a young Boy and Girl by the Oracle's Command in order to ex∣piate the incestuous Familiarity that passed be∣tween a Virgin Priestess of this Temple and a young Man. Strabo gives an Account of the several Ways used by the Gauls in Respect to Humane Sacrifices, and says, that at Leucadia, in order to expiate the publick Sins, and avert the Misfortunes wherewith they were menaced, they every Year threw some Body down head-long from an high Rock, after they had first tied a great many Feathers and live Birds to him to keep him up in the Air, and that they received him below as gently as could be, for which End they made a Ring with their small Boats: Dio∣nysius of Hallicarnassus says, that there were Humane Sacrifices offered to Saturn in the first Ages, not only at Tyre and Carthage, but also in Italy; that Hercules abolished the said Custom, by perswading the People to substitute the Ef∣figies of Men instead of real Men, which they were wont to tie together to the Number of 30 and throw into the Tiber: And this was done afterwards on the Ides of May. Plutarch in his Book of Superstition treats of these Sacri∣fices offered to Saturn: The Fathers and the Mothers sacrificed their own Children and those that had none bought some: They imposed a Fine upon such as could not forbear shedding Tears at so horrible a Sight, play'd upon Flutes and beat Drums, that so the Cries of those in∣nocent Victims might not be heard: The same Historian in his Questiones Romanae, asks, why
the Romans has forbid the People of Blatonae to offer Humane Sacrifices any more, seeing they had themselves but a few Years before bu∣ried two Men and two Women alive, viz. Two Greeks and as many Gauls? To which he answers, 'tis not allowable to sacrifice Men to God; but that it was not the same Thing in respect to the Genii or Daemons, whose evil Designs they thought to avert by such Sacrifices. Plutarch says, when Gelon, King of Sicily, had overcome the Carthaginians, he would not grant them a Peace, but upon Condition that they should no longer offer their Children in Sacrifice to Saturn: This barbarous Custom was not disused at Rome, according to Pliny, till the Year 657, from the Building thereof. Porphyry in his Second Book concerning Abstinence, makes a long Enumera∣tion of the Places where they formerly offered Human Sacrifices, viz. Rhodes, Cyprus, Egypt, Phoenicia, Arabia, Thrace, Athens, and Megalopo∣lis: And he adds upon the Credit of Pallas the Historian, that the Emperor Adrian did almost abolish these abominable Sacrifices throughout the Empire; and he assures us, that as to Egypt, King Amasis was the first who forbad Humane Sacrifices, according to Manetho, and that the Representations of Men made in Wax were sub∣stituted in the room of them. Macrobius says, that at the Feasts called Compitalia, they sacri∣ficed Children to the Lares, and their Mother Mania, because Apollo had commanded that Heads should be offered to them; and that Bru∣tus the Consul, after the Expulsion of the Tar∣quins, offered the Heads of Garleek and Poppy instead of those of Children unto them: He says also, that the Pelasgi arriving in Italy, introdu∣ced a Custom thither of offering Humane Sacri∣fices to Pluto and Saturn, till such time as Her∣cules prevailed with their Descendants to sacri∣fice the Effigies of Men made of Clay, called Oscilla, Sigilla, to Pluto, and Wax-Tapers to Sa∣turn, instead of Men; for the Word  signifies a Man and a lighted Taper. The Pagans, says Vigenere, had Three sorts of Sacrifices, viz. Publick, Private and Foreign: The Publick ones were performed at the Charge of the Publick for the Good of the State, to ren∣der Thanks unto the Gods for some signal Favour, or to pray unto them for averting the Misfortunes and other Calamities wherewith a People or City were menaced or afflicted: The Private Sacrifices were made by each Family; of such sort were those of the Family of Clodia done for some particular Persons of it, and at their Charge, whereunto they many times obli∣ged their Heirs. Plautus also makes a Servant named Ergasilus, who had found a Kettle full of Gold, to say, that Jupiter had sent him so much Riches, without obliging him to offer any Sa∣crifice, Sine sacris hereditatem sum adeptus effertissimam, I have got a good Inheritance without being obliged to go the Charge of a private Sacrifice. Foreign Sa∣crifices were so named when the Tutelary Gods of Cities and conquered Provinces were brought to Rome, together with their Mysteries and Ce∣remonies. They were offered either for the Benefit of the Living, or Good of the Dead; these last, according to Festus, were called, Hu∣mana sacra, or humanum sacrificium quod mortui causâ fiebat: For the Ancients, as the Papists do now, had their Feast of the Dead in February, as Cicero says; Februario mense, qui tunc extre∣mus anni mensis erat, mortuis parentari volue∣runt. The Matter of which the Sacrifices consisted, were, as before said, the Fruits of the Earth, or Animals, whose Flesh and Entrails they some∣times presented to the Gods, and at other times contented themselves to offer them only the Animal Power of the Victims, as Virgil makes Entellus do, who sacrificed a Bull to Eryx for the Death of Dares, and so gave Soul for Soul. Hanc tibi, Eryx, meliorem animam pro morte Daretis Persolvo. The Sacrifices varied according to the Diversity of Gods, worshipped by the Ancients; for there were those that were offered to the Coelestial, Infernal, Marine, Aerial and Terrestrial Gods, to the first of which they sacrificed white Victims of an odd Number; to the second, black ones, with a Libation of pure Wine and warm Milk, which were poured into the Gutters with the Victim's Blood; to the third they sacrificed black and white ones on the Sea-side, and threw their Entrails as far as they could into the Water, and poured some Wine on; .... Candentem in littore taurum Constituam ante ar as voti reus, extaque salsos Porrtciam in fluctus, & vina liquentia fundam; To the fourth they sacrificed white Victims, and raised Altars to them in the same Manner as to the Coelestial Gods: To the fifth they only offe∣red Wine and Honey. As for the Gods of the Air, they kindled a Fire upon their Altars where the Body of the Victim was burnt, the same be∣ing powder'd with salt Paste and Incense. In chusing of the Victim, it was required it should be found and whole, without any blemish or Imperfection, his Tail was not to be too small at the End, his Tongue not black, nor Ears cleft, as Servius observes upon those Verses in the Aeneid,
Totidem lectas de more bidentes. Idest, ne habeant caudam aculeatam, nec linguam gram, nec aurem fissam: And those Bulls were not to be such as had drawn in the Yoak. When the Victim was pitched upon, they gilded his Forehead and Horns, especially if they were Bulls, Heifers and Cows: Et statuam ante ar as aur atâ fronte juvencum. Macrobius, L. 1. Saturn. recites an Order of the Senate, whereby the Decemviri at the So∣lemnizing of the Ludi Apollinares, were ordered to sacrifice an Ox with gilded Horns, and Two white Goats with gilded Horns likewise to Apollo, and a Cow also with gilt Horns to Latona: They adorned their Heads with a Woollen Infula, from whence hung down two Rows of Chaplets with twisted Ribands; and in the middle of the Body a kind of a Stole, that was pretty large, and hung down on both sides: The lesser Victims were only adorned with Bundles of Flowers and Garlands, together with white Tufts or Gar∣lands. The Victims being thus made ready, were brought before the Altar, and this Action was exprest by the Greek Word , agere, ducere: The Victim was called Agonia, and those that conducted it Agones. The lesser Victims were not lead in a String, but were only conducted to the Place by driving them gently before them; whereas the greater ones were brought in an Halter to the Place of Sacrifice: The Victim was not to struggle, or refuse to go, for the Resistance made by it, was taken for an ill Augury, the Sacrifice being required to be free: The Victim being brought before the Altar, was examined again and view'd very cir∣cumspectly, in order to see whether there was any defect in it; and this Action was called Pro∣batio hostiarum & exploratio. Then the Priest being clad in his Sacerdotal Habit, and accom∣panied with the Sacrificers and other Attendants, and being washed and purified according to the Ceremonies prescribed them, of which we have already spoken, began the Sacrifice with making a loud Confession of his Unworthiness, acknow∣ledging himself to be guilty of divers Sins, for which he begged Pardon of the Gods, hoping that without their having regard thereunto, they would be pleased to grant him his Re∣quests. The Hebrews made also a like general Con∣fession, with this difference, that the Pagans con∣fessed the Frailty of Mankind, and owned their Faults; but the others consisted in a Confession of the Greatness of God, which was accompani∣ed with Hymns play'd upon Musical Instruments; Cum Dominum laudare coepissent, & dicere: Consi∣temini Domino quoniam bonus, quoniam in saecu∣lum misericordia ejus, Paralipom. 2. C. 5. This Confession being over, the Priest cried aloud, Hoc age, compose your selves and mind your Sacrifice; and presently a kind of an Usher holding a Rod in his Hand, called Commentacu∣lum, went thro the Temple, and made all those withdraw who were not instructed in the My∣steries of Religion, or such as were excommuni∣cated: For the Custom of the Greeks, from whom the Romans borrowed theirs, was that the Priest coming to the Altar should ask aloud, , Who is here? The People answered, , Many good Persons. Then the Usher or Verger went thro' the Temple, crying, ; that is, Away with the Wicked; or else, , Away with the Prophane. The Romans commonly made use of these Words, Nocentes, profani ab∣scedite. All those who were driven out of the Temples among the Greeks, were comprehended under these general Words, , &c. Ovid comprizes a great many of those who were forbidden to assist at the Mysteries of the Gods in these Verses, L. 2. Fast. Innocui veniant: procul binc, procul impius esto Frater, & inpartus mater acerba suos: Cui pater est vivax: quimatris digerit annos, Quae premit invisam socrus amica nurum. Tantalidae fratres absint, & Jasonis uxor, Et quae ruricolis semina tosta dedit: Et soror & Progne, Tereusque duabus iniquus, Et quicunque suas per scelus auget opes. We understand by these Verses in general, that there were two sorts of Persons, who were for∣bidden to assist at Sacrifices, viz. The Prophane, that is, such as were not yet instructed in the Worship of their false Deities, and those who had committed some enormous Crime, as to kill or strike a Father or Mother: They had some kind of Sacrifices in Greece, whereat it was not allowed Virgins and Slaves to be present. The Priest at Cheronaea with a Whip in his Hand, stood at the Gate of the Temple of Matuta, and with a loud Voice forbad the Etolian Slaves to enter in: Those among the Magi, who had Red Spots in their Faces, must never draw near the Altars, as Pliny says, L. 30. C. 2. no more than those must do among the ancient Germans, who had lost their Shield in a Conflict; so also among the Scythians, he that had not killed an Enemy in Battle must not come: The Roman Ladies were to assist at the Sacrifices with Vails on. When prophane and excommunicated Persons were withdrawn, they cried, Favete linguis, or animis, and pascite linguam, to require Silence
and Attention during the Sacrifice: The Egyp∣tians for the same End were wont to expose the Statue of Harpocrates, the God of Silence, whom they called . As for the Romans, they placed the Statue of the Goddess Angeronia upon the Altar of Volupia, the said Goddess having her Mouth sealed up, to intimate that Men ought to be attentive both in Body and Mind at the Mysteries of Religion, and submit thereunto: In the mean time the Priest bleft the Water, in or∣der to sprinkle it with the ordinary Ceremonies, either to throw the Wood-Ashes into it, that had been used in burning the Sacrifice, or to ex∣tinguish the Taeda or Sacrificial Torch therein. He first sprinkled the Altars, and then all the Peo∣with this Lustral Water, while the Chorus of Musicians sung Hymns in Honour of the Gods: Then they perfumed the Altars, Statues of the Gods and Victims with Incense, and the Priest turning his Face to the East, and laying hold on the Horns of the Altar, read the Prayers out of the Book of Ceremonies, and began them with Janus and Vesta, as believing there could be no access had to the other Gods but by their Inter∣position: They also offered them Wine and In∣cense before all the rest. The Emperor Antoninus, surnamed Helioga∣balus, ordered that the Preface of those Prayers should be addrest to the God Heliogabalus, as Lampridius says in his Life. Domitian would also have them begin with addressing themselves to Pallas, whose Son he called himself, as Philostra∣tus says: Nevertheless the Romans restored this Honour to Janus and Vesta, which was allowed them from all Antiquity. After this Preface addrest to Janus and Vesta, the Person that offi∣ciated began a long Prayer, which he directed to the God to whom the Sacrifice was made; and afterwards to all the rest of the Gods, whose chief Vertues he recounted, and whom he pray'd to be propitious and favourable to those for whom the Sacrifice was offered, according to the Institution of Orpheus, who ordered that in all Prayers they should summarily touch upon the principal Vertues of the Gods, and that at last they should be entreated to assist the Empire, Emperors, chief Ministers, particular Persons, and generally to relieve all the Necessities of the Publick. This is that which Virgil, L. 8. Aeneid. has religiously observed in the Prayer, which he makes the Salii put up to Hercules, adding after having recounted his glorious Actions, Salve, vera Jovis proles, decus addite Divis, Et nos & tua dexter adi pede sacra secundo. Apuleius makes a Prayer to the Goddess Isis, consisting of Thanksgiving, for her having re∣stored unto him his former Shape, and which I shall relate here for the Benefit of the curious Reader. Tu quidem sancta & humani generis sos∣pitatrix perpetua, semper fovendis mortalibus muni∣fica, dulcem matris affectionem miserorum casibus tribuis, nec dies, nec quies ulla, ac ne momentum quidem tenue tuis transcurris beneficiis otiosum, quâ mari, terrâque protegas homines, & depulsis vitae procellis salutarem porrigas dexteram, quâfa∣torum etiam inextricabiliter contorta retractas licia, & fortunae tempestates mitigas, & stellarum varios meatus cohibes. Te superi colunt, observant inferi, tu rotas orbem, luminas Solem, regis Mundum, cal∣cas Tartarum, tibi respondent sidera, redeunt tem∣pora, gaudent Numina, serviunt elementa, tuo nutu spirant flamina, nutriunt nubila, germinant semi∣na, crescunt gramina. Tuam Majestatem perbor∣rescunt aves coelo meantes, ferae montibus errantes, serpentes solo latentes, belluae ponto natantes. At ego referendis laudibus tuis exilis ingenio, & adhiben∣dis Sacrificiis tenuis patrimonio: Nec mihi vocis ubertas ad dicenda quae de tuâ Majestate sentio, sufficit; nec ora mille, linguaeque totidem, vel inde∣fessi sermonis aeternaseries. Ergo quod solum potest religiosus quidem, sed pper, alioqum efficere cura∣bo, divinos tuos vultus numenque sanctissimum in∣tra pectoris mei secreta conditum porpetuò custodiens imaginabor. These Prayers were usually made standing, sometimes with a low, and sometimes with a loud Voice, unless it were at the Sacrifices of the Dead, when they were performed sitting: Multis dum precibus Jovem salutat Stans summos resupinus usque in ungues. Mart. L. 12. Epigr. 78. And Virgil, L. 9. Aeneid. —Luco tum fortè parentis Pilumni Turnus sacratá valle sedebat. There was a kind of an Oration made with the Prayers for the Prosperity of the Emperor and Government, as Apuleius L. 11. of his Golden Ass informs us, After, says he, the Procession was come back to the Temple of the Goddess Isis, one of the Priests, called Grammateus, standing up before the Door of the Quire, brought together all the Pastophori, and getting up to a high Place like a Pulpit, took his Book and read several Orations aloud, and made Prayers for the Emperor, Senate, Roman Knights and People, adding some Things by way of Instruction in Religion: Tunc ex iis, quem cuncti Grammateum vocabant, pro foibus assistens, coetu Pastophorum (quod sacro-sancti Collegii nomen est) velut in concionem vocato, indidem de sublimi suggestu, de libro, de litteris faustâ voce praefatus Principi magno, Senatuique, Equiti, totique populo, nauticis navibus, &c.
These Ceremonies being ended the chief Sa∣crificer being set down, and the rest of them standing, the Magistrates or private Persons who offered Sacrifice, came before him and pre∣sented him with the first Fruits and Victime, and made sometimes a short Discourse or kind of Complement, as we find Homer makes Ʋlysses do, when he presented the High Priest Chryses with Iphigenia Agamemnon's Daughter to be sa∣crificed. I come to you, said he, in Agamem∣non my Master's Name, who gives his Daugh∣ter a Sacrifice to Apollo, whose Displeasure the Greeks have but too much felt, in order to ap∣pease him.These Words being over, he de∣livered her into his Hands, and Chryses received her: We have also such another Speech in Lu∣cian, which he makes Phalaris his Embassador deliver to the Priests at Delphi, as he made them a Present from him of a brasen Bull, that for Workmanship was a Master-piece. As every one came to present his Offering, he went to wash his Hands in a Place appointed in the Temple for that Purpose, that he might the better crepare himself for the Sacrifice he was to make, and to thank the Gods for being pleased to accept of the Victims. Lastly, When the Offering was made the Priest that officiated, perfumed the Victims with Incense, and sprink∣led them with Lustral Water; and having washed his Hands, and got up again to the Altar, he prayed to the God whom he presented the Sacrifice to, with a loud Voice, that he would ac∣cept of those Offerings, and be pleased with the Victims he went to sacrifice to him, for the pub∣lick Good, and for such and such Things in par∣ticular: Thus the Priest Chryses, in Homer, L. 1. Iliad. when he had received Iphigenia, and the other Sacrifices, lift up his Hands to Heaven, and made loud Prayers to Apollo, earnestly be∣seeching him to pardon the Greeks, and accept of his Petitions. In the close of the Offertory and Prayer made by the Priests to the Gods, he came down the Steps of the Altar, and from the Hand of one of his Assistants received the Sacred Paste called Mola salsa, that was made of Barley or Wheat Flour, mixed with Salt and Water, which he threw upon the Head of the Victim, sprink∣ling a little Wine upon it, and this was called Immolatio, quasi molae illatio, being as it were the Diffusion of this Paste: Mola salsa, says Festus, vocatur far tostum & sale sparsum, quòd eo molito hostiae aspergantur. Virgil has exprest this Cere∣mony in several parts of his Poem; one of which take from Aeneid. 2. Jamque dies infanda aderat mihi sacra parari, Et salsaefruges, & circam tempora vittae. Upon which Servius says, that the Priest scatte∣red little bits of this Paste upon the Head of the Victim, the Altars where the Sacred Fire burnt, and Knives, as by way of Consecration. The Priest having scattered the Crumbs of this salt∣ed Paste upon the Head of the Victim, which made the first part of the Consecration; he took some Wine in a Vessel called Simpulum, which was a kind of a Cruel; and having tasted it him∣self first, and then made his Assistants do the same, to shew that they partaked of the Sacri∣fice, he poured it between the Horns of the Vi∣ctim, pronouncing these Words of Consecrati∣on, Mactus hoc vino inferio esto; that is, Let this Victim be improved and honoured by this Wine, that it may be the more pleasing to the Gods: I have explained the Word Mactus elsewhere, which you may see: This done, they pulled off the Hair from between the Horns of the Victim, and threw them into the Fire, as Virgil says, Et summas carpens media inter cornua setas, Ignibus imponit sacris. He then commanded the Sacrificer, who asked him Agon', Shall I strike? To knock down the Victim with a great Blow on the Head with a Hammer or Ax; and presently another of the Assistants named Popa, thrust a Knife into his Throat, while another received the Blood of the Animal, that gushed out, wherewith the Priest sprinkled the Altar. Supponunt alii cultro, tepidumque cruorem Suscipiunt pateris. Virg. When the Victim was slain, they flead him, if the same were not a Burnt-offering, which was burnt Skin and all: They took the Flesh off of the Head, and then adorning it with Garlands and Flowers, fasten'd it to the Pillars of the Temples, as well as the Skins, as Ensigns of Re∣ligion, which they carried about in Procession in some publick Calamity; and this we learn from that Passage in Cicero against Piso: Ecquid recor∣daris cùm omni totius provinciae pecore compulso, pel∣lium nomine, omnem quaestum illum domesticum pae∣ternumque renovasti? And again from this other in Festus: Pellom habere Hercules fingitur, ut ho∣mines cultûs antiqui admoneantur: Lugentes quo∣que diebus luctûs in pellibus sunt. Not but that the Priests oftentimes wore the Skins of the Victims, and that others went to sleep upon them in the Temples of Aescupius and Faunus, that they might receive favourable Responses in their Dreams, or be cured of their Maladies, as Virgil says, L. 7. Aen. v. 87. —Et caesarum ovium sub nocte silenti Pellibus incubuit strais, somnosque petivit: Multa modis simulacra videt volitantia miris, Et varias audit voces, fruiturque Deorum
Colloquio, atque imis Acheronta affatur Avernis. Hic & tum pater ipse petens responsa Latinus, Centum lanigeras mactabat ritè bidentes, Atque harum effultus tergo, stratisque jacebat Velleribus. And Capadox, a Merchant that dealt in Slaves complains in that Comedy of Plautus, entituled, Curculio, that having lain in Aesculapius his Temple, he saw that God in his Dream remove far from him, which made him resolve to leave it, as having no hopes left of a Cure, Migrare certu'st jam nunc è fano foras, Quando Aesculapî ita sentio sententiam: Ʋt qui me nihili faciat, nec salvum velit. They opened the Victim's Entrails, and after they had circumspectly view'd them in order to draw good or bad Presages therefrom, according to the Art of the Auruspices; they floured them with Meal, and sprinkled them with Wine, and made a Present of them to the Gods, reddebant exta Diis, by throwing them into the Fire in small bits boiled or parboiled. Thus Alexander Neapolitanus, L. 4. C. 17. speaks of it: As soon as the Entrails were floured over, he put them into Basons upon the Altars of the Gods, sprinkling them with Wine, and perfuming them with Incense, and then threw them into the Fire that was upon the Altar.And this made the Entrails to be called Porriciae, quae in arae foco ponebantur, Diisque porrigebantur: Inso∣much, that this ancient Form of Speech, porrici∣as inferre signified to present the Entrails: Ignis, says Solinus, in hanc congeriem adponitur, cùm por∣icias intulerint. They often also sprinkled the En∣trails with Oil, as we read, Aen. 6. Et solida imponit taurorum viscera flammis, Pingue super oleum fundens ardentibus extis; And sometimes with Milk and the Blood of the Victim, particularly in the Sacrifices of the Dead; which we learn from Stacius, Theb. L. 6. Spumantesque mero paterae verguntur, & atri Sanguinis, & rapti gratissima cymbia lactis. The Entrails being burnt, and all the other Ce∣remonies finished, they believed the Gods to be fully satisfied, and that they could not fail to find their Vows accomplished, which they ex∣prest by this Verb Litare, that is, all is finish'd, and well done; whereas non Litare on the con∣trary intimated there was something wanting for the Perfection of the Sacrifice, and that the Gods were not appeased. Suetonius speaking of Julius Caesar, says he could not sacrifice one fa∣vourable Victim on the Day he was slain in the Senate; Caesar victimis caesis litare non potuit, that is, says Macrobius, sacrificio facto placare numen. The Priest afterwards dismist the People with these Words, I licet, which were also made use of at the End of Funeral Solemnities and Come∣dies for dismissing the People, as you may see in Terence and Plautus: The Greeks made use of this Expression upon the same account , and the People answered feliciter: Then they made a Sacred Feast of the Flesh of the offered Victims; an Account of which is given under the Word Epulum. From what has been said, you may see, that the Sacrifices consisted of Four principal Parts; the first of which was called Libatio, or the pour∣ing a little Wine upon the Victim; the second Immolatio, when after they had scattered the Crumbs of salted Paste thereon, they killed it; the third Redditio, when they offered the En∣trails to the Gods; and the fourth was called Litatio, when the Sacrifice was perfected and accomplished, without any Fault: Among the publick Sacrifices, there was one sort called Stata, fixed, immovable, which was annually performed on the same Day, and other extraordinary ones named Indicta, because they were appointed ex∣traordinarily upon some important Occasion: You'll find these Sacrifices described in their Al∣phabetical order, or under the Months of the Year. SACROS; Arabian Weights consisting of an Ounce, worth Seven Denarii. SAGUM; a sort of Coat or Habit for Sol∣diers, which the Greeks and Romans used, and was peculiar to the Gauls, according to the Te∣stimony of Varro and Diodorus Siculus: It was made of Wool, and of a Square Form; they had one for Winter and another for Summer. SALACIA; the Wife of Neptune, the God of the Sea, according to the Poets. SALAPITIUM; Die magni Salicipplum disertum, Catul. Epigr. 54. Some said it ought to have been called Salaputium, others Salpitici∣um, and some Saliiputum. Vossius in his Com∣ment upon Pomponius Mela, declares himself in favour of Salicippium; but he forsakes it for Sa∣lapicium, and thereupon informs us that Salappita, in the best Glossaries signifies a Blow or Buffet; and hence it was that the Buffoons, who recei∣ved a thousand Blows upon their Heads and Faces, in order to divert the Company, were called Salpitones, salvitones, and salutiones: He took these Words to be derived from the Greek Verb , which signifies to sound a Trum∣pet, and that the Buffoons who suffered them∣selves to be buffetted as aforesaid, were called Salpittones, i. e. Trumpeters, because that like Trumpeters they blew out their Cheeks as much as they could, that so the Blows they received might make the more noise, and afford greater Diversion; from this Remark he deduces the E∣tymology of Buffoon; for he pretends that the
Title of Buffoon was not given to those, who to make others laugh, acted and said a thousand Fooleries, but upon account among other things, that they suffered themselves to be struck on the Face; and to the end that the Blow might make the more noise, they blew out their Cheeks as much as they could. SALARIA; one of the Gates of old Rome, so called because Salt was brought thro' it into the City; it was named also Quirinalis, Agonalis and Collina. SALII; they were the Priests' of Mars; they wore round Bonnets on their Heads, with Two Corners standing up, and a particoloured Tunick: They also wore a kind of a Coat of Arms, of which nothing could be seen but the Edges, which was a Purple-coloured Band fast∣ned with Copper Buckles, carrying a small Rod in the Right-hand, and a little Buckler in the Left: These Salii confisted of young Noble Men, of whom there were Two very ancient Colleges in Rome: They began their Ceremo∣nies with Sacrifices, and so we find a Trivet pla∣ced near a Salian upon a Medal, which Trivet was commonly made use of at Sacrifices. When the Sacrifices were over, they walked along the Streets, one while dancing together, other whiles separately at the Sound of some Wind-musick; they used a great many Gestures and set Postures, striking musically upon one a∣nothers Bucklers with their Rods, and singing Hymns in Honour of Janus, Mars, Juno and Minerva, who were answered by a Chorus of Virgins drest like themselves, that were made choise of to assist at that Solemnity. Authors give divers Originalls to this Word, those who are for having the same to have been instituted before Romulus, say, that the Salii were so called from one Salius of Arcadia whom Aeneas brought from Mantinea into Italy; where he taught the Youth of the Country a sort of Dance which they performed in Arms, called by the Greeks : Critolaus will have it to proceed from one Saon, who transported the Dii Penates from Samothracia to Lavinium, and in∣stituted this sacred Dance; but Varro says, that the Salii took their Name a Saltando and Saliendo, from the Dances and Capers they made: There were Two sorts of Salii, viz. Salii Palatini, and Collini: The Institution of the first is owing to Numa, according to Livy and Dionysius of Halli∣carnassus, who appointed Twelve of them to at∣tend the Service of Mars upon Mount Palatine; the Occasion of this Institution was that the City of Rome being afflicted with a great Plague in Numa's Reign, he made his People believe, that a Brass-shield was sent him from Heaven, as a sure Pledge of the Gods Protection, and Af∣fection to the Romans. He assured them that the Nymph Egeria and the Muses advised him to keep it carefully, the Fate of the Empire de∣pending upon it; and to the end that it might not be stolen, he caused Veturius Mammurius to make Eleven more so like it, that the sacred Shield could never be distinguished from the rest. Thus Numa erected a Colledge of Twelve Priests taken out of the Patritian Order, to whom he entrusted the Care of those Bucklers, which he laid up in Mars his Temple, and which were carried yearly with Dancing and Capering thro' the City at the Feast of Mars. This Priesthood was very august in Rome, and officiated by the chief Persons in the Empire, who were assumed into the Number of the Twelve: For we read in History that several Great Captains among the Romans made themselves of the Order of the Salii, such as Appius Claudius, the Emperor Titus, Antoninus and Scipio Africanus, who, Livy says, left the Army because he was of the Or∣der of the Salii, and that their Festival Day drew near; and this was the Reason that the Army continued for some time incamped at the Heliespont, till the Return of Scipio who staied in some Place in order to perform his Devotion on the Day of the said Feast. Stativa deinde ad Heliespontum aliquandiu habuerunt, quia dies fortè quibus Ancylia moventur, religiosi ad iter incide∣rant: iidem dies P. Scipionem propiore etiam reli∣gione, quia Salius erat, disjunxerant ab exer∣citu, causaque & is ipse morae erat dum conse∣queretur. The Salians called Collini were also to the Number of Twelve instituted by Tullius Hosti∣lius, and all of the Patrician Order; for the said King fighting against the Fidenates, as Livy says, and finding he had the Worst of it, made a Vow to Mars that he would increase the Num∣ber of the Salii, if he won the Victory, who when he had so done, created Twelve Salians more. SALINAE, Salt-houses. Pliny says, that Ancus Martius was the first that erected Salt∣houses near Ostia towards the Tiber's Mouth; Rex Ancus Salinas primus instituit. There were Granaries of Salt at Rome which stood near the Gate called Trigemina. SALTATIO; a Dance; Lucian in his Dia∣logue concerning Dancing, says, 'tis as ancient as the World, and took it's Original with Love; witness, adds he, the various Motions of the Stars and the different Conjunctions of those fixed and wandring Bodies; 'tis from the Mo∣tion of the Heavens and their Harmony that this Divine Art took it's Origin, which has been improved in Time: It's said, that Rhea was the first who took Delight in this Exercise, and that she taught it her Priests both in Creet and Phrygia; and this Invention was not useless to them, for by Leaping and Dancing they sa∣ved Jupiter's Life, whom his Father intended to devour, insomuch, that the King of the Heavens owed his Safety to Dancing; but in those Times
it was a Military Exercise, which consisted in striking their Swords and Javelins upon their Shields: Pyrrhus invented the Pyrrhica, which was a Dance performed in Arms: The Lacedae∣monians, after they had learnt this Art of Castor and Pollux; improved it with that Care, that they never went to War without dancing to the Flute, insomuch, that it may be said they owed part of their Glory to Dancing; and their Youth accustomed themselves as much to the Exercise of Dancing as they did to that of Arms, for a Player upon the Flute fixing himself in the Midst of them, began the Motion with Piping and Dancing, and they followed him ma∣king a Thousand warlike Postures, in good order: The same Thing was practised at the Dance cal∣led Hormus, which was a Mixture composed of Boys and Girls, wherein the Boys lead the Dance with manly and warlike Postures, and the Girls followed with a gentler and more mo∣dest Pace, with a Design to compose a Harmony of Strength and Moderation: They had also a∣nother Dance which they performed bare-foot, to say nothing of that which Homer represents in Achilles his Shield, wherein Daedalus instructed the fair Ariadne, nor of the Caperers and great Dancers that went before, who cut dangerous Capers: The Thessalians esteemed it so much, that their chief Magistrates borrowed the Name from it, and called themselves Proorquestres, that is, those who lead the Dance, for this Inscripti∣on was to be met with under their Statues, as well as that, To the Honour of such an one, for having danced well in Fight, that is, for having been valliant in Battel. They offered no Sacrifice at Delos without a Dance, and here they had young Boys, the Chief whereof lead a Dance by the Sound of the Flute and Harp: But what need we speak of the Greeks since the Indians themselves worship the Sun, not by kissing their Hands, but dancing, as if thereby they meant to imitate the Motion of that admirable Planet, and they have no other Divine Worship, since that same is performed at Sun-setting and Rising: The Ethiopians went dancing to Battle, and before they let fly their Arrows, which were set in order about their Heads in the Form of Sun-beams, they leaped and danced to terrifie the Enemy; let us now go into Egypt, where the Story of Proteus repre∣sents an excellent Dancer, making a Thousand different Postures, and who with his supple Body and Ingenuity of Mind knew how to counterfeit and imitate every thing. The Three Sorts of noblest Dances, are the Cordacismus, Syncinnis, and Emmaelia, who took their Names from the Satyrs. I'll pass by se∣veral other sorts of Dances with their Names and Authors, says Lucian, my Design being no other than to shew the Pleasure and Benefit that may be got by this Exercise, especially, since the Time of Augustus. I have not spoken of the Phrygian Dance, which was done for Debauchery, where you might see the Peasants jumping and tumbling about while the Flute play'd, and the same is a painful and labori∣ous Dance, still practised in the Country. SALUS, Livy mentions the Goddess Salus; by it was meant the Publick Weal: Aedes, Ce∣reris Salutis, de caelo tactae. SANCTUS or SANCUS and SAN∣GUS, and SEMO-SANCTUS and FI∣DIUS. Ovid informs us, that all these Names meant one Thing, and that this was a God pecu∣liar to the Sabines, which they communicated to the Romans: Quaerebam Nonas Sancto, Fidio-ne referrem, An tibi, Semo Pater; tunc mihi Sanctus ait Cuicumque ex istis dederis, ego munus habebo; Numina ternafero, sic voluêre Cures: Hunc igitur veteres donarunt aede Sabini, Inque Quirinali constituere jugo. St. Augustine L. 18. de Civ. Dei. C. 9. belie∣ved that he was the first King of the Sabines, who was communicated to the Romans, he ha∣ving been deified after his Death. Varro and Festus believed the Contrary, and that he was the same God as Hercules: These are Varro's Words: Putabant hunc esse Sanctum à Sabinâ lin∣guâ, & Herculem à Graecâ; and for Festus he says: Fit sacrificium Herculi aut Sanco, qui sci∣licet idem est Deus. This Contradiction may be removed in the same manner as that con∣cerning the Father of Picus, which some said was Stercetius: They often gave unto Kings the very Names of the Gods; and so Stercetius was called Saturn, and Sanchus Hercules, as Encas was also named Jupiter: Dionysius of Halicarnas∣sus shews how the Sabines were originally de∣scended from the Lacaedemonians: The Name also of Sabines came from the Greek , colere: Livy likewise mentions the God Sancus: In old Inscriptions these Words are to be met with, Semoni Sanco Deo Fidio Sacrum. SANDALIUM, a Sandal, being a rich kind of Wear for the Feet made of Gold, Silk, or some valuable Stuff, and parti∣cularly used by Ladies, consisting of a Sole, and hollow above the Foot; Terence speaks of this Sandal, Ʋtinam tibi commitigari videam san∣dalio caput, I wish she would strike thee with her Sandal. Aulus Gellius call Apollo Sandalarium, because he had a Temple in one of the Streets of Rome, where Sandals were made. SANDAPILA; a Bier, or Coffin to bear the Bodies of poor People, and such as were exe∣cuted to be buried, and those who carried the Corps were also called Sandapilarii. SANGUS. See Sanctus.
SANITAS; Health, of which the Anci∣ents made a Deity: Pausanias shews us, that the Worshipping of the Goddess of Health was very common in Greece. Posita sunt Deorum signa Hygiae, quam filiam Aesculapii fuisse dicunt: & Minervae, cui itidem Hygiae, id est, Sospitae cogno∣mentum. by the first was plainly meant the Health of the Body, and by the other that of the Mind: He says elsewhere, that there was an Altar for Iason, Venus, Panacer, Health, and Minerva in the Temple of Amphiaraus: lason comes from  Sanatio; and Panacea in Greek is the same as Sanatio: They also make her to be Aesculapius his Daughter: Pliny in like manner says very well, that the Name of Panacea implies the Cure of all Distempers: The Pagans herein pretended to no more than to worship the Deity that bestowed and preserved Health. The Romans worshipped Health upon Mount Quirinal; by her Statue she is repre∣sented like a Roman Lady holding a Serpent crowned with medicinal Herbs in her Right-hand: She was covered with Hair which Women cut off in Honour of her; her Temple, as Pub∣lius Victor says, stood in the Sixth Division of the City of Rome, and Domitian erected a little Temple for her (after he had been freed from the Danger he was in upon Vitellius his coming to Rome) with this Inscription: SALUTI AUGUSTI. There is a Medalion in Relidro of Mar∣cus Aurelius, whereon is represented a Sacrifice made to Aesculapius under the Form of a Ser∣pent by Minerva, who holds a Cup covered with an Olive-Tree in her Hand, and before her ap∣pears Victory, holding a Basket full of Fruit. SARCOPHAGUS and SARCO∣PHAGUM: It was a Stone-Tomb, wherein those Dead were laid, they had no mind to burn. The Word Sarcophagus, which is derived from the Greek, signifies in strictness of Sence, one that eats Flesh, because at first they used a sort of Stones for the making of Tombs, which quickly consumed the Bodies: The Quarries from whence they dug them were in a City of Troas, named Assum: They had the Virtue to waste away a Body to nothing, save the Teeth, in Forty Days: This Stone was like unto a reddish Pumice-stone, and had a saltish taste; they made Vessels of it to cure the Gout, into which they put the Feet, not suffering them to continue there too long. D. M. CUSPIA AEGLA-LIS HOC SARCO PHAG. APERIRI N. LIC. To the Manes; Cuspia Aeglalis rests here; its not lawful to open this Coffin. SATURNALIA. See after Saturnus. SATURNUS; Saturn; all idolatrous Na∣tions in general had a Saturn of their own, as they had also their Jupiter: Its certain in re∣spect to Saturn as well as Jupiter, that the first of all of them was he of Babylon, or Assyria, who was no other than Noah, as we shall shew, whose Son they made to be Jupiter Belus. The Egyp∣tians and Phoenicians receiving their Religion as well as their Colonies, and peopling from As∣syria, dignified also their Countries with a Sa∣turn and Jupiter of their own: The Religion and Worship of Saturn passed from Egypt and Phoeni∣cia into Greece; and the Greeks likewise framed a Saturn and Jupiter to themselves, in Imitation of those of the Eastern People: At last the same Superstition was carried from Greece into Italy; and this is that which Tertullian calls post multas expeditiones, post Attica hospitia: For these Mili∣tary Expeditions consisted in no more, than that Progress made by the Worship of Saturn, which successively ran thro' all the Provinces from the East to the West; and by that Hospitia or En∣tertainment which Greece gave to Saturn, is meant the long abode which that Religion had in Greece, before it was carried into Italy. Ter∣tullian adds, that the Reason, upon Saturn's land∣ing in Italy, why he was taken there for the Son of Heaven and Earth, was because they did not know his Descent: As Noah was the Saturn of the Assyrians, and the Original from which all the other Saturns were copied, its not to be wondered that those Things which appertained more peculiarly to him, have been attributed to others; for he with the Ark coming out of the Waters of the Deluge, that had drown'd all his Predecessors, gave Men some Pretence to believe, that he had no other Father nor Mo∣ther, besides the Heaven and the Earth. Lactantius was of Opinion, that Saturn being a very potent King, did in order to eternize the Memory and Glory of his Father and Mother, give their Names to the Heaven and Earth as many others did theirs to Rivers and Mountains, from which afterwards they feigned themselves to be descended: Hence 'tis, that Trismegistus makes Saturn to be the Son of Ʋranus, who was a Man that had the same Name as that of Hea∣ven. The same Lactantius, after having refuted the Allegorical explication given by the Stoicks, concerning the maiming of Caelum, by his Son Saturn, concludes they were the real Enterprizes of Men against one another; and as to what he says concerning Saturn's devouring his own Chil∣dren; he relates out of Euhemerus his History how that Men in Saturn's Days, fed indifferently upon Humane Flesh, which came afterwards to be forbidden by an Edict of Jupiter: The same Sacred History of Euhemerus, as recited by La∣ctantius, imports that Ʋranus was the first King upon Earth; and that Titan his Eldest Son pre∣tending
to the Crown after his Death, was how∣ever perswaded by his Mother and Sisters, to yield the Empire to Saturn, on Condition that all Saturn's Male Children should be put to Death, that so the Empire might return to Titan and his Children: They killed Saturn's eldest Son, but Jupiter, Neptune and Pluto, and such as were born afterwards, were deliver'd from Titan's Cruelty, and brought up in remote places. Titan coming to understand the News, took up Arms with his Children the Titanes, made War upon Saturn, took him with his Wife Ops, and put them in Prison. Jupiter in the mean time was brought up in Crete, from whence with an Army he came and defeated Titan, de∣liver'd his Father out of Prison, re-establish'd him on his Throne, and then returned again in∣to Crete; Saturn understanding that his Son had a mind to dethrone him, was willing to prevent it, and so laid Ambushes for him: Jupiter per∣ceiving the Design, made himself Master of the Empire, by the Expulsion of his Father Saturn, who fled, and went and reigned in Italy. This is the Story as Lactantius has borrowed it from Eubemerus. Diodorus Siculus recounts the ancient Tradition of the Egyptians, who would have Sa∣turn to have been married to Rhea his Sister, and to have Osiris and Isis by her; or else Jupiter and Juno, of whom Osiris, Isis, Typhon, Apollo and Ve∣nus were born. Saturn, according to the Poets, was the Fa∣ther and King of the Golden Age; that was the Age of Bliss wherein Adam lived in the De∣lights of a Terrestrial Paradice: The Name of Saturn agrees admirably well with the first Man, who for his Sin went to hide himself, as not da∣ring to appear before God; for Satar in Hebrew signifies to bide ones self; whence also 'tis, that the Poets having made Saturn to pass into Italy, gave the Name of Latium to the Country where he landed, and reigned, according to their Re∣lation: And so Saturnalia Tellus and Latium was but the same Country, these two Names bearing the same Signification, tho' the one was Hebrew and the other Latin. The Poets make Saturn to be the Son of Heaven and Earth; so Adam was formed of the Earth, and the God of Heaven was he that made him: The Empire of Saturn and the Golden Age ended together; after which Saturn applied himself to Agriculture: Adam also, after he had sinned, was driven out of the Ter∣restrial Paradice, and from a King as he was, was reduced to the Condition of a Labourer: Lastly, All prophane Authors, as well Histori∣ans as Poets, have recorded, that all Men lived free in the Reign of Saturn, without any men∣tion yet made amongst them of Vassalage or Ser∣vitude. And so during the Saturnalia, or Feasts of Saturn, Servants and Masters eat together; and this was a Resemblance of the first Age un∣der Adam. Noah's History has been also applied to Sa∣turn; for Noah was the Father of all Mankind after the Deluge; he was also the King and Au∣thor of another Golden Age: There were no Slaves in the first Age after the Deluge; all the Race of Men that were in the World making yet as it were but one numerous Family: As Noah, according to Scripture, was the first who plant∣ed a Vineyard, and began the Use of Wine; the Pagans also gave unto Saturn the Glory of having taught Men the Way to cultivate Vine∣yards and the Earth, and the Use of the Sickle. Plutarch says, Saturn taught Icarus the Use of Wine, and dressing the Vineyards. Athaenaeus, after Berosus, says, that the Saturnalia were ce∣lebrated at Babylon, as well as in Greece and Ita∣ly: In short, all the Ancients observe, that the Saturnalia were Days appointed for Debauchery and Drunkenness; as if the Pagans had had a mind to keep in Remembrance the Drunkenness of Noah, which he unadvisedly fell into, he ha∣ving not yet tried the Strength of Wine; of which the Babylonians, as being nighest, might he best informed. Plato in his Timaeus says, that Saturn and Rhea his Wife proceeded from the Ocean and Tetbys; and so Saturn's Symbol at Rome was a Ship: They feigned the Ocean to be the Father, and Tethys the Mother of Saturn, because he came out of the Waters of the Deluge; and this Ship was no other than Noah's Ark. As Noah left all Mankind to perish in the Wa∣ters of the Deluge, except his Three Sons, the Poets have imitated the History herein, by say∣ing that Saturn had devoured all his Children, but Three. Lucian in his Saturnalia brings in a Minister speaking to God Saturn in this manner: Minister. Do but tell me whether what they say is true, that you devoured your Children, and would have done as much by Jupiter, if your Wife had not convey'd him away, and put a Stone in his room, which you swallow'd down like a Pill: But when he grew up he dethroned you, and threw you Head-long into Hell, with all those who took your part. Saturn. Tho' I should have been so cruel as to devour my Children, could I eat a Stone with∣out being choaked, or breaking my Teeth? Nei∣ther did Jupiter dispossess me at all, but I have voluntarily resigned him the Throne, and am not in Hell, as you see. Minister. But what moved you to relinquish your Dominion? Saturn. It was because I was Old and Gouty, which has given them occasion to say, that my Feet were put into Irons; insomuch, that I was incapable to take care of every thing, and to pu∣nish the Wicked, whole Number increases daily.—Besides, I thought it the Duty of a good Father to part with his Estate to his Children in
his Life-time, to avoid Quarrels after his Death: I'll live at Ease, without having my Head tor∣mented with a thousand importunate Petitions that are contradictory to each other, to say no∣thing of the Trouble I was continually put to by causing Thunder, Rain, Wind and Hail: Now I live easily, and solace my self with Nectar and Ambrosia, in the Company of Japetus and other Old Men like my self; without being incumbred with the Affairs of the World, as Jupiter is; for he has no rest any longer than while my Feast lasts, when I re-assume the Empire for some Days, to the End I may not be despised, and to put Men in mind of the Gentleness of my Reign, when Corn grew without sowing, Rivers flowed with Milk, and Fountains with Wine and Ho∣ney: All Things were then in common; there were neither Rich nor Poor, none cheated nor betrayed; in short, it was the Golden Age. Saturn was represented like an old Man grown crooked with Age, pale, sad, and with his Head covered; in his Right Hand he held a Sickle, and a Serpent biting her Tail, and a Child which he endeavoured to devour in his Left. The first Temple that was built to him at Rome, was that of Tatius, King of the Sabines, upon Mons Ca∣pitolinus; the second was consecrated by Tullius Hostilius; and the third dedicared by the Con∣suls A. Sempronius Atratinus and M. Minutius. Valerius Publicola made it to be the Place where the publick Treasure was kept, and 'twas in this Temple that Foreign Embassadors caused their Names to be writ down in the publick Registers by the general Treasures: Here also it was that they kept the Minutes and Registers of Con∣tracts, and all such Actions as Parents did. Those who had recovered their Freedom, were discharg'd out of Prison, or freed from the Hands of their Enemies, went to consecrate their Chains in that Place: The Statue even of Saturn himself were Chains made of Wool, in Comme∣moration of those which Jupiter his Son put up∣on him; which Chains at the Saturnalia were taken off, to denote the great Liberty Men en∣joy'd at that time. They sacrificed anciently a Man to him; but Hercules abolished this cruel Custom, and instead thereof appointed them to offer little Statues made of Plaister unto him. Saturn is also one of the Seven Planets, and the farthest from the Earth, who appears to move flower than the rest: Its placed between the Firmament, and the Orbit of Jupiter; and tho' it appears to be the least of the Planets, yet 'tis the greatest, for its Diameter contains 97 times that of the Earth: It performs its Re∣volution in the Zodiac in 29 Years, 157 Days, and 22 Hours. It has two Satellites about it; there is something new daily discovered concern∣ing it: The Astrologers call it the Great Infor∣tune: Its Nature is cold and dry; and its accu∣sed of being the Cause of all the Evil that hap∣pens upon Earth; its two Houses are Capri∣corn and Aquarius, and its Exaltation is in Libra. SATURNALIA; they were Solemn Feasts instituted in Honour of Saturn, and kept at Rome Decemb. 17, or on the 16 Calends of Ja∣nuary, the same lasting a Week: This Feast was instituted long before the Foundation of Rome. Macrobius, L. 1. Saturn. relates Three Opini∣ons concerning the Original thereof: Some say, that Janus appointed it by way of Acknowledg∣ment for the Art of Agriculture, which he had learnt of Saturn: Others attribute the Origin thereof to Hercules his Companions, for their having been kept from Robbers by Saturn, to whom they put up their Prayers for that Pur∣pose: And lastly, Others maintain that the Pe∣lasgi of Greece landing in the Isle of Delos, learnt of the Oracle that they ought to erect an Altar to Saturn, and celebrate a Feast in Honour of him: This Feast was therefore instituted at Rome, according to the Relation of the said Au∣thor, in the Reign of Tullus Hostilius, after he had triumphed over the Albans. This Opinion is opposed by Varro, who says Tarquinius Super∣bus built Saturn a Temple, and that T. Largius the Dictator dedicated the same to the Satur∣nalia. Livy shews us, that they dedicated a Temple to Saturn, and instituted Saturnalia, Three Years after the Victory which Posthumius the Dictator won over the Latins, near the Lake Regillium, which happen'd in the Year 257, in the Consulship of Aulus Sempronius, and M. Mi∣nutius Augurinus: His consulibus, says he, Aedes Saturno dedicata: Saturnalia, institutus festus dies. This Feast lasted but for one Day at first, and this continued to the Reign of Augustus, who ordered it to continue for three; and afterwards they intermixed the Saturnalia with the Sigillaria, which made the Feast last sometimes five, and sometimes seven Days, as Martial says. Lucian in his Saturnalia brings in Saturn him∣self speaking in this manner concerning the said Feast. During my whole Reign, which lasts but for one Week, no publick nor private Business is to be done, but only to drink, sing, play, create imaginary Kings, place Servants with their Ma∣sters at Table, smut them with Soot, or make them leap into the Water with Head foremost, when they do not perform their Duty well. He afterwards recites the Laws of the Saturnalia. They shall do no publick nor private Business during my whole Reign; and of all Trades, none but common Cooks, Pastry-Cooks, and the like shall follow their Occupation: All Exercises of Body and Mind shall be banish'd, saving such as are for Recreation, and nothing shall be read or recited but what is conforma∣ble to the Time and Place: The Rich, Poor, Masters, Slaves, all shall be equal; there shall be
neither Disputes, nor Quarrels, Reproaches, In∣juries, nor Menaces, nay, Men shall not be al∣lowed to be so much as angry: No Accompt shall be kept of Income or Expence; no Inven∣tory taken of Moveables and Plate used at my Feast. The Rich before-hand shall take an Ac∣count of all such as they are minded to treat, or ought to send Presents to, and for that End lay aside the Tenth part of their Income, with∣out being permitted to apply it to any other use under any Pretence whatsoever: They shall also lay by their Superfluities, whether the same be Moveables or Cloaths, and that which is of no use to them, in order to make a Pre∣sent of the same to their necessitous Friends. After they have on the Eve before cleared the House of all Pollution, and expelled Pride, Ambi∣tion, and Covetousness from thence, in order to sacrifice to Sweetness of Temper, Courtesie and Liberality, they shall read over the List they have made, and having laid every ones Portion by it self; they shall towards Night send their Presents to them by the Hands of some trusty Persons, with Orders to take no∣thing of them, unless a Cup of Drink; and for the surer delivery of the said Present, mention shall be made thereof in a Letter writ for that Purpose: When the Master of the House shall treat his People according to Custom, his Friends shall serve at Table with him, and Li∣berty shall be given them to jest, provided the Raillery be neatly done, and that he who is Raillied laughs first. Thus Slaves had Liberty to say what they would at this Feast, and to ridicule their Ma∣sters to their Faces for their Faults, as Horace says, Sat. 7. L. 2. Age libertate Decembri, Quando ita majores voluerunt, utere, narra. They sacrificed at the Saturnalia bare-headed, contrary to the Custom of other Sacrifices. SATYRI; Satyrs; they were fabulous Demi-Gods among the Pagans, who with the Fauni and Sylvani preside over Forests. They were re∣presented with Horns on their Heads, erected Ears, a Tail, Goat's Feet, and hairy all over, and the Hair standing an end in their Foreheads: Its thought this Word comes from Sathen, which in the old Greek signified a Man's Genital; be∣cause the Satyrs were naturally very lascivi∣ous: They were usually Bacchus his Companions. SATYRA, or rather SATIRA; a Satyr; its a Word that signifies all manner of Discourse, wherein any Person is reprehended: But a Satyr is commonly a Poem that wittily reproves Mens Vices. Casaubon makes a Distinction between the Satyrical Poetry of the Greeks, and the Sa∣tyr of the Romans, which was peculiar to them∣selves only; and this is justified by Quintilian, L. 1. C. 10. Satira quidem tota nostra est; for which Reason Horace calls it, Graecis intactum carmen, a sort of Poetry unknown to the Greeks. See Cau∣sabon upon the Word: A Satyr ought to be lively, pleasant, moral and full of variety; wherein Juvenal and Horace excelled, though their Satyrs ought to be read with Precaution. SCABILLA, SCABELLA, SCA∣MILLA, and SCAMELLA; a sort of Castianets, which were like a little Joint-stool, or Foot-stool, and which they beat after diffe∣rent ways, with Wooden or Iron Shoes: It was a kind of Sandal made of two Soles, between which a Castianet was tied. SCALAE GEMONIAE; to which they fastned the Bodies of Criminals after their Exe∣cution, and from whence they dragged them with Hooks into the Tiber, after they had expo∣sed them for some time. SCELERATA; Porta is understood; otherwise called the execrable Gate, was one of the Gates of Rome; being so named from the Misfortune which befell the Three hundred and six Fabii there. SCENA; a Scene; the Theater whereon were represented the Dramma, and other pub∣lick Shews: According to Vitruvius, L. 5. C. 8. there are Three sorts of Scenes, viz. the Tragi∣cal, Comick and Satyrical: Their Decorations vary, in that the Tragical Scene hath Columns, raised Cornishes, Statues, and such other Orna∣ments as appertain to a King's Palace: In the Decoration of the Comick Scene are represent∣ed private Houses, with their Balconies and cross Bars, like common and ordinary Buildings: The Satyrical is adorned with Groves, Caverns, Moun∣tains, and whatever is represented in Land∣skips. SCENE; by this Word is also meant the Parts of a Drammatick Poem, when a fresh Actor enters upon the Stage, or that one that was thereon, goes off: A Drammatick Poem is divided into Acts, and Acts into Scenes. SCHOENOBATES; a kind of a Rope∣dancer, who tumbled about a Rope as a Wheel does round the Axle-tree, and hung by the Feet or Neck. Nicephorus Gregoras says, that these sorts of Tumblers or Rope-dancers lived in his time at Constantinople. SCHOLASTICI; those who assisted the Governours and Intendants of Provinces in the Exercise of their Office, and were as Councel∣lors, who drew up Petitions, and instructed them in Matters of Law. SCRIBA; a Secretary, who was an Officer appeartaining to the Publick or Magistrate, that wrote Acts or Decrees, and gave out Dispatches. Every Magistrate had his Secretary, so that there were Secretaries, whom they called Scribae Aedi∣litii, Praetorii, Quaestorii: They were not admit∣ted to the Management of the principal Offices
of the Republick, unless they relinquished their Profession, as we have an Instance of it in the Person of Cn. Flavius, a Libertine's Son, who was Secretary to an Aedilis Curulis, who ha∣ving sued for and obtain'd the Office of Aedile, was opposed therein, and not allowed to enter upon it, as Livy says, before he was first obliged by Oath to exercise the Profession of Secretary no more: They were called by other Names in the Time of the Emperors, viz. Notarii, be∣cause they made use of Abbreviations, and short Notes in writing, insomuch that they writ as fast as one could speak, of which Martial informs us, L. 14. Epigr. 208. Currant verba licet, manus est velocior illis: Nondum lingua, suum dextra peregit opus. SCRINIUM; it was a Desk or Cub∣board to put Papers in, but we may call it an Office or Chamber. SCRINIUM MEMORIAE; a Place where Minutes were kept, to put a Person in remembrance of the Prince's Order, to the End he might afterwards dispatch Letters Patents at large for the same: There were 62 Secretaries, who were called Scriniarii Memoriae and Memo∣riales, belonging to this Office; 12 of whom served the Chancery; and 7 more named Anti∣quarii, whose Business it was to transcribe old Books, in order to transmit them to Posterity: The first of these Officers was called Magister Scrinii Memoriae, and received a Golden Belt from his Prince at the Time of his Creation. SCRINIUM EPISTOLARUM; the Office of those who wrote the Emperor's Letters; Augustus Caesar wrote his own Letters, and gave them afterwards to Maecenas and Agrippa to cor∣rect them, as Dio says, L. 35. Other Emperors commonly made use of Secretaries, to whom they dictated, or only contented themselves to tell them the Substance of such Things as they should write, and only subscribed underneath Vale with their own Hand. SCRINIUM LIBELLORUM; the Office of Requests, where the Petitions present∣ed to the Emperor to beg some Favour of him, were kept: In Pancirolus his Notiriâ Imperii, C. 96. we have the Copy of a Petition presented to the Emperor Antoninus Pius, by Arrius Alphius, the Freedman of Arria Fadilla, the Emperor's Mo∣ther, importing his begging leave to lay up the Bones of his Wife and Son in a Marble-Coffin, which before he had laid in an Earthen one, till such time as the Place which he had bought to erect a Monument for them, was ready: The Words are these: Cùm ante hos dies conjugem & silium amiserim, & pressus necessitate corpora eorum sarcophago fictili commendaverim, donec quietis lo∣cus quem emeram aedificaretur viâ Flaminiâ inter milliare secundum & tertium euntibus ab urbe parte laevâ, custodia monumenti Flam. Tymeles Amelosae M. Signii Orgili. Rogo, Domine, permittas mihi in eodem loco, in marmoreo sarcophago quem mihi modò comparavi, ea corpora colligere, ut quando & ego esse desiero, pariter cum iis ponar. The Answer below was: Decretum fieri placet. Jubentius Cel∣sus Promagister subscripsi. SCRINIUM DISPOSITIONUM, was the Office or Chamber where the Orders and Commands of the Emperor were dispatched, and he that was the chief Officer here was called Comes dispositionum. SCRINIUM VESTIMENTO∣RUM; the Wardrobe where the Emperor's Cloaths were kept. SCRIPTURA; a Tribute paid for Wood and Pasturage, and secured to him that bid most. SCRUPULUS; a Scruple; the least of the Weights used by the Ancients, and among the Romans was the 24th part of an Ounce. SCULPTURA; Sculpture; its an Art, whereby in taking from or adding to some Mat∣ter, are form'd all sorts of Figures, made of Earth, or Wax, or else of Wood, Stones or Met∣tals. Its very difficult, by reason of the Obscu∣rity of former Ages to find out who were the first Inventors of Sculpture; the Antiquity whereof is apparent to us from the Holy Scrip∣tures, by the Idols of Laban, which Rachel stole, and the Golden Calf made by the Children of Israel in the Wilderness: As to prophane Au∣thors who have written hereof, some will have it, that a Potter of Sicyone, whose Name was Dubitadus, was the first Sculptor; and that his Daughter first began Portraiture, by drawing her Lover's Picture upon the Shadow, which the Light of a Lamp marked upon a Wall: Others maintain that this Art had its Origin in the Isle of Samos, where Ideocus and Theodorus who were the Inventors of it, made some Pieces long be∣fore any mention was made of Dibutadus; that Demaratus, the Father of Tarquinius Priscus, was he that brought it into Italy, upon his reti∣ring thither; for having brought Eucirapus and Eutigrammus, who were excellent Artists in this kind, along with him, they communicated the same more especially to the Tuscans, who applied themselves to it, and went on with it to Perfecti∣on; that Tarquin caused one Taurianus after∣wards to come thither, who was one of the most famous of them, to make an Earthen Statue of Jupiter, and Four Horses of the same Mat∣ter to be placed in the Frontispiece of that God's. Temple: Its also thought, the same Sculptor made a Figure of Hercules, which was for a long time to be seen at Rome, and named upon ac∣count of the Matter whereof it was made Her∣cules of baked Earth.
There were several Sculptors in those Times, both in Greece and Italy, who wrought in Earth: There is mention made of Calcostenes, an Athe∣nian, who made his Name and House famous, upon account of the many Earthen Figures wherewith he adorned it; of Demophiles and Gorsanus, who were also Painters, and beautified the Temple of the Goddess Ceres with Pictures and Earthen Images; and so the Representati∣ons of all the Heathen Gods, were at first no o∣therwise than in Earth and Wood; and 'twas not so much because of the Brittleness of the Matter, and the little Value thereof, as from the Luxu∣ry and Riches of People, that they proceeded to make of Marble, and the most precious Met∣tals: In the mean time how rich soever the Mat∣ter was which Sculptors used, they never laid Earth aside, which they always used to make their Models of; and whether they went about to make them Statues of Marble, or cast them in Met∣tal, they never undertook these laborious Works, before they had first made a Model of Earth of them; and this without doubt gave Praxiteles occasion to say, that the Art of making Earthen Figures, was the Mother that as it were brought forth the Art of making Marble and Brass Fi∣gures; which began not to appear in its Perfecti∣on, till about 300 Years after the Building of Rome. Phidias of Athens, who lived at that time, excelled all those that went before him, either in working in Marble, Ivory, or Mettals; but quickly after there came up a great Number of excellent Artists, who advanced Sculpture to the highest Pitch, it arrived to: For in Sicyone ap∣pear'd Polycletus, whose Figures were admired by all the World, and a Model for all those that studied the Art. Afterwards Myron came on, who was inimitable in all he did; Lysippus, whose Name will live as long as Alexander's, and who alone had the Reputation to cast that Prince his Statue in Brass; Praxiteles and Scopas, who made admirable Figures, and the Horses which are still to be seen at Rome before the Pope's Palace at Monte-Cavallo: This Scopas had Briaxis, Timo∣theus and Leochares for Competitors, who wrought at the famous Tomb of Mausolus, King of Ca∣ria: Fisodorus, Canachus, Daedalus, Buthireus, Myro's Disciple, Nyceratus, Euphranor, Theodo∣rus, Xenocrates, Phyromachus, and Stratonicus Anti∣gonus, who wrote a Treatise concerning his Art. Those excellent Persons, who made the Laocoon, viz. Agesander, Polydorus and Athenodorus, are all Three worthy of immortal Praise for such curi∣ous Workmanship; and an infinite Number more, the Names of some of whom have been trans∣mitted to Posterity, and others have perish'd with their Works. For, tho' there were so great a Number of Statues in Asia, Greece and Italy, and that in Rome alone, there were more, as was reported, than there were living Persons; yet at this Day there are but very few remaining, especially of any value. In the Time that Mar∣cus Scaurus was Edile, as he was obliged by his Place to provide for what was requisite towards the publick Rojoycings, he adorned the stately Theater, which he erected with 3000 brazen Statues; and tho' L. Mummius and Lucullus brought away a great Number out of Asia and Greece, yet there were still above 3000 remain∣ing in Rhodes, as many at Athens, and more at Delphi; but what is most strange, is the Big∣ness of the Figures, which those ancient Artists had the Courage to undertake: Amongst those which Lucullus caused to be transported to Rome, there was a Statue of Apollo 30 Cubits high; the Collossus of Rhodes, made by Cares of Lyndos, the Disciple of Lycippus, far exceeded it. Nero's Statue made by Xenodcrus after that of Mercu∣ry, was also of an extraordinary size, as being 110 Feet high. In the mean time 'tis to be observed, that Sculpture, after Phidias his Time, continued not in any great Perfection but for about 150 Years, and that then it began insen∣sibly to decline; not but that after the said time there were still some fine Pieces of Workmanship both in Greece and Italy, tho' not performed with so great a Fancy and exquisite Beauty: Be∣sides the Greek Statues are more esteemed for the Excellency of the Work: There is a special Difference between them and those of the Ro∣mans; in that the greatest part of the first are almost always naked, like those who wrestle or perform some other bodily Exercise, wherein the Youth of those Times placed all their Glo∣ry, whereas the others are clad or armed, parti∣cularly have the Toga on, which was the great∣est Mark of Honour among the Romans. SECESPITA, was the Knife wherewith they killed the Victims appointed for Sacrifices. SECULUM; an Age. This Word which is often used comprehends the Space of 100 Years compleat, according to Festus. Servius observes that an Age is also taken for the Space of 30 Years, sometimes for 110 and sometimes for 1000: The Ancients divided Time into Four Ages, which they called the Golden Age, that is attributed to Saturn's Reign, the Silver Age, to that of Jupiter, and the Brazen and Iron Ages, under which they comprehend that of the present Time. SECULARES LUDI; Secular Games, were formerly one of the most solemn Feasts kept at Rome: Several ancient Authors have writ concerning it; but their Works being lost, we should have remained ignorant of the chief Ceremonies thereof, if Zozimus, who lived to∣wards the End of the fourth Century, had not taken Care to give us an abridged Account thereof, in the second Book of his History, and what he says thereupon, we find confirmed and ex∣plained by some Medals of those Secular Plays still
in being, especially by those of Domitian: The O∣riginal therefore of the said Plays take as follows. The City of Rome being afflicted with a great Plague, the very same Year wherein they ex∣pelled the Tarquins, Valerius Publicola, who was then Consul, in order to appease the Wrath of the Gods, ordered them to celebrate this So∣lemnity, the Ceremonies whereof were found in the Oracles of the Sibylls, which they kept with great Care; 'twas the Year after the Foun∣dation of Rome 245. according to the Calculati∣on of Varro, which is the best and most followed, that is 509, Years before our Saviour's Nativity. These Plays were called Secular, because they were obliged to renew them from Age to Age; that is every 100 Years, according to the most received Opinion; or every 110 Years, as the 15 Officers, called Quindecim-viri, pretended in Augu∣stus his Time, who at Rome were to look after the Ceremonies of Religion, and by the said Ex∣cuse found a Way to clear themselves before that Emperor, who accused them for not having celebrated the said Plays at the Time appointed, as you may see in Father Tassin the Jesuite's Treatise concerning the Secular Plays: Augustus having celebrated them under the Consulship of Furnius and Silanus in the Year of Rome 737. the Emperor Claudius would renew them Anno 800. because it was the Beginning of a Centu∣ry: But Domitian without any Respect to Clau∣dius, conformed himself to what Augustus had done, and celebrated them 103 Years after that Prince had done them, that is, in the Year of Rome 840. Some time before it was published over all the Empire, according to ancient Cu∣stom, That every one might come and see those Plays, which he never had seen nor never should again. They opened those Games thus. To∣wards the Beginning of Harvest, the Emperor, as sovereign Pontiff, haranged the People in the Capitol, and exhorted them to prepare them∣selves for so solemn a Feast, by purifying both their Bodies and Minds. The like Exhortati∣ons were made at the great Feasts, and parti∣cularly at the Mysteries of Ceres Eleusina, whose Ceremonies were very like those of the Secular Plays, as Herodian observes: The Emperor be∣ing seated on a Tribunal before a Temple, which was that of Jupiter Capitolinus, gave some Per∣fumes to be distributed to the People, and these Perfumes consisted of Sulphur and Bitumen; the Quindecim-viri received them of the Emperor, and afterwards distributed them among the Peo∣ple, adding thereunto a little Piece of Fir-wood, called Taeda; they-lighted it at one End, and threw some of the said Perfume upon it, the Smoak whereof every one caused to go round him, in order to purifie himself: They also gave of the same to Children, who were at Years of Understanding. The Days whereon these Plays were to be celebrated being come, they began with a Pro∣cession, whereat the Priests of all the Colleges assisted; the Senate and all the Magistrates were present, the People being clad in White, crowned with Flowers, and every one having a Lawrel in his Hand. As they went along the Streets they sung some Verses made on Purpose for this Feast, and as they went into the Tem∣ples and Cross-ways worshipped the Statues of the Gods, which were exposed to view upon Beds of State, and these were called Lectisternia Deorum. They met in the Temples on the Three following Nights to watch there, and put up their Prayers and Sacrifices, and this was cal∣led Pervigilium; and to the end that nothing that was undecent might be committed in these pub∣lick Assemblies, the Youth of both Sexes assisted hereat under the Inspection of their Parents, or some Person at Years of Discretion of their Family, who might be responsible for their Be∣haviour, as Augustus had ordered it; and be∣cause this Feast was chiefly instituted to appease the Gods of Darkness, that is, Pluto, Proserpina, Ceres, the Destinies and Lucina; there were no other than black Victims offered to them, and that in the Night Time, which was then illu∣minated by the Fires made in the Streets and an infinite Number of Lamps lighted upon that Occasion. They then sacrificed a black Bull to Pluto, and a black Cow to Proserpina. On the Morrow during Day-light they offered the like Victims, but such as were white, to Jupiter and Juno. And this we learn from a Medal of Do∣mitian, where the said Emperor powers a Cup of Wine upon the Ashes of the Altar: Here you have Two Musitians also, one playing upon the Harp, and the other upon Two Flutes; a Man upon his Knees holding a Bull, to which, he that was to sacrifice him, whom they called the Vi∣ctimary, seemed to give a Blow on the Head with an Ax. At these Sacrifices they brought the Victims washed and drest with Garlands of Howers, to the Altar, then Orders were given that all pro∣phane Persons should withdraw, and others be silent, and attentive to what was done. After this the Pontiff, who was the Emperor himself, put a little Flower mixed with Salt upon the Victim's Head and then poured a little Wine on, which he gave to the Assistants to taste: Then the Sacrificer presently gave the Victim a great Blow on the Head with his Ax, and his Throat being cut at the same Time by the other Offi∣cers, they presented his Blood to the grand Pontiff, who immediately powred it upon the Fire of the Altar: This being done, they nar∣rowly observed the Entrails of the Animal, from the different Disposition and Colour of which the Aruspices drew good or bad Omens; where∣in the Romans were so circumspect, and had so much Faith, that Julius Caesar himself, as Macro∣bius
says, at least writ Sixteen Books upon that Subject. They afterwards burnt the same En∣trails, when they had taken Three Turns round the Altar, offering this Sacrifice to the God or Goddess for whom the same was designed; and this they never did but they invoked all the other Gods at the same Time, as if they could do nothing but altogether; they usually reser∣ved the Victim for the Feast which was made; after the People were dismissed, with these Words, Iicet, that is, you may withdraw: These Sacrifices being over, they assisted at the pub∣lick Plays, which were more particularly conse∣crated to Apollo and Diana, and went to the Theater where Comedies were acted; and to the Circus, where they were entertained with Foot, Horse and Chariot Races: The Athletes also signalized themselves at Wrestling and o∣ther Exercises: In the Amphitheater they saw the Combats of the Gladiators, and wild Beasts fight, the last of which were brought thither on purpose from all Parts. They resumed their Prayers and Sacrifices the second Night, which they addrest to the Destinies, and to whom they sacrificed a Sheep and a Goat, both black: Next Day such Wo∣men as were free and no Slaves, went to the Capitol and other Temples, where they made their Prayers to Jupiter and the other Gods be∣fore mentioned: There they sung Hymns, to intreat them to prosper the Empire and People of Rome, they also prayed for what related to their own particular Occasions, and among o∣ther things for Ease in Child-bearing: The rest of the Day was spent in publick Rejoycings, and much the same as those used the preced∣ing Day. The third Night they sacrificed a Hog to the Earth, which the Ancients esteemed as one of their chief Goddesses, and adored under diffe∣rent Names; they believed this Animal to be the most pleasing Victim they could offer her, as well because it always looked towards the Earth, as by reason, they said, a Hog former∣ly eat the first Corn that was sowed: This Sa∣crifice was offered upon the Banks of the Tiber at a Place in Campus Martius, called Terentum, from the Verb Tero, to use, because the Bank of the River was there worn away, and as it were consumed by the Water. On the Day following which was the third and last of the Secular Games, they had Two Consorts of Musick, one consist∣ing of Boys, and the other of Girls, all of them of the best Families in Rome, and whose Parents were yet alive; a Circumstance observed, that there might be no Occasion administred for Mourning and Sadness at a Feast, where there should be nothing found but Joy: They sung an Hymn composed on Purpose for the Secular Plays; we have that extant which was sung in Augustus his Time, and composed by Horace, which is to be found in the End of his Book of Epods. It was undoubtedly, the same Day that was appointed for the Mystick Dance of the Salii, instituted formerly by Numa, second King of Rome; we should not have known that this Dance made one of the chief Ceremonies of the Secular Plays, if we had not learnt it from two Medals, one of Augustus, and the other of Domitian, which were stamped on purpose for these Plays, and upon which may be seen the Figure of a Salian, as re∣presented by the Ancients: He has a round Bon∣net on his Head, ending with two very long Corners; upon his particoloured Tunick, he wears a kind of a Coat of Arms, of which nothing but the Edges is to be seen, which consisted of Purple Bands fastned with Brass Buckles; he holds a small Rod in his Right Hand, and a Buck∣ler in the Left, in the midst whereof Minerva's Head is to be seen, she being the Goddess chosen by Domitian to be his Protectress: They assisted the same Day at the Shews, in the same manner as on the preceding Days. This Feast being o∣ver, the Emperor gave the Offerings to such Officers, as were to take care of these Ceremo∣nies, who distributed part of the same amongst the People. They afterwards recorded these Plays in the publick Registries, and inscribed them on Marble. They were called Secular Games, because the Time prescribed between the Celebration of one and the other of them had the same Extent as the longest Life of Man, which is that called  by the Greeks, but Seculum by the Romans. In short, this Solemnity contributed very much to the Diverting of the Plague, Morality, and other Epidemical Distempers; and now we will give you the Occasion of the Institution of them. Valesius, from whom the Family of the Valefii among the Sabines was descended, having a Wood before his House, the tall Trees whereof were reduced to Ashes by Thunder, he was troubled that he could not understand the Rea∣son of such a Prodigy. In a short Time after, his Children happening to fall sick of a dange∣rous Distemper, against which no medicinal Remedies could prevail, he had Recourse to the Aruspices, who telling him, that the manner of the Thunder denoted that the Gods were very angry, he went in the Way of his Duty to ap∣pease them, by Sacrifices; and being both him∣self and his Wife extreamly concerned for the Safety of his Children, of which they had no Hopes, he prostrated himself at the Feet of a Statue of Vesta, making a Tender to that God∣dess of his own, and their Mother's Life to re∣deem theirs; then turning his Eyes towards the Wood that had been burnt, he thought he had heard a Voice commanding him to go to Taren∣tum, and there give them some of the Water of the Tiber to drink, after he had warmed it upon the Fire of Pluto and Proserpina's Altar: At
these Words he despaired still the more of the Lives of his sick Children; for how should he find the Water of the Tiber at Tarentum, which was a little Town scituated in the farther Part of Italy; besides he took it for an ill Augury, for him to heat that Water upon the Altar of the Infernal Gods: The Aruspices had no better Opinion of it than he, however they advised him to obey, wherefore he embarked with his Children upon the Tiber, and took care to carry Fire along with him, but finding he could do it no longer because of its excessive Heat, he caused the Men to row toward a Place on the Shore, where the Stream was not so rapid, and having stopped near a Shepherd's Cottage; he came to know of the said Shepherd that the Name of the Place was Tarentum or Terentum, as well as the City scituate in the Promontory of Iapyx: He gave God Thanks for this good News, caused the Water of the Tiber to be warmed upon the Fire he had lighted, and no sooner gave it his Children to drink but they fell asleep; and when they awoke, found them∣selves well. They told their Father, that while they were asleep, a Man of an extraordinary Size appeared to them, who had an Air all Di∣vine, and commanded them to offer black Vi∣ctims to Pluto and Proserpina, and to spend Three Nights successively in singing and dancing to the Honour of those Deities in a Place in Campus Matrius, appointed for the exercising of Horses: Vaicsius going about to lay the Foun∣dations of an Altar there, had not dug very far, but he found one to his Hand with this In∣scription: TO PLUTO AND PROSERPINA. And having then his Doubts fully cleared to him, he sacrificed black Victims on the said Al∣tar, and spent Three Nights in this Place as 'twas ordered him to do: Now this ar had been erected for those Gods upon a remarkable Occasion during the War of the Romans against the Albans; whea their Armies were just going to engage, all on a sudden there appeared a Man with a monstrous Aspect and clad in black Skins, crying out with a loud Voice, That Fluto and Proserpina commanded them before they en∣gaged, to sacrifice to them under Ground, after which he vanished: The Romans being astoni∣shed at this Apparition, immediately built an Altar 20 Foot deep under Ground, and after having sacrificed according to Order, they co∣vered it, to the end no Body but themselves might have Knowledge of it: Valesius having found it, after he had offered Victims thereon, and spent the Nights in the Rejoycings prescri∣bed by the Gods, he was called Manius Valerius Terentinus; Manius in Commemoration of the Infernal Gods called Manes by the Latins, Vale∣rius from the Word valeo which signifies to be in Health, and Terentinus, in respect to the Place where he had offered Sacrifices. Sometime after this Adventure, that is, the first Year after the Expulsion of the Tarquins, the City of Rome being afflicted with the Plague, Publius Valertus Publicola, who was then Con∣sul, freed the People from this Evil, by offer∣ing in the same Place a black Ox to Pluto, and a black Cow to Proserpina, and he caused this Inscription to be graven on the same Altar; Publius Valerius Publicola hath conse∣crated a Fire to Pluto and Proserpina in Campus Martius; and celebra∣ted Games in Honour of the said Gods, for the Deliverance of the People of Rome. Rome being after that afflicted with Wars and Pestilence in the Fourth Consulship of Marcus Potitus, 352 Years after the Foundation there∣of, the Senate ordered the Sibyll's Books to be consulted by those whose Business it was: They answered, that those Evils would be at an end, if they did but offer Sacrifices to Pluto and Pro∣serpina: They presently sought out the Place where the Altar of these Gods was buried, found it, and consecrated it anew, and they had no sooner finish'd their Sacrifices thereon, but the Romans found themselves freed from the Evils they laboured under; after which they buried the said Altar again, and the same is in a certain Place at the End of Campus Martius; but these Sacrifices having been neglected from the Consulship of Lucius Cénsorinus, and Manli∣us Puelius, and new Misfortunes befalling them in Augustus his Reign, the said Prince renew'd those Plays under the Consulship of Lucius Cen∣sormus, and Caius Sabinus, after Ateius Capito had informed them of the Ceremonies they were to observe thereat, and that the Quindecim-viri, in whose Custody the Sibyll's Books were, had found out the Place where the Sacrifices and Shews ought to be performed. The Emperor Claudius, after Augustus caused the same Games to be celebrated, without any regard had to the Law, that required they should not be per∣formed, but once every Age. Afterwards Do∣mitian not minding what Claudius had done, celebrated them at the full Revolution of an Age from the time of Augustus his solemnizings of them: Lastly, Severus assisted by his Sons Caracalla and Geta, renewed the same Games un∣der the Consulship of Chilo and Libo. Here follows the Manner how these Plays are set down in the publick Registers; the He∣ralds went about to invite the People to a Shew
which they had never seen, and should never see again but this once: Harvest-time being come a few Days before this Feast, the Quinde∣cim-viri, whose Business it was to look after the Ceremonies of Religion, sate upon a Tribunal before the Capitol and Apollo's Temple, from whence they distributed Torches of Sulphur, and Bitumen, to the People which every one used to purifie himself with: They gave none to the Slaves, but only to such as were free: After∣wards all the People went to the Temples we have mentioned, and to that of Diana upon Mount Aventine; every one of which carried some Wheat, Barley and Beans thither, and kept the sacred Eve there all Night in Honour of the Destinies with a great deal of Company: Last∣ly, They solemnized this east for Three Days and Three Nights, beginning with offering Sa∣crifices in Campus Martius upon the Banks of the Tiber in a Place named Terentum: The Gods to whom they offered, were Jupiter, Juno, Apollo, Latona and Diana, as also the Destinies, Lucina, Ceres, Pluto and Proserpina. The first Night Two Hours after Sun-set, the Emperor being assisted by the Quidecim-viri, of whom before, sacrificed Three Lambs upon Three Altars raised upon the Banks of the Tiber, and when he had sprinkled the Altars with the Victims Blood, he burnt them all whole, during which Time the Mu∣sicians who were set upon an advanced Place, sung an Hymn made for that Purpose: They lighted Fires and Lamps every where, and gave Shews that agreed with those Sacrifices: Those who were to provide for Ceremonies, by way of Recompence receiv'd the first Fruits of the Earth; after some of them had been distribu∣ted to all the People: In the Morning they met in the Capitol, from whence after they had sacrificed the usual Victims, they went to the Theater to celebrate Games there in Honour of Apollo and Diana: On the second Day the Wo∣men of Quality went to the Capitol, at the Hour assigned them in the Sibyll's Books, and there sacrificed to Jupiter, and sung Hymns in his Praise. Lastly, On the third Day, a Com∣pany of Youths of good Birth, to the Num∣ber of 27, and as many young Girls, all whose Parents were alive, in fix Chorus's, sung Hymns in Greek and Latin, and Sacred Songs, for the obtaining all manner of Prosperity to the Cities of Rome. There were moreover many other Things done according to the Prescription of the Gods, and as long as these Ceremonies were observed, the Roman Empire remained entire; but to the end you may know the Truth of what has been said, I'll here recite the Oracle of the Sibylle her self, as others have already done. Roman, remember every 110th Year, which is the longest Time of the Duration of a Man's Life; I say, remember to offer Sacrifice to the immortal Gods, in the Field, that is watered by the Tiber. When the Night is come, and that the Sun is set, then offer Goats and Sheep to the Destinies; afterwards offer proper Sacrifices to Lucina, who presides over Child-bearing; next sacrifice a Hog and a black Sow to the Earth; and this done, offer white Oxen on Ju∣piter's Altar; and this must be performed in the Day-time, and not by Night; for those Sacrifices that are made in the Day-time please the Coelestial Gods; by the same Reason thou shall offer to Juno a young Cow that has a good Hide; the like Sacrifices thou shall make to Phoebus-Apolio, the Son of Latona, who is also called the Sun; and let the Roman Boys, ac∣companied with Girls, sing Hymns with a loud Voice in the Sacred Temples, but so that the Girls sing on one side, and the Boys on the other, and the Parents both of the one and the other must be then alive; let married Women fall upon their Knees before Juno's Altar, and pray that Goddess to give Ear to the publick Vows, and theirs in particular; let every one according to his Ability offer first Fruits to the Gods, to render them propitious, and these first Fruits ought to be kept with Care, and they must not forget to distribute some of them to every one that assists at the Sacrifices; let there be a great Number of People Night and Day at the Resting-places of the Gods, and there let serious and diverting Things be agreeably intermix'd: See therefore, O Roman, that these Injunctions be always kept in mind by thee; and thus the Country of Italy, and that of the Latins will always be subject to thy Power. SELLA SOLIDA; a Chair or Seat made of a piece of Wood, wherein the Augurs sate, when they were taking their Augury. SELLA CURULIS; the Curule-Chair, which was adorned with ivory, and on which the great Magistrates of Rome had a Right to sit and to be carried. SEMELE; the Daughter of Cadmus, King of Thebes, with whom Jupiter was in Love; Juno being jealous perswaded Semele, whom Jupiter loved, to lie with him in all his Glory; insomuch that the Fire of his Thunderbolt catching hold on the Wainscot of her Chamber, burnt her: All that could be done upon this Occasion, was to save the Child, for she was big, and to take him hot out of his Mother's Womb, and put him in Jupiter's Thigh, where he staid his time, and was called Bacchus. SEMENTINAE FERIAE; Feasts in∣stituted in Seed-time, in order to pray unto the Gods to vouchsafe them a plentiful Harvest. SEMONES; Demi-Gods: Fulgentius in his Treatise of ancient Words, says, that the Ancients would have the Semones to be the cer∣tain Gods, who were not of the Number of the Coelestial Deities, but such as were Demi-Gods, quasi semi-homines.
SENACULA; they were Places where the Senate of Rome met, of which there were Three. SENATOR; a Senator. Romulus institu∣ted the first Hundred Senators at Rome, which made up the King's Council: In order to be a Senator, a Man must be a Citizen of Rome, or of one of the Municipal Cities that had the same Privileges or Freedom: Respect was had to their Manners, Birth and Estate; for a Senator ought to have a Revenue of 4000 Pounds for the Main∣tenance of his Dignity; but Augustus required he should have 300000 Crowns: Senatorum cen∣sum ampliavit, says Suetonius, ac pro octinginto∣rum millium summâ, duodecies H. S. taxavit, sup∣plevitque non habentibus. He was to be at least Thirty Years old before he was made a Se∣nator. We are not without Instances of Children af∣franchized, and of Persons yet of a meaner Con∣dition, and even Strangers, who have arrived at the Dignity of Senators; but this was brought about either by Intreague, or the Emperor's Authority. The Choice of Senators belonged at first to the Kings; the Consuls afterwards were invested with this Power; and lastly, the Censors being obliged every five Years to take an Account of them, substituted others in the room of those that were dead, or had been de∣graded: But in the decaying Time of the Repub∣lick, the Emperors arrogated this Power to themselves, and made as many Senators, and of what Quality they pleased. The Number of Senators varied according to various Times: Romulus at first created a Hun∣dred of them, which he called Patres; and after the Alliance made with the Sabines, increased their Number to a Hundred more. Tarquinius Priscus, according to Livy, or as others will have it, King Servius added also an Hundred, which he named Patres minorum gentium, because they were not of so noble an Extract as the former. This Number of 300 Senators continued to the Time of C. Gracchus, Tribune of the People; who opposing the Nobles, made the Peo∣ple add 300 Roman Knights to the rest, in order to counterballance the Number of the 300 Senators: Thus the Number of 600 Senators lasted to the Time of Julius Caesar, who being willing to gratifie a great many brave Men, who had faithfully served him in his Wars a∣gainst Pompey; increased the Number to 1000 of all sorts of People, without distinction. But Augustus to purge this Body that was in an ill habit, reduced it to the former Number of 600, and expelled such as were most unfit for the Dignity; and this he did with so much Mode∣ration, that in order to make those easie whom he thus reduced, he granted them to wear the Lati∣clavium, and allowed them the Priviledge to assist at the Plays with other Senators in the Or∣chestra; as also at publick Feasts, which were so∣lemnized with Plays and Triumphs. And so of the 300 Senators, the 200 created by Romulus were called Patritii majorum geniium, and the other 100 Adlecti, or Conscripti, a Name which after∣wards continued to be given to the whole Se∣nate. Among these Senators, there was some who had a decisive Vote, and spoke their Sentiments in the Matters that were proposed; and others who did no more than follow those Sentiments which to them appear'd most reasonable; and this made them be called Pediarii Senatores, who did not declare their own Opinions, but sided with those whose Opinions they approved of: Qui senten∣tiam in Senatu non verbis dicerent, sed in alienam sententiam pedibus irent. Aulus Gellius rejects this Interpretation, and seems to follow that of Q. Bassus, who says in his Commentaries, that those of the Senators who had never bore the Office of Curule-Magistrate, went a foot to the Senate; and for that Reason were called Pedarii Senatores: But Varro pretends, that the Advice of such Senators as were last admitted, was not asked, and that they were obliged to espouse some others Opinion: Et qui in postremis scripti erant, he speaks of the List of Censors, non ro∣gabantur sententias, sed quas principes duxer ant, in eas descendebant: For which reason Laberius says, that a Pedarian Senator's Vote was a Head with∣out a Tongue, Caput sine linguâ pedaria sententia est. Hence it is that when the Consuls would have the Senate meet, they must say, Senatores, qui∣busque in Senatu sententiam dicere licet; and this shews the Difference between sententiam verbis dicere, and sententiam pedibus ferre, or dicere, which appertained to none but the Senatores Pedarii. The Senators wore a very large Purple Tu∣nick, with broad Edges called Lati-clavium; from which the Senators were called Lati-clavii, they had a Right to sit or be carried in the Curule-Chair, to assist at Plays and Shews in the Or∣chestra, and likewise at Feasts and the Banquet consecrated to Jupiter in the Capitol. The Cen∣sors took an Account of them every five Years, calling them with a loud Voice; and those whom they passed over, were degraded from the Order of Senators, which was called Praeterire: But if the Person who was passed over was minded to oblige the Censor to tell the Reason of it, he was under an Obligation to do it, says Lipsius, and then he was degraded with the greater Ignomi∣ny and Shame; this being called ejicere Senatu. He who was thus degraded had the Remedy of appealing to the People, who in spight of the Censor, did many times re-establish him.
SENATUS; the Senate; a Body consist∣ing of Councellors of State, commonly called Senators, constituted to give Advice to those who had the Sovereign Authority vested in them; they called them Senators, that is, Old Men, wherein the Romans imitated the Greeks, who called their Senate , that is, An Assembly of Old Men: So when the Athenians assembled the People to consult about the Affairs of the Publick, the Officers summoned none but such as were Fifty Years old: The E∣gyptians and Persians followed the same Example after the Hebrews. The Lacedamonians and Carthaginians received none but such as were Sixty Years of Age. The Senate's Authority in the Republick of Rome was very considerable; they decided concerning what was to be done in Matters of Peace and War, without saying any thing to the People, to whom the Sentiments of the said Bo∣dy were communicated in these Terms, Senatus decrevit, populus jussit. It was the Senate's Right to give the first Audience to Foreign Embassa∣dors, to dispose of Provinces, appoint Triumphs, and recerve Letters from the Generals of their Armies concerning the Success of the Republick's Arms. Their Power came somewhat to be les∣sened under the Emperors; for Augustus con∣stituted to himself a Privy-Council, consisting of a certain Number of Senators, with whom he consulted concerning the most important Af∣fairs of State. Tiberius endeavoured by little and little to assume the Power into his own Hands. Nero on the contrary ordered, that the Senate should retain their ancient Rights and Priviledges; but we may say with Tacitus, that all this was but a specious Pretence, wherewith he was minded to colour his Usurpations. All Authors are agreed, that the Senate of Rome, was of great Dignity and Authority, but had not a full Power, nor an absolute Dominion, they having none to command, and much less to exe∣cute their Orders, as Dionysius of Hallicarnassus has well observed; and so we meet with divers Passages in Livy to this Purpose; Senatus decre∣vit, populus jussit, that is, the Senate have thought it good, and the People commanded it: And, in short, the least Tribune, that opposed the Se∣nate, could obstruct all their Decrees, and the Senate gave out their Orders to the Consuls and Praetors, no otherwise than if it pleased them, si eis it a videtur. All the great Magistrates had a Right to en∣ter into the Senate, but not to give their Opi∣nions there, unless they were Senators: The Se∣nators Children had also the same Right that they might betimes use themselves to the Af∣fairs of the Republick: The Tribunes of the People at first stood at the Door of the Senate to know their Deliberations, and to oppose them in case they were contrary to the Rights of the People, but they were afterwards admitted in: The Consuls, Dictators, Tribunes of the Peo∣ple, and the Governour of Rome in the Consul's Absence, had a Right to call the Senate toge∣ther; which they did in these Words, Quod fau∣stum felixque sit, P. Cornel. Cos. edicit sic Sena∣tores, quibusque in Senatu sententiam dicere licet, conveniant ad XIII. Cal. Jan. They notified the Place and Day, which was pitched upon some∣times in one, and sometimes in another Place. The Senate usually met three times a Month, viz. on the Calends, Nones and Ides, according to Suetonius; and this stated Assembly was called legitimus Senatus; and all the Senators were obli∣ged to be present under the Penalty of a Fine: They might be extraordinarily called together any Day in each Month, and this they called Senatus indictus or edictus. These Assemblies might be held from Morning to Evening in three places in the City appointed for this Purpose, viz. in the Temple of Concord, between that Place and the Capitol, at the Gate Capena, and in the Temple of Bellona, where they gave Foreign Embassadors Audience, before they were intro∣duced into the City: There were also a great many more places appointed for this Purpose, as Curia Hostilia, Pompeia, and Julia, which the Augurs first consecrated, according to Aulus-Gellius and Varro. The Assembly of the Senate began with a Sa∣crifice offered to the Gods, but Augustus altered this Custom, and ordered every Senator, to of∣fer a Sacrifice of Wine and Incense upon the Altar of the God, in whose Temple the Senate met, before he took his Seat, or could consult about any Business, as Suetonius in his Life, C. 35. informs us. After which he was obliged to take an Oath, by touching the Altar, and calling the Gods to witness it, that he would give his Opi∣nion with Sincerity, and without Hattery: This Ceremony was exprest by these Words, Jure∣jurando obstringere Senatum, and from thence came Juratus Senatus, as we read in Tacitus, Lib. 4. Annal. This being done, the Senators took their Places when the Consul, or he who sate as President, proposed both the publick and private Affairs, which they were to consult a∣bout, and ended with these Words: P. Conscripti, quid fieri placet? When the Question was put about the choosing of an Emperor to succeed Aurelian, the Senate having met in Curia Pompilia, Cornificius Gor∣dianus the Consel proposed the Thing in this manner: Referimus ad vos P. C. quod sapè re∣tulimus. Imperator est deligendus. Exercitus fine Principe diutiùs stare non potest; and concluded, Quare agite P. C. & Principem dicite: Aut acci∣ptet exercitus quem elegeritis; aut fi refutaverit, alterum faciet. He asked their Opinion, and began with the Highest, and so on to the Low∣est: This Method was not always observed;
for sometimes they asked the Opinion of one and then of another, without any regard had to their Quality; these Votes were given either Viva voce, or only by holding up the Hand, or else by separating into two Parties; and this is comprehended by Flavius Vopiscus in a single Passage of Aurelian's Life: Post haec, says he, in∣terrogati plerique Senatores sententias dixerunt; deinde aliis manus porrigentibus, aliis pedibus in sententias euntibus: plerisque verbo consentientibus conditum est Senatûs consultum. When the Debate contained several Heads, which required several Opinions to be given, they debated each of them in particular, divide∣batur sententia: When any Business was deter∣mined by a Plurality of Voices; the Consul pro∣nounced the Decree of the Senate in these Words: S. C. A. By these Three Letters they meant Senatus-Consulti Authoritates, the usual Title of all the Decrees of the Senate. Pridie Kalend. Octobris in aede Apollinis scribendo adfuerunt L. Domitius, Cn. filius, Aenobarbus, Q. Caecilius, Qu. F. Me∣tellus, Pius Scipio, &c. Quod Marcellus Consul. V. F. (i. e. verba fecit) de Provinciis Consularibus, D. E. R. I. C. (that is, de eâ re ita censue∣runt) uti L. Paulus, C. Marcellus Coss. cùm Magi∣stratum inissent, &c. de Consularibus Provinciis ad Senatum referrent, &c. and after having ex∣plained the Matter in Debate, and the Senate's Resolution, he adds, Si quis huic Senatus-consulto intercesserit, Senatui placere auctoritatem perscribi, & de eâ re ad Senatum populumque referri. After which if any one opposed it, they wrote his Name underneath; Huic Senatûs-consulto inter∣cessit talis. Auctoritatem or auctoritates perscribere, is to register the Names of those who have a∣greed to the Decree, and caused it to be regi∣stred: The Consuls at first carried the Minutes of the Decrees to their own Houses, but because of the Alterations sometimes made therein, it was ordered in the Consul hip of L. Valerius and M. Horatius, that the Senate's Decrees should be laid up in the Temple or Ceres under the Cu∣stody of the Aediles; and at last the Censors car∣ried them into the Temple of Liberty, putting them up in the Armories called Tabularia. SENECA; a Philosoper, Nero's Praeceptor and Governour of the Empire during his Mino∣rity: This Emperor put him to Death, as su∣specting him to have a Hand in Piso's Conspiracy. He died by opening his Veins and bleeding to Death. SENTINUS DEUS; a God who gives Thought to an Infant in his Mother's Womb, according to the Fable. SEPTA; Inclosures or Rails made of Boards thró' which they went in to give their Votes in the Assemblies or the Romans. SEPTEMBER. The Seventh Month of the Year, if you reckon from the Vernal Equi∣nox, and the Ninth, if you begin with January; they celebrated divers Feasts at Rome in this Month, such as the Dionysiaqui or the Vintages; the great Circensian Games: the Dedication of the Capitol, &c. See Calendarium. They would have given the Names of divers Roman Empe∣rors to this Month, the Senate would have had it called Tiberius in Honour of the Emperor Ti∣berius, as Suetonius in his Life informs us, C. 26. Domitian named it Germanicus, according to the Authority of the same Author. They gave it the Name of Antoninus, in Honour of the Me∣mory of Antoninus Pius, as Julius Capitolinus re∣lates in his Life: The Emperor Commodus na∣med it Herculeus or Hercules, as Herodian says: And lastly, the Emperor Tacitus would have it called Tacitus after his own Name, as Vopiscus says; but for all these, it has always retained the Name of September, given it by Numa. This Month was under Vulcan's Protection: On the 1st Day of it there was a Feast celebrated in Honour of Neptune; the 2d Day was remarkable for Augustus his Victory over Antony and Cleo∣patra in the Fight of Actium. On the 4th the Roman Games were celebrated, which lasted Eight Days. The Eighth was remarkable for the taking of Jerusalem by Vespatian. The 13th the Praetor drove the Nail into the Wall of Mi∣nerva's Temple, thereby to denote the Num∣ber of the Years of the Roman Empire, Writing being not frequently used; but afterwards the Ce∣remony of driving the Nail was applied to other Uses, especially to make the Plague cease, and for that end they constituted a Dictator. On the 14th there was a Cavalcade of Horses, in order to try them, which they called Equiria. On the 20th Romulus his Birth-day was celebrated. On the 23d that of Augustus by the Roman Knights, and the same lasted Two whole Days: The 25th was dedicated to Venus: The 30th they prepared a Banquet for Minerva, and cele∣brated a Feast called Meditrinalia. SEPTIMIANA PORTA; it was one of the Gates of Rome between the Tiber and the Janiculum, being so named from Septimius Se∣verus, according to Spartian in his Life, where he caused Baths to be built for the Publick Use. SEPTIMONTIUM, the Seven Moun∣tains of the City of Rome, whereon they cele∣brated a Feast called Septimontium. SEPTIZONIUM; They were Baths built by Septimius Severus on the other Side of the Tiber, on Seven Rows of Pillars. SEPTUNX; Seven Ounces of the Weights of a Roman Pound. SEPULCRA. See Sepulturae. SEPULTURE; Buryings; the Pagans always had a Regard to the Care that was taken of Sepulcres, as a Religious Duty grounded up∣on
the Fear of God, and the Belief of the Soul's Immortality; and the Ancients accounted the Buryings of the Dead to be a Thing so holy and inviolable that they attributed the original Invention thereof to one of the Gods, viz. to him whom the Greeks called Pluto, and the Ro∣mans Dis or Summanus. Priam in Homer's I∣liads asks and obtains a Cessation of Arms for burying the Dead on both Sides; and in ano∣ther Place Jupiter interposed and sent Apollo to procure Sarpedon to be buried: Iris also is sent by the Gods to stir up Achilles to fight, and to pay this Duty to Patroclus: Thetis promised Achilles she would take care his Body should not corrupt, though he lay unburied a whole Year. Homer grounds this upon the Ceremonies of the Egyptians; for the People of Memphis did not bury their Dead till after they had examined into the Deceased's Life, and if they found him to have been an ill Liver, Burial was denied him: This Refusal was the Cause why they would not allow the Bodies of the Wicked to be carried to the other Side of the River and Ma∣rish, near unto which lay the Graves of the Just. And hence it was, that to be deprived of a Burial, was a kind of an Excommunication by which the Soul was excluded from the Elisian Fields, and loaded with Infamy: In speaking of these Burials I make use of the Terms in Fashi∣on now-a-days, and such as have been used long before Homer; for in those ancient Times they put the Bodies into the Earth, after they had inbalmed them, as we do now. The most anci∣ent Books of the History of the Old Testament bear witness hereof, and furnish us with divers Examples in the Persons of Abraham, Isaac, Ja∣cob and Joseph; but in the Book of Kings it seems as if there were some Examples of a con∣trary Custom that was introduced of burning the Bodies. It was about Homer's Time: Thus in his Iliads and Odysses you find all the Bodies of the Dead consumed with Fire: The Terms of Interring and Burying have been always com∣monly used, either because the same could not be abolished, or because there was still some∣thing remaining either of Bones or Ashes which the Fire consumed not, and which they interred in Urns. The Places appointed for Buryings grew to be sacred, and were reckoned in the Number of holy and unalienable Things: They anciently allowed a Burial to those who were put to Death for their Offences. Josephus, L. 4. C. 6. of the Antiquities of the Jews, against Appian L. 2. says, that Moses commanded those to be buried who had suffered Death according to the Laws. The Romans practised the same Thing: Pilate gave Leave to take down the Body of the Son of God, and to lay it in a Tomb, tho' he were put to Death as a Person guilty of Trea∣son. The Emperors Dioclesian and Maximinian ordered that they should not hinder the burying of those who had suffered Punishment by Death, the Romans being of Opinion, that the Souls of such Bodies as were not buried, wandered up and down for an Hundred Years, as not being able to get into the Elisean Fields: Haec omnis quam cernis, inops, inhumataque turba est. Virg. Aen. 6. In the mean time, Suetonius in the Life of Augustus says the Contrary: Ʋni sepultu∣ram precanti respondisse dicitur, jam illum in volu∣crum potestatem fore: When a Prisoner of War pray'd for Leave that he might be buried; the Answer made him was, that he should quickly become Birds Food; and Horace says, Non bo∣minem occidisti, non pasces in cruce corvos; thou has killed no Man, therefore thou shall not be Crows Meat. SEPULCRA; Sepulchres, Tombs, Fune∣ral Monuments. They were Places appointed wherein to bury the Bodies of the Deceased, or the Bones and Ashes of the Bodies which they burned. The Pyramids were built for Sepulcres to the Kings of Egypt: Those who violated the Sepulcres of the Dead, or searched them, were hated by all Nations, and very severly puni∣shed: It was in order to comfort themselves upon Account of their Mortal State, that the Egyptians built them Eternal Houses, as they were wont to call those Sepulchres, whereas they honoured their Pallaces and Mansion Houses on∣ly with the Title of Inns, in Regard to the short Time we dwell here on Earth in Comparison of the Stay we make in the Grave. Perpetuas sine fine domos mors incolit atra. Aeternosque levis possidet umbra Laros. It was not enough that the most famous Per∣sons among the Heathens bore witness by their Conduct, that Vanity was the chief Spring of their Actions, without they also made the same to survive after their Deaths; the Mauso∣leums, Obelisques, and stately Monuments e∣rected by them are Eternal Proofs thereof; It was a fine Thing, said a Queen, in Herodotus his History, to be honoured after her Death with a magnificent Monument which should be a Testimony of our Glory to Posterity.Varro speaks of a Barber whose Name was Licinus, that had the Ambition to have a Marble Tomb e∣rected for him. Marmoreo, Licinus tumulo jacet; & Cato, parvo; Pompeius nullo: Credimus esse Deos. Cestius his Pyramid which is still in being at Rome, and which had within it a Room painted by a very good Master among the Ancients, is only the Tomb of a private Person. Persons of Quality had their burying Vaults, wherein they placed the Ashes of their Ancestors, and formerly there was such an one at Nismes with
a rich Pavement of inlaid Work, that had Ni∣ches round its Walls, in each of which there were Rows of Urns of gilt Glass full of Ashes. The Romans after the Expulsion of their Kings did no longer bury their Dead within the City, the same being expresly forbidden by the Law of the 12 Tables, In urbe ne sepelito ne-ve urito, in or∣der to prevent an Infection which the buried Corps might occasion in so hot a Climate as Italy, and also to avoid Fires, as it happened at the Fu∣neral Solemnities of Clodius, who was burnt in the Place of the Rostra, for the Fire catched hold of the Palace, and burnt all the Front looking to∣wards the Place with several neighbouring Houses. Altho' the Laws of the 12 Tables for∣bad the burying of any Body within the City Walls, yet there were some Romans who had that Priviledge both before and after the making of the said Law, as the Family of the Claudii, who had a Burying-place in the Capitol, so had also Valerius Publicola and Posthumius Tubertus, to whom and their Descendants the People of Rome by a particular Order granted Liberty to be bu¦ried within the City: Indeed Plutarch writes, that in his Time they interred none there of Publicola's Race, they thinking it enough to put a burning Torch over the Burying place, which was presently taken off, in order to shew they had a Priviledge to bury there, but they volun∣tarily divested themselves of that Honour, and carried their dead Bodies to the Burying-place they had in the Country of Velia; those Persons also enjoy'd the same Priviledge, who had done any considerable Service for the Commonwealth, or triumphed over the Enemies of the Empire: The Vestal Virgins, as well as the Emperors, had a Right to be buried there; but otherwise besides the Three sorts of Persons now mention∣ed, we do not find in History that any other was buried in the City. The Emperor Adrian laid a Fine of Four Pieces of Gold upon those that bu∣ried within the City, and extended the Penalty to the very Magistrates that did allow it; he did moreover injoin, as Ʋlpian the Lawyer says, that the Burying-place should be forfeited and held prophane, and that the Body or Ashes of him that was buried there should be taken up. This Edict was renewed by the Emperors Dioclesian and Maximinian in the Year of Rome 1042. and of our Redemption 290. on the 28th of Sep∣tember. They built Burying-places upon the most fre∣quented High-ways, as upon the Road to Brun∣dusium, called via Appia; upon via Flaminia or Latina, whereon stood the Burying-places of the Calatini, Scipio's, Servilii and Marcelli; and this with an Intent to put Passengers in mind of their Mortal State, and to excite them to imitate the Vertues of those great Men, who were repre∣sented upon those stately Tombs, or in the In∣scriptions on them. Agenus Ʋrbious mentions some other Places in the Suburbs, that were used for Sepulcres, one of which was named Culinae, wherein the Poor and Slaves were buried, ano∣ther Sestertium, where their Bodies were laid who were put to Death by the Emperors. There were some Burying-places belonging to certain Families, and others Hereditary: Those belonging to certain Families were such as a Person caused to be built for himself and all his Family, that is, his Children and near Rela∣tions, and also his Freed-men: Hereditary Se∣pulcres were those which the Testator appoint∣ed for himself and his Heirs, or acquired by Right of Inheritance: Persons might reserve unto themselves a particular Burying-place, where no other had been laid; they could also by Will hinder any of their Heirs to be interred in the Burying-place belonging to their Family; and when they were minded to shew that it was not allowed an Heir to be buried in a Sepulchre, they inscribed these Letters upon it, which are still to be met with in a great many Places. H. M. H. N. S. that is, Hoc monumentum he∣redes non sequitur, or these, H. M. ad H. N. TRANS. that is, Hoc monumentum ad heredes non transit: The Right of Burying here does not descend unto the Heir: They had also another sort of a Burying-place which they called by a Greek Word , which signifies a Sepul∣chre made in Honour of some Person, and where∣in his Body is not laid, the Use of these empty Sepulchres came up from a Superstitious Opi∣nion the Ancients entertained, that the Souls of those whose Bodies were not buried, wander∣ed by the Sides of the Rivers of Hell for an Hun∣dred Years, and could not pass over. They first made a Tomb of Turf, which they called Injectio glebae: After which they practised the same Ce∣remonies, as if the Corps were actually there. Thus Virgil, in L. 6. makes the Soul of Deipho∣bus pass over to Charon, tho' Aeneas had erect∣ed him no more than a Cenotaphium, or empty Tomb. Suetonius in the Life of the Emperor Claudius calls them Honorary Tombs; and they were inscribed with these Words, Ob Honorem, or Memoriae; whereas on others where they de∣posited their Ashes, these Letters were put, D. M. S. in order to shew they were dedicated to the Manes: When the Words Tacito nomine were added, it was to intimate that the Ashes which were inclosed in it, were declared infa∣mous for some Crime or other, and buried in a By-place, by the Emperor or chief Magistrate's Leave. SERAPIS; the God of the Egyptians: Some derive the Word from Sara and Apis, as Julius Maternus: Its not likely it should come from the Greek , Apis, i. e. Loculus Apis, as if it were the Tomb wherein the Ox Opis was embalmed after his Death: Wherefore 'tis very probable
the Word must be derived from Osirapis, by cut∣ting off the first Letter: For the Learned are almost agreed, that Osiris and Apis were but one and the same Deity; or else Serapis comes from Sor Apis; for Sor signifies an Ox; as if they should say, Joseph the Father of Egypt; which is symbolically signified by an Ox: Sor or Sar does also signifie a Prince: Sara is the same as Domi∣nari: Nothing agrees better with Joseph's Cha∣racter, than to be the Father, Nourisher, and Ruler of Egypt. Tacitus, L. 4. Hist. says, truly enough, that Ptolomy the Son of Lagus was he who sent to seek for the Statue of Serapis to Sy∣nope, a City in Pontus, in order to set it up in Alexandria; from which Scaliger concludes that Serapis was a Foreign Deity. Clemens Alexan∣drinus repeats what Tacitus says, with some Va∣riation of Circumstances; but he adds, that the Statue which was sent by the People of Synope, was placed by Ptolomy upon the Promontory of Racotis, where a Temple of Serapis stood before; from whence 'tis concluded against Vossius, that if there was a Temple of Serapis before in the said Place, it was not then the first Time that they began to worship him in Egypt; Tacitus him∣self agrees thereunto by giving the same Testi∣mony as Clemens Alexandrinus does, that there stood a Temple of Serapis and Isis in the same Place where they built one for the new-brought Statue. Adrian in his Return from Alexandria brought to Rome the Worship of Serapis and Isis, who were celebrated Deities among the Egyptians, to whom doubtless he promised to erect Altars when he arrived at Rome; In a Medal we have of his, Se∣rapis holds out his Hand to him and promises him his Protection; and Isis swears by the Brazen Timbrel, that she would accomplish his De∣sires. Macrobius says, the Egyptians ever excluded Saturn and Serapis from their Temples, because they offered no other to them than bloody Sacri∣fices, to which they had a strange Aversion in all their Religious Worship; but that after Alexan∣der's Death, their King Ptolomy forced them to receive those Two Deities in Imitation of the People of Alexandria; the Egyptians yielded to Necessity; but they still retained Marks of their old Aversion, since they would not allow of these new Temples and new Worship, within the Walls of their City: Pausanias says, it was King Pto∣lomy that perswaded the Athenians, to erect a Temple to Serapis, who had a very magnificent one at Alexandria, but the most ancient stood at Memphis, into which the Priests themselves never entred, unless it were when they buried the Ox Apis. The God Serapis was usually represented by a kind of a Basket upon the Head, which Macro∣bius says, signified the Highth of the Sun. Sui∣das and Rufinus call it a Bathel or Corn-measure, because it was believed Serapis taught Men the Use of Measures, or because he afforded Men A∣bundance of Fruit by the Help of the Nile, whose Overflowings made Egypt fruitful. Some are of Opinion that the Bushel was attributed to this God, in Commemoration of Joseph, who saved Egypt from Famine, by the Stores of Corn he took care to lay up during the Seven Years Plenty, as the holy Scriptures inform us. SERPENS, a Serpent, an Animal worship∣ped by the Heathens; they kept Serpents in Baskets made of Bullrushes or Ozier Twigs, which they consecrated to Bacchus, Ceres and Proserpina: Epiphanius in his first Book contra Hae∣reses, speaks of a sort of Hereticks called Ophitae, who in their Temples kept a Serpent in a Chest, worshipped and kissed it, and fed it with Bread: The Egyptians kept one of them in their Tem∣ples, and especially in those of Serapis and Isis: Aesculapius, the God of Physick was worshipped under the Form of a great Serpent, and Justin Martyr, who had been a Pagan, upbraiding them with their Superstitions, says, You represent next unto those whom you account Gods a Ser∣pent, as a Thing that is very mysterious. Cle∣mens Alexandrinus in the Celebration of the Bacchanalia says, that those who assisted thereat, placed Serpents round their Bodies, and be∣smeared their Faces with the Blood of the He-goats which were sacrificed to that unclean Deity. SERVUS, a Slave, one that is brought un∣der his Master's Power whether by Birth or War. The Riches of the Romans conusted in Slaves: There were Three Ways of having Slaves, ei∣ther when they bought them with the Booty, taken from the Enemy, distinct from the Share reserved for the Publick, or of those who took them Prisoners in War, whom they properly called Mancipia, quasi manu capta, taken with ones own Hand, or of Merchants who dealt in them, and sold them in Fairs and Markets. They used Three sorts of Ceremonies in the Sale of them, for they sold them either sub hastâ, sub coronâ, or sub Plleo: Sub hastâ, to the highest and last Bidder, by sticking a Spear in the Earth; sub coronâ, when they put a Garland or Crown of Howers upon their Heads like a Nosegay up∣on the Ear; sub Pileo, when they put a Cap on their Heads, that Notice might be taken of them, and the Sellers not be obliged to warrant them. They wore a Writing about their Necks, wherein their good and bad Qualities were con∣tain'd, also their State of Health, or Infirmities, their Usefulness and Faults, according to Aulus Gellius. Titulus servorum singulorum ut scriptus siet curato; ita ut intelligi recté possit quid morbi, vitiique cuique siet. Those who were taken in War and sold, wore Crowns upon their Heads, and thence comes the Phrase, sub coronis venere. Those Slaves which
were brought from beyond Sea to be sold, had their Feet rubbed with Chalk, and so they called them Cretati. The Slaves were so entirely sub∣jected to their Masters, that they had Power of Life and Death over them, might kill them and make them suffer all imaginable Tor∣ments. In the mean time Suetonius gives us an Account of the Edicts of some Emperors, which lessened this Power in Masters over their Slaves, as that of Claudius, who ordered that in case Slaves falling sick, came to be forsaken by their Masters in the Isle of Esculapius, they were declared free if they recovered; and that of the Emperor Adrian, which prohibited Masters to kill their Slaves any more. Slaves were made free, and obtained their Liberty divers ways: Their Masters many times granted them Freedom, and many affranchised them, when they had affectionately and faithfully ser∣ved them; as Simon does in Terence, —Feci è servo ut esses libertus mihi, Propterea quòd serviebas liberaliter. They sometimes purchased their Liberty with the Money they saved or got by their Labour, for they had a Peculium apart; and this is also ju∣stified by Terence; Quod ille unciatim vix demenso de suo Suum defraudans genium, comparsit miser, Id illa universum abriptet, All that which a poor Slave took the Pains to ga∣ther Penny by Penny, by sparing it out of his Belly, and from what was allowed him for his daily Sustenance, this Women stole at once. Slaves had formerly Four Bushels of Corn allow∣ed a Month for their Subsistance, of which they were allowed to spare as much as they pleased, and make it their own, and this was called Pecu∣lium. When the Masters had committed any Crime that was punishable by Law, they grant∣ed their Slaves their Liberty, and so made them Citizens of Rome, for Fear they should be tor∣tured, and brought Witnesses against them. For it was not lawful to put a Roman Citizen upon the Wrack: There were some who affranchised their Slaves out of Covetousness in the Time of the Emperors, that so they might participate of the Prince's Liberality, who bettowed some∣what upon every one of the People; this Free∣dom was usually granted them before the Praetor at Rome, and before the Proconsul in the Pro∣vinces with a certain Form of Speech and a Switch called Vindicta wherewith they struck them. Cic. L. 3. of his Topicks, speaks of it in this manner: The Vindicta is a small Switch which the Prator lays upon the Head of the Slave he is a∣bout to make free, and pronounces certain Words, which are to be seen in a Greek Manu∣script, in the French King's Library. . . Vindicta is a Rod with which the Magistrate struck him on the Head, whom he made free; say∣ing, we do declare this Man here present to be free, and a Citizen of Rome. Festus will have it to be the Master, who taking his Slave by the Hand, said these Words, Hunc hominem liberum esse volo. They also give us an Account of ano∣ther Form used by the Praetor, who said, Aio te jure Quiritium liberum esse; and in pronouncing of the said Words he struck the Slave with a Switch, and gave him a turn round, which was called Vertigo, from whence Perseus says, Ʋna Quiritem vertigo facit. They also affranchized Slaves by Will, or upon some sudden and severe War, when they were necessitated to arm their Slaves for the Defence of the Commonwealth: But this Freedom they did not obtain till they had signalized themselves by some considerable Action; this was called servos ad pileum vocare: Those who were made free, were called Liberti, and their Children Libertini: The Slaves were commonly skilled in Arts and Sciences, and they conferred divers Imploys on them, as the Tutoring of Chil∣dren, &c. SERVUS AB EPHEMERIDE; a Slave, whose Business it was to consult the Ro∣man Calendar, and acquaint his Master with the Days of the Calends, Nones and Ides. SERVUS AB EPISTOLIS; was one who wrote his Master's Letters, who dictated to him. SERVUS à MANU, or AMANUEN∣SIS, and SERVUS AD MANUM; a Slave that was ready to do, and undertake any thing. SERVUS à PEDIBUS; a Footman or Lacquey, who a foot carried his Master's Or∣ders. ACTORES SERVI; Stewards of the House. PROCURATOR SERVUS; he who had the Care of his Master's Business upon him. CELLARIUS SERVUS; the But∣ler. DISPENSATOR SERVUS; the Home-Steward, that buys and pays. NEGOTIATORES SERVI; those who traded or trafficked.
NUTRITII SERVI; those whose Bu∣ness it was to nurse the Children of a Family in their Infancy. MEDICI SERVI; Slaves who under∣stood and practised Physick, according to Sueto∣nius in Caligula's Life: Mitto tibi praetereà unum è servis meis medicum; I also send you one of my Slaves who is a Physician. SILENTIARII SERVI; those who caused Silence to be kept among the Slaves, as Seneca says. Procopius tells us, they were in the Emperor's Palaces, to keep every Body silent, and carry themselves with due Respect. They were also the Prince his Confidents; and were called Ministri ad ea quae sunt quietis. CUBICULARIUS SERVUS; a Slave who was in the Emperor's Chamber, like a Va∣let de Chambre. VILLICUS SERVUS; a Slave, whose Business it was to look after the Country-houses and Lands of his Master. ATRIENSIS SERVUS, or ad Limina custos; a Slave who kept the Atrium or Porch of his Master's House, where stood the Waxen Images of the Ancestors of the Family, and the Moveables: The House-keeper, as Columella in∣forms us: Tum insistere Atriensibus ut supellectilem exponant, & ferramenta detersa nitidentur atque rubigine liberentur. This was the chiefest of the Slaves. LECTICARII SERVI; Slaves who carry'd their Master's Litter, like unto our Chair-men, Martianus says, they were also those who made Litters. POLLINCTOR SERVUS; a Slave, whose Business it was to wash, anoint and trim the Bodies of the Dead. CAPSARII SERVI; Slaves, who at the Baths looked after the Cloaths of those who bathed themselves; they were also Slaves who waited upon Persons of Qualities Children, when they went to the Schools, and carried their Books; as likewise those who were Merchants, and Bankers Cash-keepers; and again, such as made Desks and Chests to keep Money in: They were also called Arcarii Servi. SACCULARII SERVI; Slaves who could convey Money out of a Bag by their Slight and Dexterity, of whom Ʋlpian speaks. VESTISPICI; Slaves who looked after their Masters Cloaths: They were also called Servi à veste and ad vestem; as may be seen by these ancient Inscriptions: CATULINO ET APRO. COSS. DULCISSIMAE. MEMORIAE. EJUS. VALENS. AUG. LIB. PHE-IANUS. A VESTE. BEN. MER. FCIT. And this other, T. STATILIUS. MALCHIO. AD VESTEM. EMISSARII SERVI; Procurers, Horse-Coursers, or others who endeavoured to injure and trick every Body. NOMENCLATORES SERVI, or NOMENCULATORES; Slaves who accompanied their Masters, and told them the Names of those that passed by, when they put in for some great Office in the Common-wealth. CALCULATORES SERVI; those who made use of small Stones to reckon by, in∣stead of Counters. LIBRARII SERVI; Slaves who tran∣scribed Books by way of Abbreviations. TABELLARIUS SERVUS; he that carries his Master's Letters. CALATORES SERVI; those Slaves who called the Assemblies of the People toge∣ther by Curiae and Centuriae, or the other Assem∣blies of the Priests and Pontiffs. ANTE-AMBULONES SERVI; Slaves who went before their Masters to make way for them to go along. SALUTI-GERULI SERVI; Slaves who came to complement their Masters Friends in their Names. CURSORES SERVI; Couriers who ran to carry News. TOPIARII SERVI; those who pru∣ned the Flower-Garden, Orchard, &c. and for∣med them into the Shapes of divers Animals. VIRIDIARII SERVI; were those who looked after Orchards and Bowling-Greens. PASTORES SERVI; Shepherds. SALTUARII SERVI; Wood-Wards, or Foresters. VENATORES; Hunters. AUCUPES SERVI; Fowlers or Fal∣coners. VESTIGATORES; those who hunted Beasts by their tract. DIAETARII SERVI; those who were to look after the Halls, wherein they eat in Summer-time. AQUARII SERVI; Water-Carriers. ANALECTAE; Slaves, whose Business it was to gather up what fell down at a Feast, and to sweep the Floor and Hall where they eat. POCILLATORES, or AD CYA∣THOS SERVI; Cup-bearers, or those who served with Drink. PRAEGUSTATOR SERVUS; he that tasted the Wine as he served his Master.
OBSONATORES; those who bought Provision for the Family. STRUCTORES SERVI; those who waited at Table, and set the Dishes in order. VOCATORES; those who went to in∣vite Persons to Dinner. ADMISSIONALES; those that intro∣duced Persons into the Emperor's Presence. PISTORES and MOLITORES; those that pounded Corn to make Meal of it, be∣fore Mills were invented. OSTIARII and JANITORES; Porters who attended at the Gate, to open and shut it. SCOPARII; Sweepers, who were to clean the Privies, and Close-stools. PENICULI; those who were to clean the Table with a Spunge. FORNACATOR; was he that kindled the Furnace of their Baths. BALNEATORES; Bathers; and UN∣CTORES were those who with perfumed Oil anointed the Bodies of those who were bathed. SESTERTIUS; the Ancients marked their Sesterces with these Two Letters H. S. the Sestertius was a Piece of Silver Money, worth about the 4th part of a Roman Denarius; and in English Money 1 d. For the Romans ha∣ving for a long time made use of Brass Mo∣ney, which they called As, quasi Aes, or Libra and Pondo, because it weighed a Pound, begun at last with the Denarius to coin Silver Money, in the Year of Rome 585. This Denarius was marked with an X, because it was worth Ten Asses, and divided into two Quinarii, marked with an V, because each of them was worth five Asses; and the Quinarius was again divided into two Sesterces, marked L-L-S, because they were each of them worth two Asses: But the Transcribers at last for their own Conveniency have given us an H for the two L-L-, which signified Pounds, and always retained the S, which is Half; inso∣much that Sestertius is put for Semistertius, two and an half; as if one should say an half taken from three; insomuch that the Greek say, , Tertium semitalentum, for two Talents and an half. It may be asked whe∣ther the two sorts of Sestertii, viz. the greater or lesser must be distinguished. There are Two Opinions concerning this Point, one is Budeus's, and the most received of the two, who distinguishes the Sestertii into two sorts, viz. the lesser called Sestertius, which, as we have said, was a little piece of Silver Money, worth two Asses and an half; and the greater called Sestertium in the Neuter Gender, which was a Word relating to Accounts, and imported a thousand small Sestertii: The other Opinion is that of Agricola, who says, that the Word Sestertium is the same as Sestertius, insomuch that Sestertii Deni and Sestertia Dena, were the same thing: But the Difference, says he, consists in the Way of Reckoning; for when you find Dena Sestertiûm for Sestertiorum in the Genitive Case, Millia is understood; and the Transcri∣bers, adds he, not understanding this Sence, have put Sestertia inftead of Sestertiûm, when they saw the Mark of the Sestertius, as you have it in this Example of Cicero against Verres, H. S. Ducenta & quinquaginta. But whether upon these Occasions we read Sestertiûm ducenta, with millia understood, or Sestertia ducenta, as taking the Word Sestertium in the Neuter Gender for a thousand small Sestertii; there is no Body but must be satisfied in the main, that it always comes to the same Number. The only Difficulty that remains, consists in an Objection that may be made concerning the Force of these Words Sestertius and Sestertium, which being Adjectives, as well as Semistertius and Semistertium, require a Substantive: For this Substantive can be no other than Assis nummus, for Sestertius, (two Asses and an half) and Assis pondo for Sestertium: As Masculine, and Pondo Neuter, being the same with the Romans, for the As was a Pound weight. I know Scioppius answers, that Minae pondo is understood with Sestertium, insomuch that the great Sestertius, may in respect to the Grecian Mina be the lesser one in regard to the Roman As: But is there any likelihood that the Romans should invent Money, that had no other Foundation for it than that of the Greeks, and not that which was peculiar to themselves? To which we may add, if it were so, the Mina must of necessity answer exactly to the Roman Pound, or the Drachma to the Dena∣rius; to the End, that as the Mina was worth 100 Drachma's, this also must be worth 100 De∣narii, that is, 1000 Asses, in the same manner as the great Sestertium is worth 1000 lesser ones: But this we can never be sure of; at least wise Agricola, Manucius, Andreas Scotus, and Capella do not in the least agree about it. But whereas we find in Historians, that the Greeks use the Word Drachma, or the Latins that of Denarius; that, says Manucius, comes to pass, because they had not a more proper and nearer Word to ex∣press themselves by; or else because the Empe∣rors of latter Times, did really reduce the De∣narius to be of the same Weight with the Drachma, that is, to a matter of eight to the Ounce; whereas formerly 'tis certain from the Testimonies of Pliny and Livy, it was heavier, six of them only at first, and afterwards seven going to the Ounce. Hence its manifest, that what has given way to Budaeus his Opinion, whe∣ther in respect to the great Sestertium, or in Comparison of the Denarius with the Drachma, was no more than because it was found to be the most easie, and came first to obtain. And, indeed, if we do but consider what Sanctius says,
that of old almost all Nouns ending in us ended also in um, with the same Signification; and that besides this, the Expressions of the Romans were always concise, insomuch that there was nothing so common amongst them as the Figure Ellipsis, whereby they did not speak so little as two Words together, but somewhat was under∣stood, and whereby they also regulated their other Terms of Accompts; we shall find Agri∣cola's Opinion is much better grounded than the others, which either came from the Igno∣rance of the Transcribers, who upon a thousand Occasions have corrupted those Words, that were written with single Letters, or by way of Abridgment; or from the Error of those, who not observing that Sestertiûm was the Genitive Case, and put for Sestertiorum, have taken it to be the Accusative or Nominative of the Neuter Gender. If with H. S. the Mark of a Sestertius we find a Noun of Number which is declined, and is of the Masculine Gender: It denotes the Sum it simply expresses and no more: For Example, H. S. deni signifies Ten small Sesterces; if it be of the Neuter Gender, as H. S. dena, de∣notes 1000 small Sesterces; so that whether you read Sestertia dena, according to Budeus, or Se∣stertiûm dena, subaudi millia, according to Agricola, H. S. dena signifies 10000 small Sesterces. But if with H. S. the Mark of a Sestertius, you find an indeclinable Noun of Number, or one that in the declining of it may be taken for Masculine and Neuter; you cannot find out the Significa∣tion of it but by the Consequence, Subject and Sence: Thus when Cicero, L. 5. contra Verrem, said, Ad singula medimna multi H. S. duorum, mul∣ti H. S. quinque accessionem cogebantur dare, you cannot judge but by what follows what Sum he means; for his Expressiion may suit with simple Numbers and with 1000, but the Consequence discovers that he speaks only of single Sesterces, for should they be taken for Thousands, the same would be ridiculous for that Occasion. Care must be had to observe that the Words Sestertius or nummus signifie oftentimes the same thing; in∣somuch that mille nummûm, mille Sestertiûm, or mille mummûm Sestertiûm may be indifferently u∣sed for one another; but there are various Opi∣nions concerning the Reason that is given for this Construction and these Expressions; for to say nothing of that of Nonius and some of the Ancients, who thought without any Grounds, that these Genetives mummûm and Sestertiûm (put by a Syncope for nummorum and Sestertio∣rum) were Accusatives, they usually take the Word mille for a Noun Substantive, that go∣verns the Genetive nummûm and Sestertiûm; however, if we believe Scioppius, Mille is ever an Adjective, as well as other Nouns of Num∣ber, and therefore we must suppose a Nomina∣tive Case of which this Genetive is governed: This Author in his 14th Letter endeavours to prove, that the Word Res or Negotium must be understood so as when Juvenal says, Quantum quisque suâ nummorum possidet arcâ, Here quantum being an Adjective must necessa∣rily suppose Negotium understood, insomuch that if we should say, Res or Negotium mille nummo∣rum, the Syntax would be plain and very regu∣lar, but if it should be said, Mille nummorum est in arcâ; the same will be figurative and the Word Res still understood, which will govern the Genetive mille mummorum (which are the Adjective and the Substantive.) But Res mille nummorum is the same thing as mille nummi, just as Phoedrus says, Res cibi for cibus. Where we meet with Sestertiûm decies numera∣tum esse in Cicero, 'tis a Syllepsis numeri, where numeratum, which refers to negotium, is put for Numerata which should have been so exprest, as 'tis indeed in some Editions, because they sup∣pose centena millia understood: Again, An accepto centies Sestertiûm fecerit, in Velleius Paterculus, is put for acceptis centies centenis millibus Sesterti∣ûm; farther, you have in Plautus, Trapezitae mille Drachmarum sunt redditae, put for res mille Drachmarum est reddita: But as the Ancients used decies Sestertiûm, or decies centena millia Se∣stertiûm, so they also said, decies aeris, for decies centena millia aeris. Authors often omit the Word Sestertiûm by an Ellipsis, as Suetonius does in Caesar's Life; Promissumque jus annulorum cum millibus CCCC distulit; and the same he does in Vespatian's Life, Primus è fisco Latinis Graecis∣que Rhetoribus annua centena constituit, that is, centena millia Sestertiûm. The Roman As was worth 3 Farthings of our Money; the Roman Denarius 10 As's being 7 Pence of English; the little Sestertius 1d. ob. qa. q. but the great Sestertium contains 1000 Sester∣ces, which in our Money is 7 l. 16 s. 3 d. and in Latin they use unum Sestertium, duo Se∣stert, &c. SEVA, a Knife used at Sacrifices wherewith they cut the Throat of the Victims. SEVERUS, a Roman Emperor, born in Affrica, and of a fierce and cruel Disposition, he was cruel to the highest Degree against his Competitors to the Empire, the Nobility, and those who sided with his Enemies; he grosly a∣bused the famous City Bizantium, and subjected it to Heraclea, because she took the Part of Pe∣scennius Niger; he also used the City of Lyons after an inhumane manner, putting it to Fire and Sword, because she stuck to the Interest of Albinus. He is commended for his Sobriety, Frugality and Modesty in Apparel, which were Vertues common enough in Africa: He was couragious, valiant, indefatigable, and very use∣ful to the Commonwealth, insomuch that the
Senate being sensible both of the good and bad Qualities of this Prince, thought it might have redounded to the Benefit of the Empire, either that he had never been born, or never died. SEXAGENARIUM DE PONTE DEJICERE: It signified to deprive an old Man of 60 Years of Age, of his Right to give his Vote in the Elections made at Rome; because the People went over a little Bridge in order to throw their Ballot into an Urn, for the chusing of Magistrates; and old Men of sixty were put by. SEXTANS; the Romans divided their As, which was a Pound of Brass into 12 Ounces: The Ounce was called uncia, from the Word unum; and 2 Ounces sextans, being the sixth part of 12 Ounces, which made the As or Pound: It was also a Measure which contained 2 Ounces of Liquor: Sextantes, Calliste, duos infunde Falerni: Fill me two Sextans, or 2 Ounces of Falernian Wine. SEXTARIUS; a Measure which held 24 Ounces of Wine, but according to Weight con∣tained no more than a Pound and 8 Ounces; it held about a Pint English Measure. SEXTILIS; the Month of August, or sixth in the Year, if you begin it as the Romans did with March, and the 8th, to reckon as we do: This Month was under the Protection of Ceres, and had several Feasts in it. See Calendarium. SI VOBIS VIDETUR, DISCE∣DITE, QUIRITES; Citizens, if you please, you may depart: It was an ancient Form of Speech among the Romans, for dismissing the Assembly of the People. SI SCIENS FALLO, ME DIE∣SPITER SALVA URBE ARCE QUE BONIS EJICIAT, UTI EGO HUNC LAPIDEM. If I have not an Intention to observe this Treaty and Alliance, may Jupiter throw me out of my Estate, with as much Vio∣lence as I do this Stone, without any Harm done to the City. It was the Form of an Oath used at the making of Treaties and Alliances, which imported an Imprecation against him who did not act sincerely in the said Treaty; for 'twas a Custom to throw a Stone at the Victim, and to wish the Gods served them so, if they used any Cheat or Deceit in the Matter. SIBYLLAE; the Sibylls, Virgin-Prophesses so called from , which in the Laconic Tongue was the Genitive of the Word , and from  Deliberation: Others derive it from the Hebrew Kibel and Kabala. Authors differ about the Number of the Sibylls, and concerning the Places where they uttered their Predictions: Martianus Capella reckons but two Sibylls, viz. Erophile of Troy, the Daughter of the Marpessus, whom he confounds with the Phrygian and Cumae∣an Sibylls; and Symachia born at Erithraea, a Ci∣ty of the Lower Asia, who came to Cumae, and there pronounced Oracles. Pliny, L. 34. C. 5. speaks of Three Statues of the Sibylls at Rome, near the Rostra, one erected by Pacuvius Taurus, the Aedile of the People; and the other Two by Messala, whom Solinus calls Sibyllae Cumeae, Delphicae and Erithe. Elian L. 12. Hist. makes them to be Four, viz. Those of Erithrea, Samos, Egypt and Sardis, some have increased their Number even to Ten, as Varro does in his Six Books concerning Divine Things, dedicated to Julius Caesar, the Pontifex Maximus. The Persian Sibyll, of whom Nicanor speaks, was born accord∣ing to Suidas at Noa, a City near the Red-Sea, which they would have to be same as the Chal∣daean and Hebrew Sibyll, properly called Sambe∣tha, who foretold divers Things concerning the Messias, his Birth, Life, Circumstances of his Death, and second Coming. The Libyan Sibyll, of whom Euripides the Poet speaks in his Pro∣logue to Lamia, who was the Daughter of Ju∣piter and Lamia, Neptune's Daughter, as Pausa∣nias writes in his Phocica: The Grecians, says he, make her to be the Daughter of Jupiter and Lamia, Neptune's Daughter; the first of Womankind that delivered Oracles, and was called Sibylla by the Lybians: She spent a great part of her Life in the Isle of Samos, at Claros, a City of the Colophonians, at Delos and Delphi; she died in Troas. The Sibyll of Delphi, of whom Crysippus makes mention in his Book of Divina∣tion. Diodorus, L. 4. C. 6. calls her Daphne, the Daughter of Tiresias, whom the Argians, af∣ter the Destruction of Thebes, sent to Delphi, where she delivered Oracles, being inspired by Apollo, and sate upon the Tripod. Virgil, L. 6. Aen. speaks of her, where he introduces Ae∣neas entring into the Sibyll's Cave, and praying to unfold unto him the Will of the Gods viva voce, and not as she sometimes did upon the Leaves of Trees, which the Wind carried thi∣ther, and promising withal to build a magnifi∣cent Temple for Apollo, and to recommend his Oracles to his Posterity. Sibylla Cumaea, which was born at Cuma in Iona. Lactantius says, 'twas she that carried the Nine Books to Tarquinius Priscus. Sibylla Erytbraea, Apollodorus will have her to be his Fellow-Citizen, and that when the Grecians went to the Siege of Troy, she prophe∣sied to them, that they should take it: Eusebi∣us places her above 450 Years after the Siege of Troy, in the Reign of Romulus. Strabo speaks of several Sibylls of the same Name, one before and another after the Time of Alexander, whose Name was Athenaïs: Lactantius makes Babylon to be the Place of her Nativity, and calls her Erythraea, because she was born in the Country of the Erythreans, in a Place called Bata, where
the City Erythraea was afterwards built: There are some Authors who make Sardis to be the Place of her Birth, others Sicily; some again, Rhodes, Lybia and Samos. She composed Odes and Oracles, and invented a kind of a Triangu∣lar Lyre; she is the most Famous of all the Si∣bylls. The Senate sent to Erythraea for the Verses, and they were laid up in the Capitol. The Si∣byll of Samos, of which mention is made in the Samian Annals; her Name was Pitho. The Cumaean Sibyll, or she of Cuma in Italy, of whom Virgil speaks; Huic ubi delatus Cumaeam accesseris urbem. And again in Eclogue 4. Ʋltima Cumaei venit jam carminis aetas. And Ovid de Fastis, Cumaam veteres consuluistis anum. The Sibyll of Hellespont, born at Troy, that li∣ved in Solon and Cyrus his Time. The Phrygian Sibyll, that prophesied at Ancyra. The Sibylla Tiburtina, or of Tibur, a Country Five or Six Leagues from Rome, upon the River Anio. These are the Names of the Ten Sibylls spo∣ken of by Varro; besides which, there were also the Sibyll of Collophon, whose Name was Lam∣pusia, the Daughter of the Prophet Colchas; al∣so she of Th-ssaly, called Mantha, the Daughter of Tiresias of Thebes, and Cassandra, King Priamus his Daughter. SIBYLLINILIBRI; the Sibylls Books, wherein the Predictions of the Sibylls were writ∣ten; these Books were had in so great Autho∣rity among the Romans, that they did nothing of moment, either in Peace or War, without first consulting of them: They committed them to the Custody of two Persons of the Patrician Or∣der, who were called Duumviri sacrorum, who had leave to consult them by an Order of the Senate. Tarquin, who was the first that insti∣tuted this Sacerdotal Office, threw one of the Keepers of these Books, whose Name was M. Attilius, into the Sea, sowed up in a Leathern-Bag, because he had given a Copy of them to Petronius Sabinus; and this sort of Punishment was afterwards appointed for Parricides. This Priesthood was exercised by Two Persons only till the Year 384, when they were increased to the Number of Ten, half of them Patricians, and the other half Plebeians; and Sylla made them Fifteen; and at last they amounted to Sixty, but still retained the Name of Quindecim-viri. These Books of the Sibylls were preserved en∣tire above 450 Years, till the War with the Marsi, in a Vault of the Capitol, shut up in a Stone-Trough: They were burnt with the Ca∣pitol in the Year 670. The Senate Seven Years after sent Deputies to all the Cities of Asia and Italy, to collect and transcribe the Verses of the Sibylls that might be yet in being. Tacitus also relates, that Augustus finding the Verses and Predictions of these Sibylls passed through the Hands of several Persons, ordered an exact Search to be made for them at Samos, Erythraea, Troy, in Affrica, and throughout the Colonies of Italy, and to put them into the Hands of the re∣spective Governours, that so by the Advice of the Quindecim-viri, they might retain those that were Genuine, and reject the rest; and this is also witnessed by Suetonius. SIGILLARIA: Feasts celebrated after the Saturnalia, wherein they offered little Sta∣tues of Gold, Silver, and other Mettals to Sa∣turn, instead of Men which before were sacri∣ficed to him: Hercules changed this cruel Cu∣stom, by giving a favourable Interpretation to the Oracle. SIGNA, Roman Ensigns, whereof there were different sorts, on some of them the I∣mage of the Emperor was represented, and they that carried them were called Imaginiferi; others had an Hand stretched out as a Symbol of Con∣cord, and these Ensign-bearers were called Sig∣niferi; some had a Silver-Eagle which made those that carried them be called Aquiliferi, Eagle∣bearers; others had a Dragon with a Silver-head, and the rest of his Body of Taffety, which was blown by the Wind as if he were a real Dragon, and these Dragon-bearers were named Draco∣narii; lastly, the Emperor's Ensign was called Labarum which they carried out when he went into the Field: It was of a Purple Colour beset with Gold Fringe, and adorned with precious Stones: All these Ensigns were sustained by a Halfpike sharp at the And that it might the more easily be fixed in the Groand: Those who car∣ried the Labarum were called Labariferi. SIGNUM RUGNAE; the Signal of Bat∣tle; it was a Coat of Arms of a Purple Colour, set upon the General's Pavillion. SILENTIUM; the God of Silence; who was represented with his Finger in his Mouth: Ammianus Marcellinus says, they also worshipped this God of Silence, Silentii quoque colitur numen. The Egyptians called him Harpocrates, and made him to be the Son of Osiris and Isis. Ausonius calls him Sigaleon, An tua Sigaleon Aegyptius os∣cula signet: The Name comes from  silere: The Angerona of the Romans was also a Goddess of Silence, and her Mouth was seal∣ed up. SILENUS, a Phrygian living in the Reign of Midas, who, as Tertuliian says, gave him his great Ears: Silenum Phrygem, cui a pastoribus per∣ducto, ingentes aures suas tradidit: It's also likely he might have been one of the Princes of Caria,
who was famous for his Wisdom and Learning: Diodorus Siculus speaks of him in this manner: Primum enim omnium Nysae aiunt imperasse Sile∣num, cujus genus ignoratur ob temporis longinqui∣tatem: The Fable of Midas his lending him his long Ears only denoted the great Knowledge he had in all Things, Cicero in his Quaestiones Tuscu∣lanae, says, that Midas having seized upon the Person of Silenus, he paid his Ransom, and bought his Liberty with this excellent Sentence; That it was best not to be born, but the second Degree of Happiness to die betimes. And now we may believe, that the Drunkenness in which Midas surprized Silenus, was a mysterious Drun∣kenness of superabounding Wisdom: So Bochart following the Steps of Justin Martyr, thinks, that the Name and Fable of Silenus, imported the Prophecy of Jacob under a Disguise, when he promised the Messias to Judah. Bochart will have the Name of Silenus to come from Silo, which is the Messias Name in the said Prophesy: And whereas Diodorus Siculus makes Silenus to be the Director of Bacchus his Studies and his Guide, this is because the Doctrine of the Messias in the same Prophecy ought to be admired and attend∣ed to by all Nations; again, the Poets making Silenus to ride upon an Ass, to be tied to Bac∣chus, with their seeming to drown him in Wine tend only to express these Words of the Prophe∣cy concerning the Messias; Ligans ad vinam pul∣lum suum, & ad vitem asinam suam. Lavabit in vino stolam suam, & in sanguine uvae pallium suum. pulchriores sunt oculi ejus vino. Diodorus Siculus made Silenus to be Bacchus his Master, in respect to the Whole of his Education and Exercises: Virgil makes Silenus make a very serious and learned Discourse concerning the Creation of the World, when he was scarce recovered out of his Drunkenness. Pausanias says, they shew'd the Stone in Attica where Silenus rested, when he accompanied Bacchus thither; that in short, they gave Silenus his Name to all the Satyrs when they began to grow a little-old. They used to represent Silenus with a bald Pate, large Forehead, and flat Nose, which denoted the Physiognomy of a Man given to Wine and in∣solent, as Silenus was said to be: He was also known by a Pot which he carried in one Hand, and a Basket of Fruits in the other. Pausanias says, Silenus had Temples built him, wherein Drunkenness presented him with a Cup full of Wine. SILVANUS; the God of Fields and Cattle, whom they were wont to represent with his Right Hand stretched out, and holding a Cypress branch in his Left, or that of some o∣ther Tree; he was crowned with the Leaves of Trees, because he was more especially worship∣ped in the Country; Horace calls him the God of Bounds, as well as Mercury, Et te pater Silvane, tutor finium. See Sylvanus. SIMPULUM; a Vessel with a long Handle, and made like a Cruet; In some Editions of Juvenal we read Simpuvium. SIMONIDES; a Lyrick Poet of the Isle of Ceos: Being at Supper with Scopas the Sta∣tuary, he was told there were Two young Men (who were Castor and Pollux) that wanted to speak with him; and as soon as he was gone out of Doors, the House fell and crushed the Guests to pieces. Phed. L. 4. Fab. 22. SIRENES; Syrens; the Pagans feigned they were Sea-monsters, with Womens Faces and Fishes Tails. They were thought to be the Three Daughters of the River Acheloüs, whose Names were Parthenope, Ligea and Leucosia, dwelling upon the Shoar of Sicily, they sung ad∣mirably well, and threw themselves into the Sea for having been slighted by Ʋlysses, or Grief for the Loss of Proserpina their Companion; but the Gods transformed them into those Monsters, who drew Passengers to the Rocks, where they lost their Lives, and were devoured by them. The Syrens, of whom Homer in his Odysses makes so long a Discourse, had in all appearance no other Foundation, than the Likeness there is between She-Tritons and Women. People have experienced in their Course of Sailing, that there are some Sea-shoars and Promonto∣ries, where the Winds by the various Reverbe∣rations they make there, cause a kind of Har∣mony, that surprizes and stops Passengers: This, perhaps, was the Ground of the Syrens Song, and was the Cause of giving the Name of Syrens to these Rocks. The Syrens are undoubtedly an Invention of the Phoenicians; they were Three Female Mu∣sicians, half Birds and half Virgins, of whom Servius gives this Description: Sirenes secundùm fabulam tres, in parte virgines fuerunt, in parte volucres; Acheloi fluminis & Calliopes Musae filiae. Harum una voce, altera tibiis, altera lyrâ canebat: & primò juxta Pelorum, post in Capreis insulâ habi∣tarunt, Aen. L. 5. Near unto the Isle of Caprea stood the Isles called Sirenussae, the City and Promontory of Sorento, where there was a Tem∣ple dedicated to the Syrens, according to Strabo; lastly, the City of Naples, where stood the Fu∣neral Monument of Parthenope, one of the Sy∣rens. Tho' the Syrens by these Authorities, and divers Testimonies of the Poets, seem to be con∣fined either to Sicily, or the Coasts of Italy; yet 'tis very certain their Name is Hebrew, Sir, Sirum, Canticum, Cantica, and that they were the Phoenicians who peopled these Islands and Sea-Coasts, that left there some Footsteps of their
Language, as they did also of their History and Religion. SISTRUM; an Instrument of the Goddess Isis, adored by a particular sort of Worship in Egypt: The Form of it was Oval, like a Racket with three Sticks, which crossed the Breadth thereof, and moved freely, that so they might thereby make a Sound, which the Ancients found very melodious: One of these Sistra made all of Copper is to be seen in the Library of Genevieve at Paris; it was the usual Mettal they were made of, as Apuleius informs us, who gives a Description of it. Several Authors have spoke of this Sistrum, and Jerom Bosius among others, who has writ a Treatise on Purpose, entituled, Isiacus de Sistro. SISYPHUS; the Son of Aeolus, a famous Robber, slain by Theseus: The Poets feigned that he rolled up a great Mill-stone in Hell to the Top of a Mountain, from whence it present∣ly fell down again, and oblieg'd him to begin again, and so eternally perpetuated his Punish∣ment. SITICENES; were those who sounded upon a kind of a Trumpet that had a very sor∣rowful and mournful Tone, at the Burying of the ancient Romans. SOCCUS and SOCCULUS; a sort of Shooe used by the Greeks, the same was also in use among the Roman Ladies: It was a kind of Covering for the Feet among the Ancients who came upon the Theater, to represent Come∣dies, and was opposed to the Corhurnus, which was a kind of Snooe or Busk in acting Trage∣dies. SOCRATES; a Philosopher of Athens, who by the Oracle of Apollo, was called the wi∣sest Man in Greece. This Philosopher applied himself very much to Morality; but being accu∣sed by divers Persons of having spoke ill con∣cerning the Gods, he was sentenced to poison himself, which he did with Hemlock. SOL; the Sun. Macrobius endeavours to shew, that all the Deitis of the Poets were on∣ly the Sun under a Disguise, which being the Ruler of the other Stars, whose Influences reached unto all this lower World, it is by Con∣quence the Governour of the Universe. The Poets agree, that Apollo is the Sun: In short, Apollo's Name being composed of the Negative Particle, and  multus, it bears the same Signification as Sol or Solus; and this Macrobius says, whereunto he adds, that Plato gave it ano∣ther Greek Etymology, tending to the same pur∣pose: PlatoSolem , cognominatum scribit, , à jactu radio∣rum. The same Author says, that as for Apollo's being called , Medicus, a Physician; the Reason is, because the Sun is the Preserver of Health: But as 'tis sometimes also the Cause of Diseases, it has likewise been called , Destroyer, , à feriendo. They have called the Sun Delius, quòd illuminando omnia clara  demonstrat. The Name of  has been given it, , quod vi fertur: As also Phaneta, ; and , because of the Corruption which al∣ways proceeds from Heat, or from the Serpent Python; for the Fable says, that Latona being brought to Bed of Apollo and Diana, Juno sent a Serpent to devour them in the Cradle, but Apollo, as little as he was, killed her with his Arrows. Now the natural Signification of this Fable is, that the Sun and Moon being come out of the Chaos, the Earth remaining yet moist produced Serpents, or rather thick Vapours, wherewith Juno, that is, the Air, would dark∣en the Light of the Sun and Moon, but the Force of the Sun-beams did at length dissipate these Fogs. The Sun is also the same as Bacchus, or Liber, according to Macrobius; he says that the Sun in their mysterious Prayers was called Apollo, while it continued in the upper Hemisphere, or during Day-light, and that they called it Liber Pater, in the Night, when it ran thro' the lower Hemisphere. Orpheus calls it also . The Name of Dionysius comes from , according to Macrobius, quia solem mundi mentem esse dixerunt: Others deduce the Name , quòd circumferatur in ambitum. Macrobius pretends that it was to the Sun, the Oracle of Apollo gave the Name of , saying he was the greatest of all the Goods: . The said Macrobius endeavours also to prove that Mars is the same as the Sun, because 'tis the same Principle of Martial Heat and Fire that inflames Mens Hearts and animates them to fight. Mercury also according to the said Au∣thor is the Sun or Apollo, and this is the Reason why they represent Mercury with Wings to in∣timate the swift Course of the Sun. Apollo presides over the Quire of Muses, and Mercury is the Father of Eloquence and polite Learning, the Sun is the Soul and Understanding of the World, and this agrees with Mercury whose Name is derived , ab interpretando. Mercury is the Messenger of the Gods, being often sent by the Coelestial to the Infernal Dei∣ties: because the Sun by Turns passes through the Superior and the Inferior Signs: Mercury slew Argus, who had 100 Eyes to watch Io that was transformed into a Cow; that is, the Sun ecclipses the Light of the Stars and the Hea∣vens by its Presence, these Stars during the Night having been as so many Eyes, to watch
over and observe the Earth, which the Egyptians represented under the Symbol of a Cow. Last∣ly, The Caduceus of Mercury composed of Two Serpents tied together and kissing each other, signifies the Four Gods that preside over Mens Nativities, viz. the Sun, Moon, Love and Ne∣cessity; the Two Serpents are the Sun and Moon, the Knot is Necessity, and their kissing imports a Dove. Again, the Sun is Aesculapius, which imports no∣thing else but the wholsome Influences of the Body of the Sun, and hence it is that they have made him to be Apollo's Son, the Father of Phy∣sick and Health: They also place at the Feet of these Statues the Image of a Serpent that grows young by casting off her old Skin, as the Sun annually reassumes Vigor and as is were a fresh Youth in the Spring. They make Aescula∣pius to preside over Divinations as well as Apollo, because 'tis requisite a Physician should foresee many Things to come. Hercules was also confounded with the Sun, not Hercules of Ihebes, but he of Egypt, who was the ancientest of all of them, and was Sun it self, to whom they owed the Victory obtained over the Giants; for 'twas this Sun that had the Power and Vertue of the Heavens, that slew those Sons of the arth who rose up in Arms against the Gods. Farther; the Sun is the Serapis or Osiris of the ancient Egyptians, on whose Head they represented the Head of a Lyon, Dog or Wolf, to denote the Three Parts of Time, viz. the Times present, past and to come: The Lyon and the Wolf intimated the Time present and past, because of their Swiftness, and the Dog by his Fawnings signified the vain Hopes Men entertain concerning Futurity. Tho the Sun also is Adonis, who while in the six superior Signs of the Summer continues with Venus, that is, with this Hemisphear of the Earth wherein we dwell, and for the other fix inferior Signs of the Winter, stays with Proserpina, that is, our Antipodes: The Egyptians also took Apollo and Horus for the Sun, from whence the Four and Twenty Hours of the Day and the Four Seasons of the Year assumed their Names. Jupiter Ammon in like manner is taken for the setting Sun by the Lybians, and that is the Rea∣son why they represent him with Rams-horns, which denote the Beams of the Sun. It need no longer to be doubted but that the Sun is Jupiter himself, that 'tis the Opinion of Homer, when he says, that Jupiter went to Ocea∣nus his House in Ethiopia to a Feast, where all the Gods followed him, and that he returned to Heaven Twelve Days after: For the Ocean of the Western Ethiopians is the Place where the Sun sets, and whither he is followed by all the Stars, who set there also, and find Aliment to allay their Eternal Fires, without returning to the Place from whence they parted under Twel∣ve Hours, or till after they have run through the Twelve Houses or Signs of the Zodiac. Macro∣bius farther adds, that the Assyrians worshipped Jupiter, as being but the same Deity with the Sun, and they called him Jupiter Heliopolitanus, because he was chiefly worshipped in the City of Heliopolis in Assyria. Lastly, Macrobius says, that the Assyrians worshipped the Sun as their only and sovereign Deity, and hence it is, that they called his Name Adad that is only: Adad was represented by the Beams of the Sun, that came down from on high, whereas Adargatis, which was the Earth, was on the Contrary pictu∣red with reversed Rays, with the Points turning upon herself, to shew, that all was done by the Influences which the Sun had on the Earth, and that the Earth received the same from the Sun. Julian the Apostate observes, that the People of the Isle of Cyprus erected Altars to the Sun and Jupiter, pretending they were the same Deities whom the Sovereign God of the Uni∣verse constituted to govern this visible World: He adds, that Homer and Hesiod were of the same Opinion, when they made the Sun to be Hypereon and Thea's Son. For these Two Names do plainly denote a Supream Deity: They seem to say, that Bacchus, Apollo, Musagetes and Aes∣culapius are no other than the Emanations and different Vertues of the Sun. The Mithra of the Persians was the Sun like∣wise, to whom the Parthians and several Eastern Nations give this Epithet, because of the Head-dress wherewith he was represented: He was also worshipped by this Name among the Ro∣mans, as you may see by these Verses of Statius. Indignata sequi torquentem cornua Mithram. And by several Inscriptions at Nismes and elsewhere. Deo Invicto Mithrae L. Calphurnius Piso Cn. Paulinus Volusius D. D. S. D. And at Rome this other Inscription may be seen. Numini invicto Soli Mithrae. M. Au-relius Aug. L. Euprepes una cum filiis piis. D. D. And again, M. Aurelius Aug. Lib. Euprepes Soli Invicto Mithraearam ex viso posuit. These Two Roman Inscriptions were those up∣on the Two Altars, which Marcus Aurelius Eli∣prepes the Emperor's Freedman had dedicated to
this God, who appeared to him in a Dream. Mithra was an Epithet given to the Sun and used in the East, from whence it was brought to Rome, and Lactantius says in the forecited Verses of Sta∣tius, that Apollo was represented by the Persians with a Lyon's Face and a kind of Tiara on his Head, because the Sun is in its Vigour when he comes to the Sign Leo; the Phoenicians worship∣ped no other Deity than the Sun, which they called Beelsamen, that is, the King of the Heavens. The Lybians as well as the Messagetes sacrificed a Horse to him. The Emperor Galienus, after his Expedition into the East, represented Apollo like a Centaur, holding his Lyre in his Right-hand, and a Globe in the other with this Inscription, Apollini Comiti. Probus represented him like a Charioteer, sit∣ting on his Chariot and crowned with the Sun∣beams and with this Title Soli Invicto. Other Emperors, such as Constantine, Aurelian and Crispus, set him forth under the Form of a naked Man, crowned with Sun-beams, and holding a Globe in his Right-hand, and a Whip in the Left with these Words: Soli invicto comiti. Lucius Plautius caused a Medal to be coined, whereon was represented the Head of Apollo with Two Serpents kissing him: There was a Temple built him at Rome of a Spherical, i. e. a round Form. SOLARIUM, a Sundial; Vitruvius de∣scribes several sorts of Sundials in L. 9. C. 9. of his Architecture. The Hemicycle or half Cir∣cle hollowed square-wise and cut so as to incline in the same manner as the quinox, was the In∣vention of Berosus the Chaldean: It's likely that Berosus his Dial was a sloaped Plinthis, like the Equinox, and that this Plinthis was intersected into an Hemicycle, or Concave Demicircle, at the Top of a high Place looking northwards, and that there was a Stile or Pin coming out of the Middle of the Hemicycle whose Point an∣swering to the Center of the Hemicycle repre∣sented the Center of the Earth; and its Sha∣dow falling upon the Concavity of the Hemicy∣cle, which represented the Space between one Tropick and another, marked out not only the Declinations of the Sun, that is, the Days of the Months, but also the Hours of each Day, for that might be done by dividing the Line every Day into Twelve equal Parts; by which must be meant the Days that are between the Au∣tumnal and Vernal Equinox; it being necessary to increase the Hemicycle for the other Days, which contain above Twelve Equinoxial Hours. The Hemisphear of Aristarchus his Dial was Sperical and Concave, and not Oval. The Discus of Aristarchus of Samos was an Horizontal Dial, whose Edges were a little elevated in order to remedy the Inconveniency of the Stile, being straight and raised up prependicularly upon the Horizon, for these Edges thus raised up, hin∣dred the Shadows from extending too far. The Astrologer Eudoxus found out the Araneus some say, Apollonius invented the Plinthis or square Dial, which was also set up in the Flami∣nian Circus: Scopas of Syracuse made that called Prostahistoroumena; Cisaranus believes this Name was given it, because the Figures of the Coele∣stial Signs were represented thereon. Parmenio was the Inventor of the Prospanclima, that is, such an one as might serve for all sorts of Climates. Theodosius and Andreas Patrocles found out the Pelecinum which is a Dial made Ax-wise, where∣in the Lines which cross one another mark out the Signs and Months; being close towards the Middle and open towards the Sides, which makes them be of the Shape of an Ax on both Sides, Dionysiodorus invented the Cone, Apollonius the Quiver Dial; these Two last Dials are plainly Vertical, which being long, and posited in an oblique manner represent a Quiver. SOLARIUM, was a Piece of Ground le∣vell'd, or Place raised up and exposed to the Sun, where People walked, as Isidorus and Cyrill's Glossary informs us. SOLEAE, Sandals; among the Ancients it was a rich Wear or Covering for the Feet made of Gold and Silk with Leather Soles only, tied with Thongs on the back part of the Foot. SOLITAURILIA; a Sacrifice consisting of a Sow, Bull and Sheep, which the Censors offered every Five Years, when they performed the Lustrum or numbred and taxed the Citizens of Rome. SOLON, one of the Seven wise Men of Greece, born at Salamis, and Law-giver to the Athenians, They attribute the Erecting of the Court of the Areopagites to him: This wise Man said, no Man could be called happy before his Death. SOMNUS, the God of Sleep, according to the Poets, was the Sun of Nox and Erebus. Ovid, L. 11. Metamorph. describes him thus: Near unto the Cimmerians, says he, there was a great Cave dug in a Mountain, where stupi∣fied Sleep dwelt, the Sun-beams never enlight∣ened that Place, the same being covered with a very thick Mist: The Birds never sing there at Break of Day, neither do the Dogs disturb the Silence of the Nights by their Barkings: A profound Silence reigns continually there; at the Cave's Mouth there grows a great many Poppies and Mandrakes, Plants that create Stu∣pidity, whose Juice the Night extracts in or∣der to throw it into the Eyes of Men. In the Midst of the Cave there is a Bed of Ebony all of one Colour, where the God Sleep lies down
soft and takes his Rest; there are a great ma∣ny Dreams who skip up and down round a∣bout him. Seneca the Tragedian gives an admirable De∣scription of Sleep, whom he represents in the same manner as Ovid does, to be a favourable God that gives Rest to the Mind, and puts an End to our Labours. The Greeks, as Pausanias says, sacrificed on the same Altar to Sleep and to the Muses, pretending that Sleep was the best Soul of the Muses: Sleep is a good old Man, King of a certain Palace, whose Masters were Taraxion and Plutocles; the sovereign Lord of the Fountain Careotis, great Master of the Tem∣ple of Imposture and Truth, and Possessor Time out of Mind of a Sanctuary or Oracle taken a∣way by Antipho; he is Death's younger Brother; who is an old Carcase as ancient as all Ages, says Coluthus. M. Iollius pretends that Sleep is a young Man, and this he grounds upon the In∣scription wherein Sleep is represented much like unto a Youth. This Sleep appeared indeed young, but according to M. Cuper, it was Som∣nus aeternalis, because of the Torch that was thrown down which was a true Representation of a Life extinct; or by reason of this Torch being thrown down it was necessary for keeping of the Children harmless, to light one for them in Hell, His datum solis minùs ut timerent, Igne praelato relevare noctem. M. Tollius insists upon it and instances in Eu∣clids Two Sleeps, one of which was easie to be per∣swaded and driven away from the Soul, and the same belonged to young People, and the other was perfectly gray with Age, and appertained to old Men. But the Moral is very good, Eu∣clid would hereby shew that young People were easily brought of from their idle Fancies, but that 'tis hard to bring old Men from their Opi∣nions: Euclid did not pretend they were Two Deities. SOMNIUM; a Dream. Ovid puts an in∣finite Number of Dreams under the Empire of Sleep, but he takes notice of Three who were much more potent than the rest; viz. Morpheus, Icelus or Phobetor and Phantasos: The first imi∣tated Men, the second Animals, and the third Mountains, Rivers and other inanimate Things: All these Names were taken from the Greek, and they very well signifie what they intimate to us: Hereby we may know that the Grecians were those who formed both the Names of and made Distinctions between Dreams, as well as the God of Sleep. Lucian tells us, Dreams were painted with Wings, because they flew away in an Instant; Homer mentions Two Gates thro' which Dreams come to us; the one made of Ivory from whence proceeded doubtful and troublesome Dreams, the other of Horn through which clear and certain Dreams passed: Virgil in these Verses borrowed the Thought from Homer. Sunt gemina Somni portae, quarum altera fertur Cornea, quâ veris facilis datur exitus umbris: Altera candenti perfecta nitens elephante, Sed falsa ad coelum mittunt insomnia Manes. Lucian describes the Island of Dreams unto us in this manner. We had not sailed long be∣fore we saw the Isle of Dreams, but obscure∣ly, as Dreams are wont to be; for she seemed to remove farther off as we drew nearer to her; at last having reached the Island we entred into the Haven of Sleep, and there went ashoar: The Island was encompassed with a Forest of Poppies and Mandrakes, full of Owls and Bats, for there were no other Birds upon it: It had a River whose Waters did not run but in the Night, and Two Fountains of standing Water; the Wall of the City was very high and of a changeable Colour, like the Rainbow: It had Four Gates, though Homer makes it to have but Two, the first looked towards the Plain of Negligence, the one being made of Iron and the other of Earth through which frightful and melancholy Dreams passed; the other Two look towards the Harbour, the one being made of Horn and the other of Ivory, which is that through which we enter: Sleep is the King of the Island, and his Palace stands on the Left-hand as you go in: On his Right-hand is the Temple of Night, which the Goddess wor∣shipped there, and afterwards that of the Cock: Sleep has Two Lieutenants under him, viz. Ta∣raxion and Plutocles, who were begotten of Fancy and Nothing: In the Midst of the Place stands the Fountain of Sence, which has Two Temples by the Sides of it; the one of Fal∣shood, and the other of Truth: There is the Oracle and Sanctuary of that God, to whom Antipho, the Interpreter of Dreams, is Pro∣phet, and has obtained this Favour of Sleep: All the Inhabitants of the Island differ from one another, some are handsome and tall, o∣thers little and ugly, these appear to be rich, and clad in Gold and Purple, like Kings in a Play, and the others poor, beggerly and all in Rags. We met with several of our Ac∣quaintance who carried us to their Houses and treated us nobly. Prophetick Dreams were formerly as frequent as they are now rare, and so they made a Part of and were an Ornament to History, both sa∣cred and prophane. God threatened King A∣bimelech in a Dream, and made him release Sarah Abraham's Wife: It was in a Dream that Jacob saw the mysterious Ladder: The Angel appear∣ed to Jacob in Mesopotamia, and told him in a
Dream that he was the God who appeared to him in Bethel: Joseph's Dreams are well known, his Brothers Sheafs of Corn which worshipped his, and the Sun, Moon and Eleven Stars which they adored, have in a manner no need of In∣terpretation: The Dreams of Pharoah's Two Eunuchs, and the Interpretation given them by Joseph, and Pharaoh's Two Dreams after that, which were so happily interpreted by the said Joseph, were the Steps by which he was advan∣ced to the Height of Honour and Power: Gi∣deon was also instructed what he should do by a Soldier's Dream: Saul answered Samuel who was conjured up by the Witch of Endor, that he made his Application to her, because God would neither answer him, by the Mouths of the Pro∣phets, nor by Dreams; for they were the Two usual Ways they had to learn the Will of God under the Old Testament. The Devil imitated these Prophetick Dreams, and made it a Piece of the wicked Superstition of the Heathens: Nebuchodonozor told Daniel the Dream he had had, and he gave him the Interpretation thereof, that he should be de∣throned and be for Seven Years sent to dwell a∣mong the Beasts of the Field: There were a vast many People who made it their Business to interpret Dreams, especially in Great Mens Courts. Virgil represents unto us how the O∣racle of Faunus was consulted by all the People of Italy, and the Answers were given them by Dreams; for the Priests after they had offered Sacrifice, spent the Night lying upon the Skins of the Victims, and there received those Prophe∣tick Visions in a Dream. .... Et caesarum ovium sub nocte silenti Pellibus incubuit stratis, somnosque petivit, Multa modis simulachr a videt volitantia miris, Et varias audit voces, fruiturque Deorum Colloquio...... It was the Custom of the Ancients to sleep up∣on Skins, and the Latin Word dormire comes from thence, being derived from the Creek , pellis: And when they sought for Prophetick Dreams, they affected to sleep upon the Skins of Victims: Lucan makes Julia Pompey's first Wife foretell him in a Dream all the Evils of the Civil War, wherein he should be engaged: Pompey despised this Dream; but it came to him thro' the Horn-gate; the Effect followed, and the Dream came to pass; but some time after when Pompey dream'd, that is, on the Day before the fatal Battle of Pharsalia, that he was admired and applauded in his Amphitheater at Rome; it was a Dream that came to him thro' the Ivory-Gate, and had nothing but a false Light in it. Juvenal speaks of the base Practices or shameful Trade drove by some Jews, who for Money sold such Dreams as were desired of them; Qualiacumque voles Judaei somnia vendunt: Macrobius gives the Reason of the Difference of these Two Gate, by which Dreams come to us: The Horn-Gate was very small, but transparent, the Ivory was not so. And so they are the true Dreams, when the Soul being disengaged from the Body pierces and penetrates thro' that Vail which hides the Sight of Truth from it; and Dreams have nothing that is real in them when this Vail is not transparent; the Soul then con∣tinues involved with the Obscurity of Matter. SORTES; Lots; Lot is the Effect of Haz∣zard, and as it were the Decision or Oracle of Fortune; but Lots were the Instruments made use of in order to know what this Decision would be. Lots were very often a kind of Dice, on which certain Characters were graven, or some Words for the Explication of which they had re∣course to Tables made for that Purpose. The Use of Lots was various; in some Temples they threw themselves, in others they took them out of a Box, which gave occasion to this Form of Speech among the Grecians: The Lot is fallen. Sacrifices and many other Ceremonies always preceded this Dice-playing: The Priests in all appearance knew how to manage the Dice; but if they had no mind to be at that Pains, they had no more to do than to let them go, for they were always Masters of the Explication given. The Lacedamonians went one Day to consult the Lots of Dodona concerning some War they were engaged in: For besides, the speaking Oak-Trees, Doves, Basons, and the Oracle; there were Lots at Dodona: After all the other Ceremonies that were performed with much Veneration and Respect, there went a Mon∣key belonging to the King of the Molossi into the Temple, and threw down the Lots and Urn: The Priestess in a Fright told the Lace∣damonians, that they must not think of over∣coming, but only of saving themselves: And all Authors assure us, the Lacedaemonians never received a more fatal Presage. The most Fa∣mous of all Lots were those of Preneste and An∣tium, two small Cities in Italy; Fortune was at Praeneste, and the Fortunes at Antium: The For∣tunes moved of themselves, as Macrobius says, and their different Motions. either served for an Answer, or intimated whether they could consult the Lots or no. Cicero, L. 2. de Divin. says, they consulted the Lots of Praeneste, with the Consent of Fortune; and this gave occasion to believe, that this Fortune also knew how to move its Head, or give some other Sign of its Will. In the East Arrows were their Lots, and still the Turks and Arabs make use of them in the same manner. Ezekiel says, that Nebuchadnez∣zar mixed his Arrows against Ammon and Jeru∣salem,
and that his Arrow went forth against Je∣rusalem: That was the prety Way they had of resolving on which of those two Nations they should make War. In Greece and Italy they of∣ten drew the Lots from some famous Poet, as from Homer and Euripides; and that which pre∣sented it self first to view at the opening of the Book, was the Decree of Heaven: History fur∣nishes us with a thousand Examples of this kind: We also find that about 200 Years after Virgil's Death, they valued his Verses so much, as to believe them to be prophetical, and to use them instead of the ancient Lots of Praeneste: For A∣lexander Severus, who was yet but a private Man, and at a time when the Emperor Heliogabalus had a Kindness for him, received for Answer in the Temple of Praeneste, that Passage out of Vir∣gil, that signifies thus much; If thou canst sur∣mount the contrary Destinies, thou shalt be Mar∣cellus. Lots continued even to the Time of Chri∣stianity; they took them out of the Scriptures, whereas the Pagans did it from their Poets, St. Au∣gustine, Epist. 119. ad Januarium, does not seem to disapprove of this Custom, unless pra∣ctised in secular Affairs. Gregory of Tours does himself inform us, that it was his own Practise; he spent many Days in Fasting and Prayer, then went to St. Martin's Tomb, where he opened what Book of Scripture he had a Mind to, and took the first Passage he saw for God's Answer; but if the said Passage was nothing to the Pur∣pose, he opened another Book of Scripture: O∣thers took the first Thing they heard sung as they entred the Church for a Divine Lot. The Em∣peror Heraclius being sollicitous about the Place he should Winter-quarter with his Army, was resolved by this kind of Lot: He caused the Ar∣my to be purified for Three Days, then he open∣ed the Book of the Gospels, and found his Win∣ter-Quarters assigned him in Albania. SOTERIA; a Sacrifice for Health; be∣ing the Games and Solemnities made by the Peo∣ple for the Health and Preservation of the Em∣peror, especially when he recovered of any sick∣ness. SPHINX; a fabulous Monster, feigned by the Poets to have been begotten by Typhon, to have a Woman's Face, the Wings of a Bird, Claws of a Lion, and the rest of his Body like a Dog. He ravaged the Country very much a∣bout Mount Sphingio, and could never be de∣stroy'd till Oedipus had explained the Riddle pro∣posed by him; from which they have since been wont to say concerning Riddles hard to be resol∣ved, that it was Sphinx his Riddle, and wanted an Oedipus. Diodorus says, there were real Sphinx's, which were a sort of Monkeys, with long Hair, great Teats, and for the rest of their Bodies like unto the Representations made of them. Sphinx, says Palephatus in a little Treatise concerning in∣credible Stories, was Cadmus his first Wife, who designing to be revenged on him, for having mar∣ried another, retired with some Troops to the Mountains, where she laid Ambushes for Pas∣sengers, and put them to death: These Am∣bushes were Riddles, Cedipus escaped them, and slew Sphinx. SPORTULA; a small present of Money, which with Wine and Bread was distributed at certain Feasts, or other solemn Days in the Year. These Presents often consisted of Silver Medals, and Denarii were used upon this Occasion: But when the Emperors or other great Men bestow∣ed these Presents, they consisted of Gold Me∣dals: Thus Trebellius Pollio speaking of the small Presents made by the Emperor Gallienus in his Consulship, says he gave a Sportula to every Se∣nator, and one of his Gold Medals to every Ro∣man Lady: Senatui sportulam sedens erogavit, Ma∣tronas ad consulatum suum rogavit, iis denique ma∣num sibi osculantibus, quaternos aureos sui nominis dedit. It was also a Custom for those who en∣tred upon the Office of Consul to send their Friends these Presents, of which Symmachus speaks thus; Sportulam Consulatûs mei, & amicitiae no∣strae & honori tuo debeo, hanc in solido misi. The Name of Sportulae, which signified small Baskets, was given those Presents because they were sent in Baskets; and herein we are con∣firmed by these Verses of Coripus, L. 4. wherein he speaks of the Consulship of Justin the Emperor; Dona Calendarum, quorum est ea cara, parabant Officia, & turmis implent felicibus aulam, Convectant rutilum sportis capacibus aurum. And for this Reason the Greek Glossaries in the Explication of the Word Sportula, say they were Presents sent in Baskets; the Consuls with these Sportulae bestowed also small Pocket-books made of Silver or Ivory, wherein their Names were written, and these were those that they called Fasti. Sidonius, L. 8. E. 6. speaking of the Consulship of Asterius, mentions the Sportulae and Fasti that were given. STADIUM; a Furlong; it was a Space of 125 Paces, and the Word is derived from the Verb Sto, which signifies to stop; for 'tis said Hercules run over such a Space of Ground at one Breath, and stopt at the end of it: This sort of Measure was peculiar to the Grecians: Eight of them goes to an Italian Mile: There were Sta∣dia of different Measures, according to the Dif∣ference of Times and Places. STATERA; a kind of Ballance, otherwise called the Roman Ballance. Vitruvius, L. 10. C. 8. describes it in this manner: The Handle which is as the Center of the Flail, being fastened, as it is, near unto the End to which the Scale is hung; the more the Weights, which run along the other farther End of the Flail, are pushed for∣ward
upon the Points marked thereon, the more Power it will have to equalize a great Weight according as the Weight's di∣stance from the Center, shall put the Flail into an Aequilibrium; and so the Weights which were weak when they were too near the Center, cou'd in a Moment gain a great Power, and raise up a very heavy Burden with little trouble. STATUAE; Statues; the Use and Liberty given to make Statues increased the Number of Temples and Heathens: We do not know (says Cicero) the Gods by their Faces, but because it has pleased the Painters and Statuaries to repre∣sent them so unto us: Deos eâ facie novimus quâ pictores & fictores voluerunt. Statues at first were no more than shapeless Stones; but Daedalus was the first who left the Custom of imitating the Egyptians, and separated the Feet and other Parts of the Statues, which he made so as to be distinguished from the rest, and for that Reason they were called Moving Parts, as Palephatus says: Thus Aristophanes calls Statuaries , Ma∣kers of Gods; and Julius Pollux names a Statuary, , a Former of Gods. The Romans were 170 Years before they had either Statuaries or Painters, as were the Persi∣ans, Scythians, and Lacedemonians for a long time: Constantine, as Eusebius says, forbad Sta∣tues to be set up in the Temples of the Hea∣thens, for Fear they should give them Divine Honours, which before was very common; for Tatius (says Lactantius) consecrated the Image of the Goddess Cloacina, whom he took out of a Gutter and gave it the Name of the Place from whence he had it: They also dedicated (conti∣nued he) and consecrated Kings Statues after their Decease, and represented them as they pleased; and Valerius Maximus says, the Rhodians gave the Statues of Harmodius and Aristogito the same Honours as they did to the Gods. The Statues, said he, being come to Rhodes, the Citizens received them in a Body and having placed them in an Inn, they exposed them up∣on sacred Beds to the View of the People. As to the Bigness of the Ancients Statues there were Four sorts of them; the greatest were the Colossus's which were made only for the Gods: There were lesser ones made for Heroes; those for Kings and Princes somewhat bigger than the Life, and for other Men who for some special Desert were allowed this Honour, they were made of the Bigness of the Life. STOLA, a long Robe in use among the Roman Ladies; they put a large Mantle or Cloack called Palla, and sometimes Pallium, o∣ver this Robe when they wore their ceremoni∣ous Habits. STRENAE, New-years Gifts; the Use of them is almost as ancient as the Building of Rome. Symmachus says, these were brought up in the Time of Tatius, King of the Sabines, who was the first that received Vervein gathered from the consecrated Wood of the Goddess Strenia, for a good Augury of the New-year, much like the Gaulish Druids who held the Mistetoe in so much Veneration, that they went to gather it on New-year's Day with a Golden Bill, or else they did herein make an Allusion between the Name of the Goddess Strenia, in whose Wood they ga∣ther'd the Vervein, and the Word Strenuus, which signifies Valiant and Generous; and so the Word Strena, which signifies a New-year's Gift, is sometimes found written Strenua by the An∣cients, as you have it in the Glossory of Philoxe∣nus: And so this Present was properly to be made to Persons of Valour and Merit, and to those whose Divine Minds promised them more by their Vigilancy, than the Instinct of an happy Augury. Strenam, says Festus, vocamus quae datur die religioso, ominis boni gratiâ. After that Time they came to make Presents of Figs, Dates and Honey, by which they did as it were, wish nothing might befal their Friends but what was sweet and agreeable for the rest of the Year: The Romans afterwards rejecting their primitive Simplicity, and changing their Wooden Gods into Gold and Silver ones, began to be also more magnificent in their Presents, and on that Day to send several sorts of Things and of great∣er Value to one another, but more particularly Silver Medals, as finding they were very silly in the foregoing Ages, to believe that Honey was sweeter than Silver, as Ovid brings in Janus plea∣santly talking of it. Wherefore Dio speaking of New-years Gifts, plainly calls them , Silver. With these Presents they sent to wish one another all manner of Prosperity and Hap∣piness for the rest of the Year, and gave reci∣procal Testimonies of Friendship to each other: And as they prevailed as much in their Religion as they did in the State, they were not wanting to enact Laws relating to them, and made that Day a Festival, dedicated and particularly con∣secrated to Janus, who was represented with Two Faces, one before and another behind, as looking upon the Year past and present: They offered Sacrifices to him on that Day, and the People in Crowds and all new clad went to Mount Tarpeius where Janus had an Altar: How∣ever though the same were a Feast and solemn one too, since it was also dedicated to Juno, un∣der whose Protection the first Days of this Month were, and that on the said Day they also cele∣brated the Dedication of the Temples of Jupiter and Aesculapius, that stood in the Isle of the Ti∣ber; yet, I say, notwithstanding, all these Con∣siderations, the People did not remain idle, but on the Contrary every one began to do some∣thing in the Way of his Profession, that so he might not be sloathful the rest of the Year.
In short, the Custom of New-years Gifts by Degrees became so common in the Time of the Emperors, that all the People went to wish him a happy Year, and each Man carried his Present of Money according to his Ability; that being looked upon as a Mark of the Veneration and Esteem they had for their Princes; whereas now the Method is altered, and they are rather the Great ones who bestow New-years Gifts upon meaner Persons. Augustus received so much of it, that he was wont to buy and dedi∣cate Gold and Silver Idols for it, as being un∣willing to apply the Liberality of his Subjects to his own private Use. Tiberius his Successor, who did not love a Crowd, purposely absented him∣self on the first Day of the Year, that he might avoid the Inconveniencies of the Peoples Visits, who would have run in Shoals to wish him a hap∣py New-year, and he disapproved of Augustus his receiving these Presents, for the same was not convenient, and must have put him to Charge to make his Acknowledgments to the People by other Liberalities: The People were so taken up with these Ceremonies for the first six or seven Days of the Year, that he was obli∣ged to make an Edict, whereby they were forbid to make New-years Gifts any longer than for the first Day: Caligula who immediately succeeded Tiberius in the Empire, let the People under∣stand by an Edict, that he would receive the New-years Gifts on the Calends of January, which had been refused by his Predecessor, and for this end he staid every Day in the Porch of his Palace, where he readily received the Money and the Presents made him by the Crowd. Claudius his Successor disanulled what he had done, and by an Order forbad them to come and present him with any New-years Gifts. From thence for∣wards the Custom continued still among the Peo∣ple, as Herodian observes, under the Emperor Commodus; and Trebellius Pollio makes mention of it in the Life of Claudius Gothicus, who also at∣tained to the Imperial Dignity. And here we might take Occasion to enquire why the Romans were wont to make Presents to and mutual Vows for one another, on the first Day of the Year rather than any other Time? It's the Question which Ovid puts to Janus, who answers with a Gravity becoming himself: It is, says he, because all Things are contained in their Beginnings; and it is for that Reason, adds he, they drew Auguries from the first Bird they saw. In short, the Romans thought there was some∣thing Divine in the Beginnings of Things: The Head was accounted a Divine Thing, because it was, as a Man may say, the Beginning of the Body. They began their Wars with Auguries, Sacrifices and publick Vows; and so the Reason why they sacrificed to Janus on the first Day of the Year, and would make him propitious to them, was because that he being Door-keeper to the Gods, they were in Hopes by this means to have obtained Admission of the others for the rest of the Year, If they made Janus to be their Friend at the Beginning of it: And as he pre∣sided over the Beginning of the Year, they ho∣ped for his Favour to themselves and their Friends, if they could draw this God to espouse their Interest: They sacrificed Hower and Wine to him, which undoubtedly gave Occasion to the Merriments and Debauches of that Day. The Grecians amongst whom New-years Gifts were not in Use, before they received them from the Romans, had no particular Word to signifie Strena; for the Word , which is to be met with in ancient Glossaries, and which was not used by ancient Authors, signifies only a good Beginning; that of , in general a Present;  in Philoxenus his Glossary, is rendered Verbena, Strenua, because the said Word signi∣fies a Branch, a Plant, such as Vervein was, of which at first, as we have told you, their New-years Gifts consisted. Athenaeus brings in Cy∣nulcus reproving Ʋlpian for calling a New-year's Gift , in all likelihood because that signifies no other than a Thing that is given above a Gratification: The Way of sending New-years Gifts to Magistrates and Emperors did not cease in the first Ages of Christianity, after the Destruction of Paganism, as you may see by these Verses of Ceripus already mentioned, Dona Calendarum, quorum est ea cura, parabant Officia, & turm is implent felicibus aulam: Convectant rutilum sportis capacibus aurum. This Custom of solemnizing the first Day of the Year by Gifts and Rejoycings having passed from Paganism unto Christianity, the Councils and Fathers declaimed against the Abuse made thereof, as you may see in. Tertullian and the sixth Council in Trullo. STYMPHALIDES AVES; Birds of an extraordinary Seize, which, they said, in their Flight obscured the Light of the Sun. They fed only upon Humane Flesh, but Hercules by the Help of Minerva, drove them out of Arcadia by the Noise of Cymbals. STYX, a River in Arcadia near Nonacris, its Water was of so cold and killing a Nature, it was present Poison, wherewith Historians say, Alexander the Great was poisoned: Pausanias speaks at large of the Grecian Styx, and cites the Places in Homer and Hefiod wherein it is mention∣ed: The Poets made it to be a River in Hell, the solemn Oaths of the Gods were made by the Water of Styx: The Fable says, that Victo∣ry the Daughter of Styx, having given Jupiter Assistance against the Grants, he by way of Ac∣knowledgment ordered the Gods to swear by its Water, and that if they perjured themselves,
they should be deprived of Life and Feeling for 9000 Years: Servius gives us the Reason of this Fable, and says, that the Gods being pos∣sest of all Bliss and Immortal, swore by Styx, which is a River of Grief and Sorrow, as by a Thing that was quite contrary to them; and the Oath was taken by way of Execration. Hesiod in his Theognis says, that when one of the Gods lyed, Jupiter sent Irts to fetch some of the Water of Styx in a Gold Cup, by which the Lyar was to swear, and if he perjured himself, he was to be for a Year without Life or Motion, but it must have been a great Year that continued se∣veral Millions of Years. SUADA and SUADELA; the Goddess of Perswasion, owned by the Romans, and called Pitho by the Grecians. SUETONIUS, named Tranquillus, wrote the Lives of the first Twelve Emperors, and was Secretary to the Emperor Adrian; his History reaches to the Year of our Redemption 98, and comprehends 144 Years. SUFFRAGIUM; a Suffrage, given by the Romans either at the Choosing of Magistrates for the Receiving of Laws, or in Judgments: The People for a long time gave their Suffrages by Word of Mouth in Matters relating to the Commonwealth, which were taken by the Offi∣cers of the Tribes, called Rogatores, who after∣wards acquainted the President of the Assembly with the Sentiments of their Tribes: This Me∣thod continued to the Year 615, after the Buil∣ding of Rome, under the Consulship of Q. Cal∣purnius Piso, and M. Popilius Lenas; when Gabi∣nius, Tribune of the People passed the first Law of Ballotting for the Choosing of Magistrates, that enjoyned the People from thence forward no longer to give their Suffrages viva voce, but that they should throw a Ballot into a Box or Urn, whereon the Name of the Person they were minded to choose should be written. This Law they called Tabellaria, because their Ballots were named Tabellae. Papyrius Carbo, who was also Tribune of the People, got another Law passed called Papyria in the Year 625, whereby the People were required to give their Suffrages by Ballots in enacting of Laws: And Cassius, Tribune of the People likewise obliged the Judges by a Law to give their Votes by Ballots in Matters of Judgments. All these Laws were very good for the Commonalty, who before durst not give their Votes freely, for fear of offending the Great ones: And this Cicero tells us in his Oration pro Plancio: Grata est tabella quae frontes aperit, hominum mentes tegit, datque eam libertatem ut quod velint faciant: And 'tis al∣so in the Agrarian Law called Vindex libertatis; and in the Cornelian, Principium justissimae liber∣tatis. Now these Ballots were little pieces of Wood, or other Stuff, made very narrow, and marked with several Letters, according to the Nature of the Business in hand: For Example, if they were about to choose a Magistrate; they wrote down the first Letters of the Candidates Names, and gave as many of them to every one as there were Competitors for the Place. In the Assemblies held for Receiving of a Law, they gave every one two, one of which was marked with these two Letters Ʋ. R. signifying as much as uti ro∣gas, and the other only with an A, which deno∣ted Antiquo, I reject the Law. In Matters of Judgments or Sentences to pass, they gave three of them, one marked with an A, and signified Absolvo, I acquit the Persons accused; the other with a C. Condemno,  condemn him; and the third with these two Letters L. N. non liquet, Judg∣ment cannot pass, the Matter is not clear enough. The Ballots were delivered at the Entry of a Bridge by the Distributors of them, who were called Diribitores, and the Place of Office where they were given was named Diribitorium: They went up to the Tribunal of the Consul, or of him who sate as President of the Assembly, qui cistellam deferebat, and threw what Ballot they thought fit into the Urn and then the Centuria or Tribe whose Right it was first to draw the Lots gave its Suffrage, having done, they told the Suffrages; and the Crier said with a loud Voice; Praerogativa renunciat talem Consulem: If the Matter related to the Enacting of a Law; Prae∣rugativa legem jubet, or non accipit: The Magi∣strates afterwards ordered the Centuria of the first Class to be called; those of the Cavalry first and the Infantry next: When there were not a sufficient Number of Suffrages for the en∣tituling of a Person to an Office, the People might chuse whom they pleased, and this in La∣tin they called, Non conficere legitima Suffragia, & non explere trihus. SUMMANUS, an Epithet which the Poets gave Pluto, being as much as to say Summus Ma∣nium, the Chief of the Manes. SYLLA, surnamed Lucius Cornelius, a Ro∣man General of a Patrician Race; he was chosen Quastor, and had a great Quarrel with Marius the Consul, which proved fatal to the Common-wealth of Rome, for he banished divers Illustrious Citizens, and filled Rome with Blood and Slaugh∣ter: He was surnamed the Happy. He died of the lowsie Disease. SYLVANUS or SILVANUS. A God whom the Poets said did preside over Forests and Land-marks: Some made him to be the Son of Faunus; but Plutarch in his Parallels will have him to have been begotten incestuously by Valerius on his Daughter Valeria. Fenestella says, that Pan, Faunus and Sylvanus were the same Deity: The Luperci were their Priests, and their Feasts the Lupercalia. See Lupercalia, &c. SILVIUS POSTHUMUS, King of Alba, the Son of Ascanius and Grandson to Aeneas; he was named Sylvius because he was
born in a Forest, and Posthumus by reason his Birth happened to be after his Father's Death. SYRE ES. See Sirenes. SYRINX and SYRINGA, were Pipes or Reeds of a different Length, joined together, wherein they blew, as Tinkers and Boors do now-a-days, who are the Inheritors of the wretched Musick of the Satyrs. Pan was the Inventor of this Instrument, who running like a hair-brained Fellow after the Nymph Syringa, whom he was desperately in Love with, could catch nothing but Reeds, into which she was transformed: so comfort himself for his Loss, he made Muical Instruments of those Reeds join'd together, which bore the Name of his Nymph, and were in Request with Shepherds: Ovid gives the Story of it in these Verses. Panaque, cum prensam sibi jam Syringe putaret, Corpora pro Nymphae calamos tenuisse palustres: Dumque ibi suspir at, motos in arundine ventos Effecisse sonum tenuem, similemque querenti; Arte nova vocisque Deum dulcedine captum, Hoc mihi concilium tecum dixisse manebit: Atque it a disparthus calamis compagine cerae Inter se junctis nomen tenuisse puellae. SYRTES, Two Gulphs in the farthest Part of Africa, full of quick Sands, and so called from the Word , to draw, because Ships at tract∣ed to it, by the Current of these Gulphs are there swallowed up and buried. The Poets represent them to us as if they were Monsters. T. TIs a Consonant, and the 19th Letter in the Alphabet, which is very like unto the D; and for that Reason they are often found put one for the other a at r ad; which made Quintilian raisly those who scrupled to write one indifferently for another, as set for sed, haut for haud.  among the Ancients was a Nu∣meral Letter, that signified 16; but if Tittle was put  it signified 16000. TABRNA MERITORIA, Mars's Hospital; was a Place in Rome where disabled Soldiers were maintained at the Charge of the Government. TABERNAE TRES. Cic. Epist. 12. ad Auicum. The Three averns. It was a Place between Rome and Capua, upon the great Road called Via Appia, which was that that lead from Brundasium to Greece, where ravellers willing∣ly stopped: There is men ion made of it in the Acts of the Acts of the Apostles, C. . TACITA, the Tenth , which  Pompilius added to the Nine, and caused to be worshipped at Rome: The King pretended he had frequent Conversation with the Nymph Ege∣ria, and the Muse Tacita, that he might there∣by give the greater Authority to his Actions, and obtain more Esteem for his Laws: It's easie to find the Moral of these Two Fables, since the Names themselves lead us to it. By the Nymph Egeria Necessity is only meant, which doubtless is an ingenious Councellor and a very bold Executioner of all sorts of Designs; and the Muse Tacita or Silence is necessary to the Counsels of a wise Prince, whose Bengns ought to be kept secret. TACITUS. See Cornelius Tacitus. TACITUS, a Roman Emperor, chosen by the Senate; he was a wise Prince and made good Laws: He was killed by the Soldiery after he had reigned Six Months: or as others will have it, died of a Feaver at Tarsus, in the Year of our Lord 274. TAEDA, a Torch, Pliny says, they used Torches made of a kind of a Thorn, or as Dale∣champ says, of white Thorn, at Weddings. By the Description which Aristaenetus gives of the Marriage of Acontius and Cydippe, he says, there was Incense in their Torches, that so with their Light they might also afford a fragrant Smell. They likewise made use of Pine-branches, and other Trees which produce Pitch and Rosin, which made them call the Pine and Fir from the Word Taeda, which signifies a Torch. TANARUS, a Cape in Laconia, near unto which there was a Cave by which the Poets feigned there was a Descent into Hell: There stood here, as Suidas says, a Temple dedicated to Neptune, where the Lacedemonians killed the Pilots who offered Sacrifices therein: Near unto it was the Place where Hercules pulled the Dog Cerberus out of Hell. TAGES, was the Son of Genius, according to Festus, and the Grandson of Jupiter, who taught the Tuscans the Art of Divination, as Cicero says, L. 2. de Div. Ovid makes him to be the Son of the Earth; a Ploughman, said he, ploughing his Field, and the Coulter-Iron of his Plough happening to sink deeper than ordinary into the Ground, he saw a Child come out of a Clod of Earth, which the Coulter-Iron had turned up, who was called Tages and who presently ap∣plied himself to teach the Tuscans the Way to know Things to come, wherein they became so skillful, that they taught several Nations this Art, and particularly the Romans. TALARIUS LUDAS; Dice-playing; Indeed, we have no proper Term whereby to express this Play in English; but 'tis certain, it was performed with a sort of Gold or Ivory Dice, which they shook as we do in a kind of a Box, before they threw them: There was this difference between them and ours, that whereas
our Dice have six Squares, because they are Cu∣bical, those had but four, for they had but two opposite sides for the six which they ought to have, and they were conically shap'd. They made use of them for Divination, as well as Playing; and they concluded on a good or evil Augury, according to what came up. As they usu∣ally threw four of them at a time, the best Chance was when four different Sides came up, for these Squares they called by the Name of some Animals, as the Dog, Vulture, Basilisk, &c. or of some Deity, as Venus, Hercules, &c. Some Authors have been of Opinion, that they were marked with the Forms of Animals, or the I∣mages of those Gods, and not with Numbers or Dots as our Dice are: But if that be true, those Figures or Images must have been applied each of them to signifie some particular Num∣ber; for 'tis certain, that if two of the opposite Sides signified one, and the other six; and that also of the two other opposite ones, one was ac∣counted three, and the other four: This Game was very ancient, seeing the Lovers of Penelope play'd at it in the Temple of Minerva, for it was a Custom to play in the Temples; 'twas a Game used by old Men at Rome, as Augustus him∣self says, but among the Grecians Childrens Play, as appears by the Description of an excel∣lent Picture of Policletus, by Apollodorus in Pliny, who there makes Cupid play with Ganimede; and by Diogenes Laertius, who says, the Ephesi∣ans laughed at Heraclitus, because he play'd with the Children. TALASSUS, and TALASIO, and TA∣LASSIUS; a God whom the Romans made to preside over Marriages, as Hymenaeus was with the Greeks: They invoked him at Weddings, that they might prove happy; and here take Livy's Account of the Origin of this Superstiti∣on, when the Romans ravish'd the Daughters of the Sabines, who came to Rome to see the Plays given there by Romulus, there was one very beautiful Virgin amongst them, who was design∣ed for Talassius, a young Roman, that was mighti∣ly beloved by his Fellow-Citizens, and to the End she might not be forced out of the Hands of those who designed her for him, they be∣thought themselves to cry out, à Talassio, à Ta∣lassio; she is for Talassius. In short, she was pre∣sented to him, and because it proved to be a very happy Marriage, the Romans called upon him at their Weddings, that so they might have as much Content in their Marriage as he had in his. TALENTUM; a Talent; this Word with the Ancients one time signified Weights, ano∣ther time a Sum of Money, and sometimes a Piece of Money; these were several sorts there∣of; that which Authors speak oftenest of is the Attick alent, of which there were two sorts, the greater and the lesser; the lesser was 60 Minae in value, and the greater 80, that is the greater in English Money was worth about 233 l. 6 s. 8 d. or as some 133 l. and odd Money, and the other 165 l. as some 100 l. as others 120 l. and after some 180. When you find nothing added to the Word Talentum, then the common Attick or lesser Talent is meant: The Hebrew Talent was worth two of the Greeks; so that twenty Grecian Talents amounted only to ten of the Hebrews; its the same thing in respect to the Drachma's, and Greek Minae; for two Greek Drachma's go to make one Hebrew, and two Gre∣cian Minae the same. TANTALUS, King of Phrygia, and Ju∣piter's Son, who treating the Gods with a Sup∣per, drest his own Son Pelops for them, in or∣der to try whether they could perceive it or no; there were none of them deceived but the Goddess Ceres, who eat some of the Shoulder; the Gods conceived such a Horror at this Cruel∣ty, that they condemned Tantalus to be torment∣ed with Hunger and Thirst in the midst of Wa∣ters, and plenty of all sorts of Fruits, in Hell, where all of them vanished as soon as ever he put forth his Hand to reach them. Lucian in his Dialogue of the Dead makes him speak to Me∣nippus in this manner: Menippus. Tantalus, why do you weep, and what Torment do you endure in this Lake where you dwell? Tantalus. Menippus, I die with Thirst. Men. Are you so lazy, that you cannot stoop to drink, or as much as take up some Water in the Hollow of your Hand? Tant. The Water disappears when I draw near it, and when I fancy I have taken some in my Hand, it presently glides away. Men. That is strange! But what occasion have you to drink, since you have now no Body left you; for that which was capable of Hunger and Thirst was buried in Lydia, and the Soul hath no need of drinking and eating. Tant. 'Tis my Punishment, Menippus, that my Soul should undergo the same Change, as my Body. Men. I believe it, since you say it, but tell me what is it you fear? Are you afraid to die of Thirst, as if there were another Death after this? Tant. No, but that is part of my Punishment, to be thirsty and yet have no need to be so. Men. Tantalus, you rave, and if you have any need to drink, 'tis of Hellebore, to cure you of an Evil contrary to the Madness of feeling Thirst, and not Water. Tant. I do not refuse to drink, provided any be given me. Men. Tantalus, be satisfied, you are not the only one of the Dead that does not drink; for all of them, who ever they be, having no Bodies, cannot drink; but all of them are not so ex∣treamly
thirsty as you are, so as not to be able to quench it. TARPEIA; the Daughter of Tarpeius. As she was one Day upon the Walls of the Capitol, and beheld the Sabines going by, she was much taken with the rich Bracelets, which those Peo∣ple wore on their Left Arms; and this made her treat with Tatius, King of the Sabines, about de∣livering the Capitol up to him, upon Condition they gave her their Bracelets: Tarpeia gave up the Capitol, but the Sabines crushed her to Death with the Weight of their Shields: Some Authors impute the Surrendring of the said Place to Spurius Tarpeius, who was Governour, and affirm, that Romulus caused him to be thrown down headlong over that famous Work, which since bore his Name, and was called the Tarpeian Rock. TARQUINIUS PRISCUS, before was called Lucumon, who withall his Family came and settled at Rome; and as he drew near the Janiculum, an Eagle fell upon him, and took away his Cap, with which he play'd for some time in the Air, and then put it upon his Head again: Tanaquilla his ife, who was a Tuscan by Descent and well skilled in the Art of Augury, gave her Husband a favourable Interpretation of this Prodigy, and assured him he should be King, which came to pass accordingly; for he succeed∣ed Ancus Martius: He defeated the Sabines and Tuscans, the last of which submitted to him, and as a Mark of their first Homage made him a Pre∣sent of a Gold Crown, and a Scepter, at the Top of which there was an Eagle in Relievo, an Ivory Throne, a Purple Vest wrought with Gold, and embrordered with Figures of various Colours, and 12 Lictors, acknowledging him for their King, and rightful Lord of the Twelve Divisi∣ons of the Tuscans: When he had consulted the Augur, Acctus Naevius, in order to know of him whether what he thought of might be put in Execution, and the Augur having assured him of the fulfilling of it, ook a Razor, and cut a Stone with it in two: He died when he was Eighty Years of Age by a Blow given him on the Head with an Ax, by the Heirs of Ancus Martius. TARQUINIUS LUCIUS; Tarquinius surnamed Superbus, the Son of Tarquinius Priseus, and King of Rome. As the Foundations of the Ca∣pitol were a digging up by his Order, they found a Man's Head there newly cut off. This Accident was taken for a Prodigy that prognosticated the City of Rome should one Day be the Mistress of the World; another Prodigy also happened, which was a strange Woman who came to Tar∣quin, and presented him with Nine Volumes, which she offered to sell him for a very great Sum of Money; Tarquin refusing them at that extravagant Price, the Woman burnt three of them in his Presence, and asked him if he would take the six that remained at the same Price she had asked for the Nine: Tarquin looked upon this Proposal to be ridiculous, but the Woman again burnt three of the six Volumes, and then applying her self to the King, asked him still the same Price for the three that were left, which she had done for the Nine. Tarquin having consulted the Pontiffs thereupon, paid her the whole Sum. Those Books were found to be full of Predictions in Verse, which were thought to have been composed by Sibylla Cumaea, and were so much esteemed at Rome, that they created two Magistrates, whose Business alone it was to keep these Books, and to consult them as occasion required: They were called Duumviri: They had no recourse to these Books, but when the Affairs of the Commonwealth were very urgent, and that in order to find out a Way to expiate the Prodigies, and avert publick Calamities. Tarquin was expelled Rome, after he had reigned 25 Years, and they set up a popular Government in the Year of the World 3545. of the Julian Pe∣riod 4205, 509 before Christ's Nativity; after the Building of Rome 244 Years, in the 67 Olympiad. TARTARA; by this Name Hell was called by the Ancients, and Homer names it . TAUROPOLIUM, or TAUROPO∣LION: Sacrifices of Bulls, which were offered to Cybele, the Mother of the Gods, to render Thanks to the Goddess of the Earth, for her teaching Men the Art to tame those Animals, and fit them for Labour: They also sacrificed black Bulls to Neptune, to denote the Fury of the Sea. Strabo, L. 14. Of his History of the World, says, There stood a Temple of Diana, in the Isle of Icaria, named ; and Livy, L. 4. Dec. 5. calls this Temple Tauropolum; and the Sacrifices offered therein to Diana Tauropolia: In the mean time Dionysius in his Book de situ or∣bis says, That Diana was not called Tauropola from the People, but from the Multitude of the Bulls in that Country, and over whom the said Goddess presided, which was the Occasion of giving her the Name of Taurica. Diodorus Siculus, L. 3. Hist. relates that the Queen of the Amazons, who trained up her Daughters to Hunting and Arms, instituted a Sacrifice called . The Silver Medal of Aulus Post∣humus represents this handsomly enough; for you have Diana on one side with her Crescent, Bow and Quiver, and on the other a Bull sacri∣ficed. TAURUS; a Bull; which anciently consist∣ed of the great Sacrifices appertaining to the Pagan Religion: Its also the second Sign in the Zodiac, into which the Sun enters on the 21st of April: It consists of 14 Stars: Those who have writ of fabulous Astronomy, say, that this Sign is the Bull that carried Europa from Phoenicia in∣to
Candia: Others will have it to be Io, whom Jupiter chang'd into a Cow, and afterwards placed in the Heavens among the Stars. There are divers Mountains of this Name, and among the rest, one in Asia, that is extraordinary large and high, they gave it several Names, because 'tis composed of many other Mountains; and the Greeks call it altogether by the Name of Ceraunius. TAYGETE; the Daughter of Atlas and Pleione, and one of the Pleiades, by whom Jupiter had Lacedaemon, who was the Founder of the City Lacedaemon. There was a Moun∣tain of this Name in Laconia, near Sparta, con∣secrated to Castor and Pollux, at the Foot of which they were born, as Homer says. TEGEA; a City of Arcadia; Statius says, that Pan and Mercury, who were much honour∣ed here, from hence took the Name of Te∣gaeus. TELAMONES; the Romans called by this Name that which the Greeks named Atlas, which were the Figures of Men supporting the Out-jettings of Cornishes in Architecture: An Author who lived in these last Ages, thinks that the Word Tlemon, which in Greek is , a Wretch that bears Misfortune with Patience, does not disagree with those Statues which in Archi∣tecture sustain the Cornishes of Buildings. TELCHINES, the Sons of Minerva and Sol, or of Saturn and Aliope: There are some Au∣thors who say, they were very wicked Persons, who bewitched People with their Looks only, and made it rain and hail when they pleased; wherefore Ovid says, Jupiter turned them into Rocks because of their Wickedness: Some there are who confound them with the Curetes and Corybantes. See Corybantes. TELLUS, the Earth, the Romans worship∣ped the Earth under the Name of Tellus and Tellumo, of whom Tellus was the Female and the other the Male; and so there was both a God and Goddess of them: St. Augustine recites Varro's Words hereupon; Ʋna eadem terra habet gemi∣nam vim, & maseulinam, quòd semina producat; & femininam, quod recipiat atque nutriat, unde a vi femininâ dicta est Tellus, & a vi masculinâ Tellumo: The same Earth hath a double Virtue, viz. a Masculine for the Production of Seeds, and a Fe∣minine for the receiving and nourishing of them: From this last it came to be named Tellus, and from the other Tellumo. TEMPE; a very pleasant and delightful Place in Thessaly watered by the River Peneus: The Agreeableness of this Place has been the Oc∣casion of giving the Name of Tempe to all Houses of Pleasure. TEMPLUM, a Temple; there was no Nation so barbarous as not to acknowledge and worship some Deity; but there have been many People who would not build any Temples to the Gods whom they adored, for fear of confi∣ning them within too narrow Limits; Thus the Persians who worshipped the Sun believed they should wrong his Power to go about to enclose him within the Walls of a Temple, who had the whole world for his Habitation: And therefore when they ravaged the Territories of Greece, their Magi perswaded Xerxes to destroy all the Temples he met with, for they seemed to con∣fine the Divine Majesty to Bounds, who had the Heaven and the Earth for his Habitation. Nec sequor, says Cicero, leg. secun. Magos Persarum, quibus auctoribus Xerxes inflammasse templa Graeciae dicitur, quòd parietibus includerent Deos, quibus omnia deberent esse patentia & libera, quorumque hic mundus omnis templum esset & domus. Zeno and and all the Stoicks would have no Temples built to the Gods, Diogenes says, this World served them for a Temple; the Bithynians went up to Mountains when they were about worshipping of Jupiter; the Sicyonians would never build a Temple to their Goddess Coronis, nor the Athe∣nians erect a Statue to Clemency, because they said, she ought to dwell in the Hearts of Men, and not in Places not capable to contain her, as Statius says; Nulla autem effigies, nulli commissa metallo Forma Deae, mentes habitare ac pectora gaudet. The Ancient Germans worshipped the Gods in Woods only, as did also a great many other Nations. There are some Authors who attribute the Original of Temples to Janus, others to Faunus some to Jupiter King of Crete, and many to Me∣rops or Eacus Jupiter's Son: There are some who will have the Egyptians or Arcadians to have built Temples to the Gods. Apollonius Tyaneus says, that Deucalion was the first who founded Cities and erected Temples for the Gods: Vi∣truvius says, that the Architect Pythius was the first who built a Temple at Priene; but Herodotus and Strabo are for the Egyptians having been the People who first built Temples and Altars to the Gods, and appointed Sacrifices. Livy in∣forms us, that Romulus was the first who built a Temple at Rome to Jupiter Feretrius. Temples were built after a different Manner: There was one sort of Temples called Antes or Parastates, because there were no Pillars or Pedi∣ments, but only square Pilasters, called Antes by the Ancients: Vitruvius gives us a Model thereof, which was a Temple of Fortune, the Particulars of which are not known. The second kind of Temple was called Prostilus, because it had no Pillars but in the Front, such was the Temple of Ceres Elusina begun by Ictinus and finish'd by Phi∣lo: The History which is in Bas-relievo in the Gable End of the Front, is recounted by Pausa∣nias, who says, that near the Temple of Ceres
Elusina there were Two great Stones one on the Top of the other, from between which the Priests went every Year to take a Writing, wherein was contained the Ceremonies that were to be performed at their Sacrifices during the Year; and because the Ancients were wont to represent the particular Methods they used in offering Sacrifices in the Front of their Temples, and that the same in Respect to the Sacrifices offered in the Temple could not be done, be∣cause they varied every Year, it was thought fit to give this Account here, which shews one of the main Particulars relating to these Ceremo∣nies, which was to take a Writing from between those Stones wherein the Method was prescribed that ought to be observed at the Sacrifices of∣fered during this Year. The third sort of Tem∣ple they called Amphiprostylus, that is a double Prostylus having Columns behind as well as be∣fore, such as the Temple of Concord was. The Fourth was called Periptere, because it had Pil∣lars round it, and of this kind was a Temple built to Honour and Vertue by Mutius the Archi∣tect. The fifth sort of Temple they named Pseudodipterus, that is, a false Dipterus; because it had not those Two Rows of Pillars which the Dipterus has, and of this sort was the Temple of Diana in the City of Magnesia built by Hermoge∣nes Alabandinus the first and most famous Archi∣tect among the Ancients, who was the Inventor of this kind of Temple. The sixth they called Dipterus, because it had Two Rows of Pillars round it, and of this sort was the Temple of Diana at Ephesus built by Cresiphon and Metage∣nes: Pliny says, they went to the Top of the Temple by a Pair of Stairs made of Vine-wood which was all of one Piece and made of one Vine only. The seventh was a Temple called Hypae∣thrum, it was open at Top and exposed to the In∣juries of the Air, of which sort was the Temple of Jupiter Olympius built at Athens by Cossutius, a Roman Architect: Pausanias says, the Altar was raised, and there were several Steps to go up to it. The Temples of the Gods ought to be so con∣trived, that provided nothing were in the Way, the Image which was in the Temple should look towards the West, that so those who were to offer Sacrifice, might turn towards the East and the Image; and that in making their Prayers they might see all at once, both the Temple and that part of the Heavens lying to the East, and that the Images seemed to rise with the Sun, to look upon those who prayed unto them at the offering of Sacrifices: The Temples of the An∣cients were either round or square, the round consisted of two sorts, viz. the round Peripters, and the Monopters; the square were also two∣fold, one had no Pillars, or if any they were en∣closed within the Walls of the Porch; the others had Columns without side. There were Four Temples, says Vitruvius, in Greece built of Mar∣ble and enriched with such fine Ornaments that they rendred their Names famous who built them. The Design of these Four Temples was so well contrived, that the same was even ad∣mired in the Council of the Gods. The first of these was the Temple of Diana begun by Cte∣siphon a Native of Crete and his Son Metagenes, at Ephesus of the Ionick Order, and which De∣metrius Diana's Slave and Paemius the Ephesian finished: The second was that which the same Poeonius and Daphnis the Milesian built to Apollo in the City Miletus, and which was also built according to the Ioniek Order. The third was the Temple of Ceres and Proserpina at Eleusis, which Ictinus built according to the Dorick Order of a Prodigious Bigness, without any Pillars on the Out-side, that so there might be the more room for Sacrifices, and to which Philo after∣wards on the Time that Demetrius Phalereus commanded at Athens, made a Prostylus by set∣ting Pillars before it, to render the Building more Majestick, and also make more room for those who were not yet admitted to the Myste∣ries appertaining to the Sacrifices of those God∣desses. The Fourth was the Temple of Jupiter Olympius begun by Cossutius at Athens, of the Co∣rinthian Order, very large and magnificent: Pau∣sanias says it had Pillars within, that made a Pe∣ristylue; he also mentions a Ceremony represented on the Front thereof, which was, that the Priests every Year on the 19th of February besmeared the Altar of Jupiter Olympius with Stuff made of Asnes, brought from the Prytaneum, and the Water of the River of Alphaeus mixed together. The Romans built several Temples at Rome, and in other Parts of the Roman Empire to their Gods, since Numa's Time; before, says Tertul∣lian, the Romans worshipped their Gods without any Temples and Images, and practised their Religion without Ceremonies: They had Three Temples at Rome in Honour of Janus; the first was built by Romulus after he had made Peace with the Sabines, wherein he put Janus his Statue with two Faces, intimating that the Ro∣mans and Sabines were united into one People, and that the two Kings Romulus and Tatius made but one Head to govern them. This Temple had but two Gates, which were only open in time of War, and shut in time of Peace. Into this Temple the Consuls, after the Declaring War, went accompanied with the Senate and Soldiery, and opened the Gates thereof; here also they took Possession of their Office, and for that Rea∣son it was said they opened the Year. Janus his second Temple was built by Cn. Duillius in the Pear Market, after the first Punick War; but being half ruined by time, it was rebuilt by the Emperor Iiberius, as Tacitus says, L. 2. Annal. The third under the Name of Janus Quadrifrons, or with four Faces, was built in the Ox-Market,
in a little Valley called the Velabrum, between Mount Palatine and the Capitol, and the Oc∣casion of it was: The Romans, says Servius, at first represented Janus with two Faces, but after the Taking of Faleria in Tuscany, having met with a Statue of Janus that had four Faces, they were desirous to have one like it at Rome, and to honour him the more, they built him a Temple with four Faces, each having 12 Niches in it, with a great Gate, which denoted the four Seasons of the Year, and the 12 Months: Varro says there were Twelve Altars dedicated to Ja∣nus, each of which represented a Month of the Year. But besides these Three Temples, there was also a Chappel, known by the Name of Aedes Jani Curiatii, dedicated to Janus by that Horatius, who defeated the three Curiatii: There is also mention made of Janus Septimianus, tho' it was believed to have been an open Build∣ing for all comers and goers, built by Septimius Severus. TEMPLUM SATURNI; the Temple of Saturn. The first Temple built to Saturn was that erected by Tatius, King of the Sabines, at the Capitol, after the Peace made between him and Romulus; the second was consecrated by Tullus Hostilius, after he had triumphed 3 times over the Sabines, and twice over the Albans: He dedicated it and instituted the Saturnalia. The third was dedicated by the Consuls A. Sem∣pronius Atratinus, and M. Minutius: Tho' others say it was Tarquinius Superbus that built it, and that according to the Advice of Valerius Publicola, he made it the Place wherein the publick Treasure was kept: It was in this Temple Foreign Em∣bassadors were first received by the publick Treasurers, who set down their Names in the Re∣gisters of the Treasury, and defray'd their Ex∣pences: There it was they kept the Minutes of Marriage-Contracts, and all Acts made by Pa∣rents; as also the Names of all the Citizens of Rome, writ upon Ivory-books: Those also who had obtained their Freedom went thither to hang up their Chains, and consecrate them, ac∣cording to the Testimony of Martial: Has  geminâ compede dedicat catenas, Saturne, tibi Zolus annulos prtores. TEMPLUM CYBELES; the Temple of Cybele, the Mother of the Gods. The Ro∣mans had no knowledge of this Deity till to∣wards the Year 548, in the Consulship of Cor∣nelius Scipio, surnamed Africanus and P. Licinus, when a Shower of Stones fell during the second Pnik War. They had recourse to the Books of the Sibylls, and found that in order to drive the Carthaginians out of Italy, they must bring the Mother of the Gods from Pesinuntia to Rome; wherefore they presently dispatched Ambassa∣dors to King Attalus, who delivered the Goddess to them, that was represented by a thick shape∣less rough Stone. M. Valerius, one of the De∣puties, being come to Terracina with this Stone, sent Advice to the Senate of it, and told them it was necessary, together with the Ladies, to send the richest Man in all the City to receive her. The Senate pitched upon P. Cornelius Scipio Nasi∣ca, who with the Roman Ladies went to receive her to the Port of Ostia, and brought her to Rome, where they placed her in the Temple of Victory, upon Mount Palatine: Next Year M. Livius and Claudius the Censors built a Temple on pur∣pose for her, and M. Junius Brutus dedicated the same 13 Years after. TEMPLUM JOVIS; Jupiter's Tem∣ple; the most famous was that of Jupiter Opt. Max. built at the Capitol, who from the Capi∣tol was surnamed Capitolinus, as may be seen by a Medal of Aurelia Quirina, a Vestal Virgin, where Jupiter is represented sitting in the middle of his Temple, that was of a Square Form; he holds his Thunderbolt in one Hand and his Scep∣ter in the other, with this Title, Jupiter Opti∣mus Maximus Capitolinus. This Temple was first devoted by Tarquinius Priscus, and after∣wards built by Tarquinius Superbus. Upon the Frontispiece of it were the Trophies of Arms and Triumphant Chariots represented. Histori∣ans say Tarquinius Superbus expended in the Build∣ing of this Temple above 3000 l. Sterl. Here the Statue of that God was set up of massy Gold 10 Foot high, with several Vessels of Emeralds, and other precious Stones: The Sibylls Books were kept in this Temple. They built him also other Temples under various Names, as that of Jupiter Vindex, which I. Papyrius Cursor vowed to build him in a Fight against the Samnites; and which Fabius built after the Defeat of that Peo∣ple: That of V-Jovis, or Jupiter Tonans, which Augustus caused to be built on Mons Capitolinus, and that of Jupiter Ʋltor, or Vindex, which M. Agrippa dedicated to him. TEMPLUM JUNONIS; the Tem∣ple of Juno, which Camilla dedicated upon Mount Aventine after the taking of Veii. TEMPLUM APOLLINIS; Apollo's Temple; that doubtless was the chiefest and most Famous of all, which was built by Augustus upon Mount Palatine, after his Victory over An∣tony and Cleopatra, at Actium: In this Temple he erected a fine and spacious Portico for a Greek and Latin Library; the Daughters of Danaus were placed according to their Order in this Portico, and over against them the Statues of Egyptus his Sons a Horse-back; in the Court be∣fore the Temple were Four brazen Cows, which were made by Myron; and by Propertius are called Armenta Myronis, The Flock of Myron, which represented the Daughters of Proetus, King of Argos, who were transformed into Cows for preferring themselves before Juno. The
Gates of this Temple were made of Ivory, up∣on one of which might be seen the Gauls, who fell off the Capitol; and on the other the Fourteen Children of Niobe, the Daughter of Tantalus, who died miserably for the Pride of their Mother, who had incurred the Displeasure of Latona and Apollo. Upon the top of the Tem∣ple the Sun appear'd sitting in a Chariot of mas∣sy Gold, that gave so lively and bright a Light, that Men could not bear the Splendor of it. Propertius gives a Description of this Temple, L. 2. Eleg. 31. where he speaks to Cynthia: In this Temple there was a Brass Candlestick of wonderful Workmanship: It resembled a Tree and its Branches, to which there hung lighted Lamps instead of Fruit; to these Branches the Poets fastned their Works, after they had got them approved by the Publick. TEMPLUM DIANAE; the Temple of Diana; the first Temple built her at Rome was up∣on Mount Aventine, in the Reign of Servius Tul∣lius, by whose Perswasion the Romans and the Latins erected her a Temple at a common Charge, and there met every Year to offer Sa∣crifice in the Name of all the People, and to terminate all their Differences; and to the End they might have an eternal Monument of this Confederacy, they graved the Conditions of this Alliance upon a Pillar of Brass, with the Names of all the Cities comprized therein, and of the Deputies that had signed them. This Temple was adorned with Cows-horns, the Reason whereof Plutarch and Livy relate unto us. They say, that a certain Sabine, whose Name was Au∣tro Coratius, having an extraordinary beautiful Cow, an Augur told him, if he offer'd the said Cow to Diana in her Temple upon Mount Aventine, he should never want, and that his City should bring all Italy under Subjection: Au∣tro upon this Occasion coming to Rome, one of his Servants acquainted King Servius with the Augur's Prediction, who consulting the Pon∣tiff Cornelius thereupon, Autro was ordered to go and wash himself in the Tiber, before he sa∣crificed the Cow, and in the mean time King Servius offered the same in Sacrifice, and affixed her Horns to the Walls of the Temple. Augu∣stus built her a Temple in Sicily after the De∣feating of Sextus Pompeius, and the Recovery of Sicily; on the Frontispiece of the said Temple he caused three Legs to be graven, as a Symbol of Trinacria or Sicily, with this Inscription, Im∣perator Caesar. Strabo, L. 14. of his Description of the World, says there was a Temple of Diana named , in the Isle of Icaria: And Livy, L. 4. Dec. 5. calls the said Temple Tauro∣polium, and the Sacrifices offered there Tauropolia; however, Dionysius in his Book de situ Orbis, says, that Diana was not named Tauropola from the People, but from the Bulls, which were very nu∣merous in that Country. TEMPLUM MINERVAE; the Tem∣ple of Minerva: The Rhodians were the first People that built Temples to Minerva for having taught them the Art to make Colossus's; but having not prepared Fire for a Sacrifice they made to her, she in Spight withdrew to Athens, where she was worshipped under the Name of , that is, a Virgin. They built a very magnificent Temple for her, and got her Statue to be made by Phidias, all of Gold and Ivory 39 Feet high: They graved upon her Buskins the Fight between the Centaurs and Lapithae, round her Shield was represented the Battel fought by the Amazons against the Athenians, and on the inside the Battel of the Giants with the Gods: She had also several Temples and Chappels at Rome, but the most famous was that which stood upon Mount Aventine, mentioned by Ovid, L. 6. Fast. TEMPLUM MERCURIJ, the Tem∣ple of Mercury, the Greeks and the Romans had Mercury in great Veneration, and the Germans worshipped him as the Sovereign of the Gods, as we are informed by Tacitus, to whom they of∣fered Humane Sacrifices; Deorum maximum Mer∣curium colunt, cui humanis quoque hostiis litare fas habent. The Grecians erected Statues to him, which they placed before their Houses, as the Romans set them in the Cross-ways and great Roads: These Statues they called Hermae, which had neither Arms nor Legs, and were only a great shapeless Lump of Matter, except the Head. TEMPLUM MARTIS; the Temple of Mars; Augustus built a Temple to Mars upon Mons Capitolinus, inscribed Marti Ʋltori, to Mars the Avenger; he had vowed to do it in the Phil∣lippick War, to revenge his Father's Death, ac∣acording to Ovid. Templa seres, & mevictore vocaberis Ʋltor: Voverat, & suso laetus ab hoste redit. Dio, L. 50. of his Roman History, says, that Augustus built to Mars the Avenger a Temple on the Capitol, where their Ensigns and other Mi∣litary Cognizances were put up; and the Senate ordered that the Chariot wherein Casar had tri∣umphed should be put into the Temple, in Commemoration of his Victories. TEMPLUM VENERIS; the Temple of Venus; Caesar Augustus built a Temple to Ve∣nus Genetrix, which stood in the publick Place that Julius Caesar made in Rome. TEMPLUM VESTAE, the Temple of Vesta; the Romans built it round as supposing her to be the Earth: Men were forbid to go into this Temple, and the Goddess was served by the Vestal Virgins: The Palladium brought by Aeneas from Troy was deposited here, and when the Temple was burnt, the Vestals saved the Palladium, by conveying it through the Midst of the Via sacra, and carrying it into the Empe∣ror's
Palace, the Figure of this was to be seen on the Reverse of the Medals of Vespatian and Julia Pia, which was only a small Statue of Pallas hold∣ing her Spear in one Hand and her Shield in the other. TEMPLUM CERERIS ELUSINAE; the Temple of Ceres Elusina of the Dorick Or∣der, which was begun by Ictinus and finished by Philo, who made it a Prostylus, having added Pillars in the Front thereof. TEMPLUM VIRTUTIS & HO∣NORIS; the Temple of Vertue and Honour built by the Architect Mutius by Marius his Or∣der, this Temple might have been reckoned of the Number of the most excellent Buildings, had it been made of Marble, and that the Mag∣nificence of the Matter had been answerable to the Greatness of the Design. St. Augustine speaks of this Temple, and lets us know that the first Part of it was dedicated to Vertue, and the o∣ther to Honour, as a Foundation of good Mo∣rality, which Vitrutius also intimates by some∣thing particularly related by him, which St. Au∣gustine does not mention, and that is, that the Temple had no Posticum or Back-door as most of the rest had; for that does intimate, that we must not only pass through Vertue to attain to Honour, but that Honour is also obliged to re∣pass through Vertue, that is, to persevere therein, and acquire more of it. TEMPLUM FORTUNAE EQUE∣STRIS, was built by Scylla at Preneste, where the Figure of the Goddess was gilt: the Pave∣ment of the said Temple consisted of Mosaick or inlaid Work. TEMPLUM HERCULIS, the Tem∣ple of Hercules built near the Circus Magnus. TEMPLUM CASTORIS & POL∣LUCIS, the Temple of Castor and Tollux that food in the Circus Plaminius. TEMPLUM SOLIS, the Temple of the un, which the Phoenicians in their Language called Hiogabalus: He was worshipped at Rome by Antoninus from him surnamed Heliogabalus, who  him a Temple on Mount Palatine, wer, as Lampridius says, he would not only have removed the Sacrifices of the Romans but also of the Jws. TEMLUM LIBERTATIS; the Tem∣ple of , which Clodius built upon Mount Aventine,  with Brass-pillars and beau∣tified with several curious Statues made by the best Statuaries. TEMPLUM FOECTATIS, the Temple of , to whom the Romans built a Temple and an  and  the Statue of that Goddes to be made by Archcilas surna∣med Plates or Statuary, that cost Lucullus Sixty great Sisterces. TEMPLUM CONCORDIAE; the Temple of Concord, dedicated by Tiberius ac∣cording to the Order he received from his Mo∣ther Livia, Augustus his Wife. TEMPLUM PIETATIS, the Temple of Piety dedicated by Attilius in the Place called Locus Romanus, where that Woman who nourish∣ed her Father in Prison with the Milk of her Breasts, lived. TEMPLUM AESCULAPII, the Tem∣ple of Aesculapius, the God of Physick; He was at first worshipped at Epidaurus a City of Slavonia, where he had a magnificent Temple built him, and a Statue made of Gold and Ivo∣ry by Trasimedes the Parian: They built him a Temple at Rome in a little Island formed by the Tiber after his Image had been brought thither from Epidaurus under the Form of a Serpent. The Temples of the Tutelary Gods, says Vitruvius, as well as those of Jupiter, Juno and Minerva, were scituated in a high Place, that so from thence they might see the Walls of the City, those of Mercury, Isis and Serapis were in the Market-place, those of Apollo and Bacchus near the Theater; that of Hercules in the Cir∣cus, if there be no Place particularly set aside to perform their Exercises in, nor any Amphi∣theater; that of Mars in the Field without the City, as well as that of Venus which ought to be near the Gates: The Reason hereof might be found in the Writings of the Tuscan Aruspices, who would have the Temples of Venus, Vulcan and Mars to stand without the City, to the end that they might deprive young People and the Mothers of Families of many Opportunities to debauch themselves, by the Romoteness of Venus Temple, and free Houses from the Danger of Fires by drawing out of the City (in offering Sacrifices to Vulcan) all the evil , that Dei∣ty might cause, who presided over Fire, and also by placing Mars his Temple without the Walis, prevent Murders and Quariels among the Citi∣zens, and secure them against the Attempts of their Enemies. The Temple of Ceres should also be built without the City in a remote Place, and whither they were not obliged to go but when they offered Sacrifice, because that Place ought to be used with much Respect and great Purity of Manners. In the mean time we do not find these Precepts of the Tuscan Aspices were observed at Rome, for the Temple of Mars the Avenger stood in that called Augustus hi Place, and that of Venus in the Place of Julius Caesar: Nay, there were several Temples of the mis∣chievous eities within the City, as those of Fe∣bris, Vulcan. Mala Fortu and Idleness. TRMINALIA. the Feast of Land∣marks, Numa set , to prevent Men from  upon their Neighbours Land, and  end he instituted yearly Sacrifices upon  Land-marks, that so Re∣ligion might be conjoined with justice, and that
every Year they might refresh their Memories in the Knowledge of the said Land-marks, which were accounted as so many Gods, they having no other Representations of the God Terminus. They sacrificed Wheat-cakes with the first Fruits of the Field to him, but no Animal, for they would not have the Stones blooded, because the Land-marks ought to be settled by a mutual Agreement, and not by Force with the Effusion of Blood: However, this Appointment of Numa did not continue always, as to the Point of un∣bloody Sacrifices, for we find by Ovid and Horace that they sacrificed Swine and Lambs to the God Terminus, Spargitur & caeso communis Terminus agno, Nec queritur lactens cum sibi porca datur. Ovid. TERMINUS, a God consisting of square Stones, to which the Ancients sometimes added a Head, which they perfumed, and whereon they set Crowns, which they wrapped up in Linnen, and were made use of to distinguish the Bounds of Fields and every Man's Estate: Terminus on the Revers of a Silver Medal of Augustus is re∣presented over a Thunder-bolt to express the Device of that Emperor, Festina lente: Terminus which should not be removed from his Place not illy denoting Slowness, but a Thunder-bolt on the Contrary Swiftness, with which it ought to be joined. Numa Pompilius dedicated a Temple to him upon Mons Tarpeius, which was open at Top. His Feasts which were celebrated in Fe∣bruary were called Terminalia. It was forbidden both by the Greek and Roman Laws to take away these Land-marks, as also by the Law of Moses in Deuteronomy; Thou shalt not remove thy Neigh∣bour's Land-mark. TERPSICORE, one of the 9 Muses, to whom they attribute the Invention of Dancing and Balls. TERRA, the Earth, a Sublunary Globe looked upon by the Philosophers to be a simple, cold and dry Element; modern Astrologers maintain that the Earth moves round the Sun: Alexander sent Diogenettus and Beto to measure the Earth; the Romans also sent Zenodorus, Theo∣dotus and Policlitus upon the same Account by the Authority of Julius Caesar. Pliny makes an Encomium upon the Earth, where he says, that we have with Reason given it the Name of Mo∣ther, and that God has bestowed it upon us for our Palace, as Heaven is his. The Pagans cal∣led it the Mother of the Gods, because they meant those Gods who had been Men, and they worshipped it under the Name of Rhea, Cybele, Ceres, Atergatis, Isis, Tellus, Ops, Vesta and Pro∣serpina: The Temple of Vesta at Rome was of a round Form, to denote the Rotundity of the Earth: The Earth was also worshipped under the Name of Maia, which signified a Nurse or Mo∣ther. The Germans, says Tacitus, worshipped the Earth as our Common Mother, and called her Herthe, they believed she walked up and down the World, and intermedled with the Af∣fairs of Men; they had also a Forest consecra∣ted to her in one of the Isles of the Ocean, where she had a covered Chariot, that none durst draw nigh to but her Sacrificer: He took notice of the Time when she went into it, and very re∣spectfully accompanied her Chariot which was drawn by two Heifers: where ever she came her Arrival was celebrated with Festivals and pub∣lick Rejoicings: It was not then lawful for them to wage War, every Man locked up his Arms, and Peace and Rest feigned every-where: Then the Sacrificer brought her back to her Temple, wearied with the Conversation of Men, after which the Chariot-Covering and even the God∣dess her self, if we must believe them, plunged down into a Lake, where she was washed by the Slaves, whom they presently drowned. TESTAMENTUM, a Testament or Will, was a solemn and authentick Act, whereby a Man at his Death exprest his Will concerning the Disposal of his Estate: The Laws which gave Men Power to make Wills, and to extend the same even beyond their Lives, thought these Wills ought to be exprest with Care, and for that end several Essential Solemnities accom∣panied them to make them valid. That of the Twelve Tables, was the most ancient Law we hear mentioned among the Romans, and the first that introduced the conferring of this Power upon the Father of the Family, that is, upon him that was the Master and Possessor of his Priviledges, and not in the Power of ano∣ther, from whence it follows that the Children of the Family who were under the Authority of their Fathers, could not make a Will; but herein Soldiers were excepted, tho' the Sons of a Family, the Imperial Constitutions impowered them to dispose by Will the Goods obtained in War, which were called Bona castrensia aut quasi castrensia, and over which the Father had no Power. Slaves could not make a Will, because they had nothing of their own which they could dispose of, nay, they could not do it with the Consent of their Ma∣sters: All such as were condemned to die or to the Gallies, could make no Will after their Condemnation, because they were Slaves by way of Punishment, but even their Wills that pre∣ceded were not valid, for they, by being con∣demned to undergo a Capital Punishment, ceased to be Citizens: It was the same thing in respect to those who were condemned to perpetual Ba∣nishment and to Strangers, for the one lost the Right of Citizens, and the other had never got it of the Emperor, Those who were given for Hostages could make no Will, at leastwise un∣less the same were made before their Captivity, Children could not make a Will before they
became of Age, that is, Boys must be full Four∣teen and Girls Twelve. TETHYS, the Daughter of Coelum and Vesta, and Saturn's Sister, she was Neptune's Wife, and the Mother of all the Nymphs and Rivers according to Hesiod in his Theognis. See under Thetis. THALIA; one of the Nine Muses whom the Poets made to be the Inventress of Geome∣try and Agriculture. THAMUS, a Pilot whose Ship one Even∣ing sailing near unto certain Islands in the Egean Sea, they were suddenly becalmed, when a Voice was heard which came from the Islands, and called Thamus; he suffered himself to be cal∣led twice without answering, but answered the third time: Then the Voice commanded him, that when he arrived at such a Place, to cry that the Great Pan was dead: All the Men in the Ship were much frightened therewith; they con∣sulted whether Thamus ought to obey the Voice, but Thamus concluded that if when they were come to the Place appointed they had Wind e∣nough to pass by, he should say nothing, but if they were there becalmed, he must pursue the Order he had received: They were surprized with a Calm in the said Place, when presently he cried out aloud that Great Pan was dead; he had scarce done speaking, when they heard Groans and Complaints round about them, as if a great many People were surprized at and af∣flicted with this News: All the People in the Ship were Witnesses of what happened; the Noise whereof in a short time reached as far as Rome; and the Emperor Tiberius being desirous to see Thamus himself, appointed a Meeting of all those learned in Pagan Theology, that he might know of them who this Great Pan was, and they concluded he was Mercury and Penelope's Son. Thus it is Cleombrotus relates this History in a Dialogue where Plutarch treats of Oracles; and he says, he had it of Epitherses his Grammar Master, who was in Thamus his Ship when the Thing happened. We may say this Great Pan who died in Tiberius his Reign was Christ, whose Death caused a general Grief and Consternation among the Demons, who could not now as formerly exercise their Tiranny over Men. THAUMATRON, a Greek Word sig∣nifying a Reward to be conferred on him who had shew'd some wonderful Thing to the People: It was a Gift consisting of Denarii, which they were to pay who were present to see it; and this was like unto the Prize called Niceterium at the Olympick and Circensian Games, and to the Bra∣beia, a Prize among the Ancients, given to those that acted on their Theaters, Dancers, Panto∣mimes or Jumpers. THEATRUM; the Theater, the Romans entended it farther than the Sence we take it in; for hereby we mean no more than a Stage, whereon Actors appear and act, whereas the Ancients by it meant the whole Circumference of the Place within which the Actors and Spe∣ctators were contained: Their ancient Theaters were only built of Wood, and served but once, just as the Stages or Scaffoldings we now erect upon some extraordinary Occasions. M. Vale∣rius Messala and Cassius Longinus when Censors took the Freedom so far as to begin a Stone Theater upon Mount Palatine, near the She∣wolf's Picture that suckled Romulus and Remus, but Scipio Nasica did so vigorously oppose it, that their Design miscarried. L. Mummius after he had destroyed Corinth, carried to Rome the Vessels appertaining to a fa∣mous Theater there, and they were made use of at the Plays acted at his Triumph, some will have him to have been the first Author of Wood∣en Theaters at Rome. M. Scaurus, says Solinus, undertook to build a very costly Theater, en∣riched with extraordinary Ornaments: It had 360 Pillars in Three Rows one upon another, whereof the first was Marble, the second Chri∣stal, and the third was of gilt Pillars; there were 3000 Brass Statues between the Pillars. Curio built a Kind of a suspended and folding Thea∣ter, which might be divided into two at Plea∣sure. Pompey built a Stone Theater with so solid a Foundation, that it seemed to have been built to last for ever. There was a kind of an Aqueduct made here, to convey Water into all the Rows of the Theater, either to cool the Place, or to quench the Thirst of the Spectators. Julius Caesar erected one of Stone near the Ca∣pitol, and Marcellus built another at the farther End of a Piece of Ground called Argiletum at the End of the Tuscan-Street by the Foot of the Capitol in the second Division of the City. It was consecrated by Augustus. There were no less than Four Theaters in Campus Flaminius only; Trajan built a pompous and magnificent one, which was ruined by Adrian. The principal Parts of the Ancients Thea∣ters were the Scene or Building which separated between the Proscenium and Postscenium, or Place whither the Actors withdrew, and where they had their Paintings, Tapistry-works, Curtains designed for Machines and Musick. The Scene took its original from the Simplicity of the first Actors, who contented themselves with the Shade of Trees, to divert the Spectators with and so the meanest at first consisted of no other than Trees set together and well matched Greens: They made them sometimes of plain Linnen Cloth, or shapeless Boards, till Mens Luxury caused them to be adorned with the best Paintings, and made use of the richest Hang∣ings to set them out. C. Pulcher was the first who adorned the Scene with Paintings, for till his Time they rested satisfied with Diversity o Columns and Statues without any other Orna¦ment:
Antony to appear extraordinary adorned the Scene with Silver: One Petrelus gilt it, Catulus covered it with Ebony, and Nero to entertain Ti∣ridates gilt the whole Theater. As for the Cur∣tains, Hangings, &c. the one served only to di∣stinguish and adorn the Scene, the other were for the Conveniency of the Spectators: Those of the Scene represented somewhat of the Fable that was acted: They had a kind of Versatile Scene, which was a suspended Triangle, and such as could easily turn about, and on whose Curtains some things were painted, that had a relation either to the Subject of the Fable, or Chorus, or Interludes. The Sails served instead of Coverings, and they made use of the same for the Conveniency of the Spectators only, wherewith they were shaded from the Heat of the Sun. Catulus was the first Inventer of this Conveniency; for he caused the whole Theater and Amphitheather to be covered with Sails, extended with Lines tied to the Masts of Ships, or pieces of Trees fastned in the Walls. Lentu∣lus Spinther made them of such fine Linnen as was never before known: Nero not only dyed them Purple, but also added Gold Stars there∣unto, in the midst whereof he was painted in a Chariot, all of it wrought with Needle-work, with so much Art and Judgment, that he ap∣pear'd like an Apollo in a Serene Heaven, who moderating his Beams form'd a Day in respect to its Light, which was agreeable to a fine Night. The Machines were very ingenious; with them they drew Heroes up to Heaven, made the Gods descend upon Earth, and repre∣sented Hell, Palaces and Prisons: They used both Vocal and Instrumental Musick. The Scene in the Theater of the Ancients ge∣nerally comprehended all that belonged to the Actors: It consisted of four Parts, viz. Prosceni∣um, Scena, Postscenium and Hyposcenium. The Proscenium was a raised Place where the Actors play'd; and is that which we call the Theater or Stage; and this Proscenium consisted of two Parts in the Grecian Theaters, the one was the Proscenium purely so called where the Actors acted, the other was the Legeion or Thymele, or Bomos, where the Chorus came to rehearse, and the Pantomimes acted their Parts. It was called Bomos and Ara, because of its square Form that was like an Altar: Scena was the Front of the Building, by which the Proscenium was separa∣ted from the Postscenium, which was the Attiring∣place behind the Stage, whither the Actors withdrew and drest themselves. The Hyposce∣nium, according to Polliux, was before the Prosce∣nium, and reached from the lowest part of the Orchestra, to the Level of the Proscenium: This Author says it was adorned with Pillars and Sta∣tues, which shews that the said Hyposcenium could be no where but in the Greek Theaters, where the Proscenium was raised 12 Foot high, for that of the Romans was too low to admit of Pillars: The Orchestra among the Grecians made a part of the Scene; but in the Roman Theaters none of the Actors went down to the Orchestra, which was taken up with Seats for the Senators. The Doors of the Theaters called Hospitalia, were those by which they made strange Actors enter, that is, those who were to appear to be of ano∣ther Scene than the common one, wherein they entered by a Door that was in the middle, or else it was the Place whereby they entred into the Scene, as from another Place than that where the principal Actors were. Pollux says, that one of these Doors which was the Left, was the Door of a Prison: Lipsius will not allow that they sate any where else but upon the gradual Seats of the Theater, and explaining these Verses of Calphurnius, who mentions Chairs for Women to sit on, Venimus ad sedes ubi pulla sordida veste Inter foemineas spectabat turba cathedras, He thinks they ought not to be taken for Chairs placed upon the Steps of the Theater, but such as were set above them, on the top of the Thea∣ter, between the Pillars of the Portico, which crowned the Theater; which he proves by Sue∣tonius, who says, that Augustus made a Law that forbad Women to sit upon the raised Seats of the Theater, and were allowed to place themselves no were but above among the common People. Propertius also intimates the same thing, when he says in order to express the Prohibition of his Mistress, that he should not look upon her, when she was at the Play, Colla cave inflectas ad summum obliqua Theatrum. But for all this Vitruvius informs us, that in Au∣gustus his Time, and so on, they laid some thing upon the Seats of the Theater, whether the same were Pillows, or somewhat else to sit on. THEBAE; Thebes; there were several Ci∣ties of this Name, the Chief of which was that in Boeotia, built by Cadmas, and famous for the Birth of Bacchus, and Death of Oedipus; they will have it to have been thus named from the Syriac Theba, which signifies an Ox, because this Animal conducted Cadmus thither: Varro assures us, that Thebes is a Boeotic Word, signifying Hil∣locks, and that the same was still used in his time among the Sabines, who were descended from a Greek Colony: But Pausanias says, this Name was given it by a Daughter of Asopus, whose Name was Thebae. In the mean time all these Opinions are ill grounded since the Word Thebes is Phoenician, and signifies Dirt, and this Name was given it, because it was really a dirty City. Dicoearchus speaks thus of it; Thebes is very in∣convenient in Winter, because of the Rivers
wherewith 'tis watered, the Winds that blow upon it, and Snow and Dirt wherewith 'tis filled. THEMIS; a Goddess of the Ancients, whom Clemens Alexandrinus does not distinguish much from Ceres, in the fearful Account he gives of her obscene Mysteries: But Diodorus Siculus in the Relation he gives us of the Theo∣logy of the Cretians, represents her quite other∣wise, for he makes her to be Sister to the Titans, and Mistress of Oracles, Laws and Sacred Ce∣remonies: Themis vaticinandi artem, sacrorum ri∣tus, & leges Deum cultui servientes princeps infor∣mavit, & qua ad bonam jurisdictionem ac pacis stu∣dia pertinent, edocuit.—Quin & ipsum Apol∣linem, quando responsum editurus est, , Themidis munus obire dicimus: quòd Themis nimi∣m inventrix oraculorum extiterit. This Por∣traiture seems to represent unto us a Moral Dei∣ty, rather like Vertue, Justice and Wisdom than an Historical Goddess; and hereof the Readers may be farther convinced, if they do but take the Pains to examine Hesiod's Verses upon the same Themis; Postea duxit Jupiter splendidam The∣min, &c. Its no more than an Allegory of Ju∣stice, which produced Laws, Rules, Rights, Peace, and at last fixed Mens Fortunes, punish∣ing their Vices, and rewarding their Vertues. The Word Themis in all probability comes from the Hebrew Tham, perfectum & integrum esse. It might also come from the famous Thummim, which was one of those precious and mysterious Stones wore by the Mosaick High-Priest, whose Lustre served the Israelites for Oracles when they consulted God, as Josephus has explained the Scripture, and Tradition of the Synagogue. Ovid speaking of the Time of Deucalion's Deloge, says, Themis then pronounced Oracles: Fatidicamque Themin, quae tunc oracla tenebat. Lucian speaking of the same Subject, says, Cum regna Themis Tripodasque teneret. The Poets will have the Earth to have been the first that delivered Oracles, then Themis, and lastly Apollo: Ammianus Marcellinus gives us another Etymology of the Word Themis, dedu∣cing it from the Greeck : The Mar∣riage of Jupiter and Themis according to this Author was nothing but the Divine Wisdom and Prescience which lie in the same Bed, and reign upon the same Throne as he. Plutarch in his Roman Questions says, that Carmenta was na∣med Themis, and adds she was surnamed Car∣menta quasi carens mente, because the Divine Spirit of Prophesie took place of Man's Spirit. THERAPHIM, an Idol; when Jacob with his Family withdrew in order to return to  Father Isaic in Palestine, Rachel privately stole her Father Laban's Idols; Rachel furata est Idola patris sui: The Hebrew Text has Theraphim in∣stead of Idola. Laban pursued Jacob, and com∣plained of his being robbed of his Gods: Cur furatus es Deos meos? Eth Elohai: Its not with∣out Reason that the vulgar Translation, and the Septuagint have taken Theraphim for Laban's Idols, which Rachel hid in the Baggage and sat upon them. When Michal saved Divid when he was pursued, she put the Theraphims in his room in the Bed, to amuse those who looked for him: Hosea says, the Children of Israel were during a long Captivity without Altar, Sacrifices, Ephod, and Theraphims. We find in Ezekiel the King of Babylon consulted his Theraphims which were his Idols, that he might know of them what was to come: And this made St. Augustine believe that Rachel stole her Father Laban's Theraphims for no other end than to learn of them the Way Jacob should take in his Flight. THESEUS; the Son of Egaeus, King of Athens, who was Cotemporary with Hercules, and related to him, and so was the frequent Companion of his Adventures and great Courage: He set upon one named Sciron, who took De∣light to drown all Passengers he met with in the Sea, he revenged the Cruelties of Procrustus, who miserably quartered the Bodies of those that fell into his Hands: He vanquished the Maratho∣nian Bull, and Caledonian Boar; but his most illustrious Exploit was the killing of the Mino∣taur, who was shut up in the Labyrinth of Crete: As he went with Pirithous to Hell to fetch back Proserpina, he was there detained by Pluto, and could not get out but by the Favour of Hercules: He retired into the Island of Scyros, where he was slain by King Lycomedes. THESMOPHORIA; Feasts instituted in Honour of the Goddess Ceres, otherwise called Cerealta. See Cerealia. THETIS, a Sea-Goddess, the Daughter of Chiron, or rather according to Homer, of Nereus and Doris, who was beloved of Jupiter, but be∣ing informed by Prometheus, that if he enjoy'd her, he should get a Child that should dispossess him of the Kingdom of Heaven, he gave over the Intreague: And this we are informed of by Lucian, in a Dialogue between Prometheus and Ju∣piter: Prometheus. If I tell you whither you are go∣ing, will you believe me? Jupiter. Why not? Prom. You go to lie with a Nereid. Jup. Suppose it should be so? Prom. You will get a Child who shall dethrone you, as you have done your Father, at leastwise the Destinies threaten it; and therefore you will do well not to go. Jup. I'll believe you for once. Jupiter gave Thetis to Pelaeus; and this Wed∣ding was celebrated by the Golden Apple, which
Discord threw into the Hall, and fell as on purpose at the Feet of Venus, Pallas and Juno; and about which was written, It is for the most beautiful. The Word Tethys comes from , Nutrix, be∣cause it nourishes all Sublunary Bodies, and even the Stars themselves with its Moisture. Some took Tethys for the Earth, because the Ocean em∣braces it, as if she were his Wife: Now if Tethys be taken for the Earth, the Name might be as well deduced as that of the Titans from the Phoe∣nicians or Hebrew Word Tis, Lutum: But yet 'tis much more common to take Tethys for the Sea it self: There was another Thetis, to whom Te∣thys was Grand-mother, for Doris who married Nereus, and had Thetis by her, was the Daugh∣ter of Oceanus and Tethys; and so Tethys was the Grand-mother of Thetis, who married Peleus, and bare Achilles to him. THYESTES; the Son of Pelops and Hip∣podamia, Father of Egistus, and Atreus his Bro∣ther, who made him eat the Children he got on his Sister-in-Law. In Seneca's Tragedies you have the Sun disappearing and obscured with Darkness, when Atreus tore Thyestes his Bro∣ther's Children in pieces and made him eat them; and Thyestes on his part, who had com∣mitted a Crime no otherwise than thro' a Sur∣prize and Ignorance, by having to do with his own Daughter, without knowing her to be so, conceived such an Horrour for the Fact, that he pray'd Jupiter to dart all his Thunderbolts at his Head. Jaculare flammas, lumen ereptum polo Fulminibus exple. THYMELE, a certain noted Dancer, whom Domitian took Delight in: Some Songs made in Honour of Bacchus were called Thymeliae from his Name: And all the Persons belonging to the Stage, who danced and sung in the Interludes were also called Thymelici, and the Place where they performed their Parts Thymele. TIBERIUS, a Roman Emperor, Son to the Empress Livia, who was adopted and made Part∣ner in the Empire and Tribunicial Power by Au∣gustus: By his Medals we find he was fat and tall and had also large Eyes: Suetonius observes somewhat very extraordinary in Respect to this Prince's Eyes, that he could see as well in the Dark when he awoke, as at Noon-day, which shews there was a great deal of Fire and Subtil∣ty in his Nature: The same Author says, that besides this he had a fixed Look, and extended his Neck so as he walked, and was oftentimes so thoughtful, that 'twas a hard Matter to get a Word from him: Augustus taking Notice of his Air and Deportment, took him to be arro∣gant, though he endeavoured to excuse him, saying, it was rather a Defect of Nature than of the Mind; he had a small Chin that was a a little turned up which was a Sign of Cruel∣ty, and indeed he was cruel, for he put his Wife Julia to Death, and slew Sempronius: Ti∣berius was smoothered with the Bed-cloaths at the Age of 78. He was very famous as long as he continued a private Man, or commanded under Augustus, having the Art to conceal his Vices and discover his Virtues. TIBIA, a Pipe, used among the Ancients in their Comedies: The Title of their ancient Comedies ran thus, Egerunt L. Ambivius Turpio L. Attilius Praenestinus: Modos fecit Flaccus tibiis, paribus dextris & sinistris: This Comedy was acted by the Company of L. Ambivius Turpio and L. Attilius of Preneste: Flaccus invented the Mu∣sick, wherein he made use of equal Pipes on the Right and Left: There is nothing about which the Ancients differed so much as about the Pipes which they called Right and Left, e∣qual and unequal: The Pipers always play'd upon two Pipes at once in their Comedies: That which they touched with the Right-hand was called the Right for that Reason, and that with the Left must consequent∣ly be termed the Left. The first had but a few Holes and made the Base, the other had more and a clearer and sharper Sound: Now when the Musitians play'd upon these two Instruments of a different Sound, they said the Part was play'd Tibiis imparibus, with unequal Pipes, or Tibiis dextris & sinistris, with Right and Left ones; and when they play'd with two Pipes of the same Sound, with two Rights or two Lefts, they said, that Part was play'd with Tibiis pari∣bus dextris, with equal Right-pipes, if they used the Base; or Tibiis paribus sinistris, with e∣qual Left-pipes, if they used the Treble. Donatus says, if the Subject was grave and serious, they only made use of equal Right-pipes which they also called Lydian Pipes, and made a Base; but that when it was a merry Subject; they used no other than the Left-pipes, which were named Tyrian Pipes or Sarranae, that performed the Treble, and consequently were fitter for the Occasion: Lastly, when the Subject was an In∣termixture of Things merry and serious, they used the unequal Pipes, that is the Right and the Left; which were called Phrygian Pipes. TIRESIAS, the Gods took him to be a Judge of their Differences, and Juno took his Sight from him, but Jupiter in way of Recom∣pence gave him the Gift of Prophesie, he had been both a Man and a Woman, and said, the Woman's Pleasure was greater than that of a Man's, he having tried both of them. TISIPHONE, one of the three Furies of Hell, and a Revenger of Murders, as her Name imports. TITAN, the Son of Coelum and Vesta, and Saturn's Brother, whose Right it was to succeed his Father, but he quitted it in Favour of Saturn
upon Condition he should put all his Male Chil∣dren to Death; but Rhea his Mother privately convey'd Jupiter away, which coming to be known by Titan, he made War upon Saturn, but Jupiter set him free. See Gigantes. TITANES, the Titans were the Sons of Ʋranus and Titea, who gave them her Name, and who her self was called the Earth: This Name comes from the Earth or Mud called Tit by the Hebrews. See Gigantes. TITHONUS, the Son of Laomedon, whom Aurora stole away for his Beauty, and by whom she had Memnon: Jupiter at Aurora's Request made him immortal: He forgot to ask of him that he might not grow old, therefore when he became very aged, and took no more Pleasure in worldly Things, he was transformed into a Grashopper. TITUS, a Roman Emperor and Vespatian's Son; he proved quite contrary to other Prince's who grew more wicked when they became Em∣perors, than they appeared before to be in a pri∣vate State; for he grew better, and by his wise Conduct effaced all the evil Impressions that had been entertained of him so far that he was stiled The Delight of Mankind; being of a sweet Dispo∣sition, liberal and benificent to every Body, which made him utter these excellent Words to his Domesticks, who put him in mind he should not promise more than he could perform, No Man, said he, ought to return with Dissatisfa∣ction from his Prince. TITYUS, the Son of Jupiter and Terra; this Giant was killed by Apollo, or as others will have it, Thunder-struck, for endeavouring to en∣joy Lacona, the Poets feigned he was racked in Hell, and that a Vulture tore his Heart with∣out killing him. TOGA, It was a great Woollen Mantle, without any Sleeves, very large, and used both by Men and Women; but in Process of time none wore them but leud Women hence that of Horace, In matronâ, peccesve togata: If you commit Sin with a Woman of Quality or a Courtizan: The Toga was of divers Colours, and admitted of various Ornaments: There was that called Toga domestica, wore within Doors, Toga forensis, abroad, Toga militaris, used by Soldiers, and tucked up after the Gabinian Fa∣shion; and Toga picta or triumphalis, wherewith the Victorious triumphed, with imbroidered Palms, that which had no Ornaments was called Toga pura. TRAGOEDIA, a Tragedy; a Dramma∣tick Poem which upon the Theater represents some signal Action performed by Illustrious Per∣sons, and has often a fatal End. Suidas says, that Thespis was the first Author of Tragedy, who began by making his Actors ride in a Cha∣riot, painting their Faces with Wine-lees in or∣der to disguise them, for Masks were not yet invented: Horace de arte Poetica gives us all these Particulars, Ignotum Tragicae genus invenisse Camoenae Dicitur, & plaustris vexisse poemata Thespis Qui canerent, agerentque peruncti fecibus ora. Eschylus was the first who invented Masks and Habits to disguise the Actors, and in short, 'twas he that advanced the magnificent and noble Character of Tragedy to the highest Pitch. Post hanc personae pallaeque repertor honestae Aeschylus, & modicis instravit pulpita tignis, Et docuit magnumque loqui, nitique cotburno. Diogenes Laertius in Plato's Life, and Aristotle in his Ars Poetica say, that at first there was but one Person in a Tragedy, who alone made the Chorus; Thespis added a Comedian thereto, in order to give the Chorus Leasure to take Breath: Eschylus added a second, and Sophocles a third, and so Tragedy came to its Perfection; he that won the Prize in a Tragedy received a He-goat which he was to sacrifice to Bacchus, from whence came the Name of Tragedy , Hircus, signifying a He goat. TRAJANUS, Trajan; a Spaniard by Birth, and the first Emperor of a Stranger that mount∣ed the Throne of Rome: His Head was like a Mallet, broad at Top and with very considerable Eminences before and behind, his Forehead broad, and Neck thick, which was an infallible Sign of a prudent, vigorous Man and one that was steady in his Designs rather than of a lively and brisk Wit; and so indeed he performed great Things, having extended the Bounds of the Ro∣man Empire much beyond any of his Predecessors; Armenia and Mesopotamia being fallen under the Yoke of the Roman Power: He had a Fit of an Apoplexy, which turned into a Palsie in some Part of his Body, but he died of a Dropsie, aged 64, when he had reigned full 20 Years, and most justly acquired the Title of an excellent Prince. TRIBUNI PLEBIS, Tribunes of the People, being Magistrates taken from among the People and chosen of the People themselves, to withstand whatever the Senate might at∣tempt against their Liberty and Sovereignty, in∣somuch that no other Power could do any thing if they opposed it: The Occasion of creating them was this. The People finding themselves opprest by the great Ones, by the Instigation of Sicinius withdrew to a Mountain Three Miles off from Rome, which afterwards was called Mons Sacer, and would not return to Rome but by the Per∣swasion of Menenius Agrippa, and being allowed
two Tribunes to protect them against the Op∣pressions of the great Ones, and this happened in the Year 266, and the two Tribunes were Sicinius Bellutus and L. Junius. The Law for creating them was called Sacred, and the same declared the Tribunes to be sacred and inviolable Persons, who must not be injured upon Pain of Death, and the Mountain whither the People had retired was called Mons Sacer, because of the Oath which the Deputies of the Senate made to the People for allowing this Magistrate to them: These two Tribunes took in three more, and their Number increased to ten. They had a Right to withstand the Delibera∣tions of the Senate, and the Orders of the very Consuls; there being nothing to be concluded on without their Consent, which they exprest by putting a T under the Order, and if the same did not please them, they hindred it to be put in Execution by subscribing the Word Veto with∣out giving any Reason for it: They wore a Purple Robe, and they were the only Persons whose Office did not cease upon the nominating of a Dictator: They could banish or imprison such as they thought criminal: They summoned a Consul and a Dictator to be tried before the People, when they were out of their Offices, and they could not tarry above one Day out of the City: The Doors of their Houses were o∣pen Night and Day, that so the People might have Recourse to them at all times; they had no Curule Chair, nor a Seat at first in the Senate; but their Seats were at the Door, where they examined the Deliberations of that Body: They had no Lictors to walk before them, but only one Usher: By the Atinian Law they were ad∣mitted into the Senate, and had a Right to give their Advice there; but their Authority was much lessened by the Cornelian Law, in point of publishing of Laws and haranging the People, and the same also supprest Appeals to the Peo∣ple; but afterwards the Consuls Q. Aurelius Cotta and L. Octavius in the Year of Rome 678 admit∣ted them to the Exercise of the highest Offices in the Republick, and allowed them the Honour of having the Fasces carried before them, and the same was confirmed to them by Pompey. The Office of Tribune became yet more considerable and illustrious under the Emperors, who took the Quality of Tribunes upon themselves; Augustus began it and held the Power of Tribune for 57 Years; A Quality, says Tacitus, that was invent∣ed for preserving of the Sovereign Authority above the other Magistrates, without taking that of King or Dictator upon them. Tiberius also held this Office for Five Years, and so did all the succeeding Emperors to Constantine the Great: It's true, they annually created Tribunes of the People, but this was only nominal, the Emperors carried all the Power from them. Ʋlpian places the Tribunes among those who ad∣ministred Justice at Rome, as they sate upon lit∣tle Benches in Subselliis. TRIBUNUS MILITUM, a Military Tribune, was an Officer who commanded in Chief over a Body of Soldiers, being the Master de camp of a Roman Legion. TRIBUNUS COHORTIUM PRAE∣TORIANARUM; the Tribune of the Prae∣torian Cohorts, much like our Captains of the Guard, whose Business it was to guard the Em∣peror. TRIBUNI CELERUM, The Captains of the Guards. TRIBUNI AERARII, Tribunes of the Treasury; they were Officers taken from a∣mong the People, who kept the Money design'd for the Use of the War, in order to distribute the same, as Occasion required, to the Quaesiors of the Army; They chose the richest Persons they could into this Office, for 'twas an Im∣ployment where a great deal of Money was to be managed. TRIBUS, a Tribe; a certain Number of the People of Rome, which were distributed into several Divisions: Romulus divided his People into three Tribes or Regiments, whose Collo∣nes were called Tribunes, but different both from the Tribunes of the People and Military Tribunes: These three first Tribes were thus called; viz. the first Ramnensium, from Romulus, Tatiensium, from Tatius, and Lucerum, for which we can give no Reason: Livy confesses he was igno∣rant of it, Varro says, they were so called from the Lucumones or Tuscans who assisted Romulus against Tatius: Each Tribe was divided into ten Curiae or Parishes: Servius Tullius, the sixth King of Rome, finding its Inhabitants much increased ad∣ded more Tribes to the rest, and assigned them several Parts of the City to live in: He therefore divided all the Inhabitants of the City into Four Tribes, for that reason called Tribus Ʋrbanae, to whom he gave particular Names according to the Divisions they lived in, viz. Suburana, Pala∣tina, Esquilina and Collina. The first inhabited Mount Coelius and the Vallies round about to the Eastward; the second almost all the old City, viz. the Mounts Palatine and Capitoline, with that Part called Locus Romanus; the third the whole Mountain called Esquiliae, and the fourth all the Quirinal and Viminal. He divided the Inhabitants of the Country in∣to Fifteen Tribes which by one general Name were called Tribus Rusticae, of which this is the List, viz. Romulia, Lemonia, Pupinia, Galeria, Pollia, Volsinia, Claudia, Aemilia, Cornelia, Fa∣bia, Horatia, Menenia, Papyria, Sergia, Veturia, whose Names were either taken from the Places of their Aboad, or from those who were the Authors of them. Sigonius informs us, there were two more added, viz. Crustumina and Ʋei∣entina in the Year of Rome 258; and in 366
Four others were also added, viz. Stellatina, Tormentina, Sabatina, Arniensis or Narniensis; neither did they end with this Number, for in the Year 421 there were two new ones appoint∣ed, called Maetia and Scaptia; in the Year 435 those called Ʋfentina and Falerina; in 454 Ani∣ensis and Terentina, and lastly, in the Year 512 Velina and Quirina, insomuch that there were 35 added at several Times and upon several Oc∣casions which continued so till the War called Bellum Sociale, when there were ten more ad∣ded in order to pacifie them: But they were sometime afterwards incorporated into the old ones by the Censors, L. Martius Philippus and M. Perpenna. Here follows the Reason of the Names given to the 35 Tribes, as taken out of Gruchius and Vigenere: Suburana, which was the first Tribe of the City and took in Mount Coelius and the adjacent Vallies, and was so named, according to Varro, Quòd sub terreo muro Carinarum esset. 2. Es∣quilina, which comprehended the Esquiliae, from whence it took its Name. 3. Collina the Quiri∣nal and Viminal that were two little Hills. 4. Pa∣latina that took in the Mounts Palatine and Ca∣pitoline, with that called Locus Romanus. 5. Ro∣mulia or Romilia, which was the first of the Coun∣try Tribes and contained all the ancient Terri∣tory of Romulus, from whom it had its Name, or because it was near Rome. 6. Lemonia so called from the Village Lemonius by which they passed through the Gate Capena along the great Road called Via Latina. 7. Pupinia, from the Pupinian Territory beyond the Tiber in the Country of the Latins. 8. 9. 10. Galeria, Pollia and Volsi∣nia, the Original of these three Tribes is not known. 11. Claudia, from Appius Claudius, who retired to Rome from the Country of the Sabines. 12. Aemilia, from one Aemilius from whom many illustrious Families descended. Cornelia, from the Familly of the Cornelii. 14. Fabia from Fabius. 15. Horatia, from the Family of the Horatii. 16. Menenia, from Menenius. 17. Papyria, from Papyrtus of whom Livy speaks in his first Decad. 18. Sergia, from Sergius. 19. Veturia, from the Veturian Family. 20. Cru∣stumina, from a City of the Sabines called Cru∣stuminum. 21. Ʋeientina, took in part of the Territory of the Ʋetentes in Tuscany. 22. Stel∣latina, from the Territory of Stellata in Tuscany. 23. Tormentina, from the Territory of Tormen∣tum. 24. Sabatina, from a Lake of the same Name in Tuscany. Arniensis or Narniensis, from the River Arnus that runs by Florence. 26. Pomp∣tina, from a Territory so called three Leagues from Terracina, Seven or Eight Miles from Rome on the Road to Naples. 27. Popilia, whose Ori∣ginal is not known. 28. Maetia, from a Castle named Maetium. 29. Scaptia, from the City of Scaptia. 30. Ʋfentina or Oufentina, from the River Oufens in the Country of the Privernates, between Terracina and the Sea. 31. Falerina, from the City Falerii belonging to the Falisci. 32. Aniensis from the River Anio. 33. Teren∣tina, from a Place called Terentum in Campus Martius. 34. Velina, from the Lake Velina in the Country of the Sabines. 35. Quirina from Cures a City of the Sabines. TRIPTOLEMUS, the Son of Elusius, or Coelaeus King of Elusis, who, according to Pausa∣nias, was the first that brought the Invention of Tillage into Greece. Ceres took an Affection to Triptolemus while he was yet but a Child, ta∣king care in the Day-time to feed him with Di∣vine Milk, and by Night to hide him under the Fire, which made him grow mightily: She also gave him a Charriot drawn by a Couple of Dra∣gons, that so he might go into all Parts of the Earth to settle the Art of Agriculture: He was the first that instituted the Feast called Thesmo∣phoria at Athens in Honour of Ceres, by way of Acknowledgment for the Kindness she had shew∣ed him. TRIQUETRA, Sicily, so called by the Romans, as the Grecians named it Trinacria; be∣cause the Island is of a Triangular Form, whose three Promontories form three Points or Capes. TRISMEGISTUS. See Mercurius. TRITON, the Son of Neptune and Amphi∣trite, or according to others, of Oceanus and Te∣thys. The Poets made him to be the Trumpe∣ter of Neptune, under the Form of a Man down to his Navel, with Arms like a Dolphin's Tail, and his Fore-feet like the Fore-feet of a Horse, and carrying a hollow Shell in his Hand which he put in his Mouth; he was carried by grey Horses. TRIUMPHALIS CURRUS. See Triumphus. As to the Chariots of the Gods, the Poets tell us, that that of Jupiter was drawn by Horses and Eagles, of Neptune by Sea-horses; of Pluto by black ones; of Mars by Horses; of the Sun by Horses vomiting Fire; of Bacchus by Lynxes and Tigres; of Juno by Peacocks; of Thetis by Dolphins; of Venus by Swans; of Diana by Deer; of Ceres by Dragons; of Cybele by Lyons; of the Moon by Horses full of Stars; of Aurora by Rose-coloured Horses, &c. TRIUMPHATOR. See Triumphus. TRIUMPHUS, a Triumph; 'twas doubt∣less the most magnificent Show the Romans had; there were two sorts of it, the first which was the lesser, was simply called Ovatio, whereas the greater was known only by that great and pom∣pous Name of Triumph. The Origin of these two Names is more intricate than the Know∣ledge thereof is necessary; the Ovatio seems to be of Roman Original, if we regard Plutarch here∣in, for the Name was given it because they only sacrificed white Sheep upon this Occasion, where∣as at the Triumph they offered white Oxen.
The Etymology of the greater Triumph is con∣tained in its Name, which is Greek, and was gi∣ven to Bacchus, because he was the first that in∣vented this way of rewarding Vertue by these Festivals and publick Magnificence: But there are more solid Reasons to be given for the Dif∣ferences between these two Triumphs; for the Ovation consisted of very little Pomp: The Conqueror wore his usual Cloaths, and walked a Foot at the Head of his Troops, without any other Mark of his Success, than the Acclamati∣ons of the People, some Myrtle-Crowns, and part of his Army to march before him with Mu∣sick playing, and they offered nothing but white Sheep in Sacrifice to the Gods upon this Occasi∣on: The Ovation was decreed to those that had waged an ill-grounded War, or such as was not very honourable; and those that fought against Pyrates, Slaves or pittiful Enemies were reward∣ed with this lesser Triumph, or the Ovatio; but the Triumph was allowed to those who had per∣formed Martial or Brave Actions: For when a Victory was won, the Conqueror dispatch'd Couriers with Letters containing the Particu∣lars of the Fight, and the Success thereof: The Senate at first met in Bellona's Temple, which stood without the City; Augustus afterwards chose that of Mars for this Occasion. The Se∣nate being met, the General and Officers Let∣ters were read, and these Letters were wrap∣ped up in Lawrel-Leaves; but when the Roman Army was worsted, they made use of a Feather instead of a Lawrel, to notifie, that they must be diligent. They presently sent to the Con∣queror the Title of Imperator, with Orders for his return, and to bring his victorious Troops back to Rome, there to triumph. When he was come near Rome, the General and chief Officers took an Oath without the City, that the Victo∣ry was true; after which they appointed the Day of Triumph: The Senate went in a Body to meet the Conqueror without the City-Gate, by which the Triumpher was to enter, and which was called Porta Capena or Triumphalis: There after the Complements were over, the Senate marched in order and accompanied the Conqueror to the Capitol: He was ad in a Purple Robe full of Gold Stars, or embroidered Cyphers, which set forth his glorious Actions: This Robe was called Toga picta, a painted Robe, or Tunica palmata, and sometimes by the single Name of Trabea: His Shoes were a kind of Bus∣kins embroidered and beset with Pearls; upon his Head he wore a Crown which at first was of Lawrel but afterwards a Golden one; in one Hand he carried a Lawrel branch, and in the o∣ther a Scepter or Truncheon, which was made of Ivory, with an Eagle at top: Before he set out he made his Prayers in these Words: Dii, nutu & Imperio quorum nata & aucta est res Roma∣na, tandem placati propitiatique servate. O ye Gods, under whose Protection and Conduct the Re∣publick of Rome had its Beginnings, and so great an Increase, be at length pleased with it, and fa∣vourably protect it. When this Prayer was over he went into a Triumphal Chariot, that was adorned with I∣vory and Gold Plates, and that they might con∣tinually intermix something that was Warlike with a Ceremony that was purely Civil, they sprinkled Drops of Blood upon the Gold of the Chariot, and even upon the Spectators; this Chariot was usually drawn by two white Horses, but sometimes by extraordinary Animals, as by Elephants, as Pompey's was when he triumphed over Africa; by Lions, as Mark Antony's was; by Tigers, as Heliogabalus did: Aurelian made use of Deer, Nero of Hermophrodite Mares, and Se∣sostris was drawn by the Kings whom he had con∣quered: The Triumpher was alone in his Cha∣riot, only he had his Children before him, or at his Feet; for we read in Cicero, that Trium∣pher's Children were mounted upon the Cha∣riot-Horses; and Tiberius and Marcellus had the Honour, one of them to ride upon the Left-Horse, and the other upon the Right, that drew Augustus his Triumphant Chariot after the Battle of Actium. Pliny to this Pomp of a Chariot adds a kind of a Deity called Fascinus, out of an Opinion they had, that this God was very powerful against the Stings and Perplexi∣ties of Envy. Most Authors say, that the pub∣lick Executioner was behind the Conqueror, to remind him from time to time that these Honours were transitory, and would not secure him from the Severity of the Laws. Those who went foremost of all at this Solem∣nity, were the Trumpeters, Fluters and Haut∣boys, with Crowns on their Heads; then seve∣ral Chariots, wherein were Plans of the Cities which the Conqueror had taken, done in Relievo, and made of several sorts of Things. Scipio's Triumph was adorned with a 137 Representa∣tions of Countries or Cities which he had redu∣ced under the Power of the Roman Empire; then came several Chariots laden with the Spoils of the Enemy, their Horses, Arms, Riches, Tents, Machines, and generally all other Warlike Pomp and Ensigns of Honour. If they triumphed for a Naval Victory, they carried along the Masts of Ships, Sail-yards, and the most considerable Things belonging to a Vessel: Lucullus caused 110 of them to be car∣ried in Pomp, and a Gold Statue of Mithridates six Foot high, with a Shield, enriched with pre∣cious Stones. Pompey the Great at his Triumph had Pharnaces his Statue that was made of Sil∣ver, another which he had got made of himself, enriched with Pearl, 3 little Gold Idols, some Myrtle ones, and 33 Crowns adorned with pre∣cious Stones: The Silver Coin taken from the Enemy made part of the Solemnity, it was car∣ried
in Waggons, with a Specification in wri∣ting, of the Sums contained therein. Scipio Afri∣canus brought 400000 Pound Weight of Silver Money from Carthage, and Gold Vessels to the Weight of 200000 Pound. Paulus Aemilius took so great a Booty of Gold and Silver in Macedo∣nia, as was enough to defray the Charges of the Republick: All these Waggons were followed by another, wherein was the Statue of Hercules adorned with his Club and Lion's Skin: Next came the Kings, Princes and Captains that had been vanquished, laden with Chains: It was not the least illustrious part of Pompey's Triumph, to have Tigranes and Aristobulus to attend it, who were powerful Kings in the East, the one of Armenia and the other of Judea: The Cap∣tives were followed by Buffoons and Mimicks, who insulted over them in their Misfortunes, with a thousand Buffooneries: Next to them came the Officers of the victorious Troops, richly clad with Crowns on their Heads: Lastly, The triumphant Chariot appear'd, be∣fore which, as it passed, they all along strewed Flowers, the Consort of Musick play'd on in Praise of the Triumpher, amidst the Acclama∣tions of the People, who often repeated these Words: Io triumpha, Io triumpha: The Senate came next after the Chariot, the Senators being clad in white Robes, and were followed by those Citizens who had been set at Liberty, or ran∣somed. Flaminius had a thousand ransomed Persons to follow his Chariot, who had their Heads shaved, and on which they wore a kind of a Bonner, to let People know that they were freed from Slavery: The Sacrificers with their Officers closed up this numerous Company, each of them being in his Ministerial Dress, with their Vessels, and other Instruments appertain∣ing to the Sacrifice, and bringing a white Ox along, which was to be offered as the chief Victim. This whole Company of Conquerors and Conquered proceeded in this Order thro' the Triumphal-Gate by the covered Market-place, and along the Via Sacra to the Capitol; where they offered the Victims appointed for this End, and by a thousand Sacrifices gave Ju∣piter Thanks for the good Success of the Re∣publick. In the mean time all the Temples of the Ci∣ty were open, and all the Altars laden with Offerings and Incense; all the Streets were full of the People of Rome and Strangers: They ce∣lebrated Games and Combats in the publick Places, and Rejoycings appear'd every-where; but what was most horrible and cruel amidst so much Jollity, was the massacring of the Conque∣red, whom, when they came to the End of the Market-place, they carried back and lead into Prison, where they were strangled; for 'twas a Point and Mystery of the Superstition of these Great Men, not to dare to touch the Victim to be offered, before they had taken a full Revenge on their Enemies. When the Victims were of∣fered, the Triumpher drew near unto the Al∣tars, and pray'd thus: Most great and good Jupiter, and thou Queen Juno, with all the other Gods, who guard this holy Place, I give you Thanks with all my Heart, that you have vouchsafed to this very Day and Hour, to preserve and increase the Republick by my means, I earnestly pray you to be always favourable unto it, and continually to keep, aggrandize and protect it. Gratias tibi, Jupiter optume, Maxume, tibique Junoni Reginae, & coeteris hujus custodibus habi∣tatoribusque Arcis Diis, lubens laetusque Ago; re Romana in hanc diem & horam, per manus quod vo∣luistis meas, servata bene gestaque; eandem & ser∣vate, ut facitis, fovete, protegite propitiati, sup∣plex oro. These Vows being put up aloud, the Conque∣ror made Jupiter a Present of a Crown with the Spoils of the Enemy, especially those that were called opima spolia, which the General himself had taken with his own Hand from the Enemy: There were but Three, among so great a Num∣ber of Roman Conquerors, who took these Spoils called opima spolia, and presented them to Jupi∣ter Feretrius: The First was Romulus who con∣quered Acron, King of the Ceninensians; the Se∣cond, Cossus, that slew King Tolomnius; and Mar∣cellus was the Third, after the Victory he won from Viridomarus: When all these holy Duties were performed to the several Deities, the Triumpher treated the People, as most Authors bear Witness, in the Capitol under the Portico's, and sometimes in Hercules's his Temple. A∣lexander ab Alexandro says, Caesar made a pub∣lick Feast, wherein 22000 Tables were spread and furnished with all imaginable Plenty, and all in good Order. The Triumpher was allow∣ed to wear his Triumphal Crowns and Robes in the publick Assemblies; they also erected Tri∣umphal Arches, Statues, and all other Monu∣ments for him, whereby the Memory of his Victories and Triumph might be perpetua∣ted. TROCHUS; it was properly a Circle of Five or Six Feet in Diameter, adorned every where on the Inside with Iron Rings; the Chil∣dren rolled it along with an Iron Rod that had a Wooden Handle to it: The Grecians called this Rod , and the Romans Radius: There was Strength and Skill required to roll this Circle well, and the Rings by the Noise they made gave the People Notice to give way and re∣tire. TROPHONIUS, had a Cave in Leba∣dia a Country of Boeotia, where he delivered Oracles; but he died there of Hunger; an evil Genius possessed himself of this Cave, and there also pronounced Oracles; he did so frighten those who came to consult him, by horrible Appari∣tions,
that they could never laugh after, whence came the Proverb concerning mournful and me∣lancholy Persons, that they had consulted the Oracle of Trophonius. They shewed a thousand apish Tricks as they entered into his Cave, which they did, covered with a Linnen Cloth, holding a Cake in one Hand, as Lucian tells us in his Dialogue of the Dead. TUBAL-CAIN, the Son of Lamech, and one of Cain's Descendants, whom the Scripture makes to be the Master and Father of Smiths, and all those that worked in Iron and Steel: He was the Vulcan of the Pagans. TULLUS HOSTILIUS, Numa's Suc∣cessor, and the third King of Rome, who made War upon the Albans, which was ended by the Victory of the three Horatii over the three Cu∣ratii, he died in the Fire that burnt his Palace, and was kindled by chance, or by his Domestick Enemies. Some will have it, that he was killed with Thunder; the Reason whereof Pliny says, was because Tullus had neglected some Ceremo∣nies instituted by Numa, and so for that Impiety was Thunder-struck by Numa. TUNICA, an under Garment formerly wore by the Ancients, both at Rome and the East: It was put under the Yoga, and that worn by the Women was to be long and with Sleeves; whereas the Men wore it before a little below the Knee, and behind as low as the middle of the Leg; for to have it any longer was esteem∣ed effeminate, and shorter, looked like a Sol∣dier. TYCHE, a Sea-Nymph, Daughter of Ocea∣nus and Tethys: This was the Name of Fortune, perhaps given it upon account of the Dangers and Hazards of the Seas, over which she more particularly presides. TYMPANA; 'twas a thin piece of Skin or Leather extended upon a Wooden or Iron Circle, which was beat with the Hand. Some Authors say this Word comes from , which in Greek signifies to strike: But Vossius in his Etymology of the Latin Tongue, derives it from a Hebrew Word, that signifies a Drum, which is not ill grounded, since the Invention of these Drums came from Syria, as Juvenal ob∣serves, Jam pridem Syrus in Tyberim defluxit Orontes, Et linguam & mores & cum tibicine chordas Obliquas, nec non gentilia tympana secum Vexit. They were much in use at the Dances and Feasts of Bacchus and Cybele, as appears by these Verses of Carulius, Cybeles Phrygiae ad nemori Deae, Ʋbi cymbalum sonat, ubi tympana reboant. Herodian speaking of Heliogabalus, says he often had a Frolick to make Persons play upon Flutes, and beat Drums in his Presence, as if he were celebrating the Bacchanalia. TYPHON; one of the Gyants that fought against the Gods, and was buried alive under the Mountains. Apollonius in his Argonauticon, says, that Typhon was defeated near Mount Nyssa, and afterwards thrown down Headlong into the Waters of the Lake Serbonis, which is between Egypt and Palestine. Plutarch in the Life of Mark Antony, tells us, the Egyptians said that the Vapours of the Lake Serbonis were caused by the Breath of Typhon. Homer makes his Death to have happened in Arimis, that is, ac∣cording to Strabo, in Syria, which the Scrip∣tures and prophane Authors call Aramea from Aram. V. U Is the 20th Letter in the Alphabet, and fifth Vowel: There is also a Consonant V which is thus distinguished by Grammarians, V. Ʋ is often changed into O, as in this Word volt put for vult. The V is also a Numeral Letter, signifying five; and when it has a Tittle above it, five thousand. VACUNA; this Goddess was worshipped by Plough-men, and her Feast celebrated in Winter. VADARI ALIQUEM; 'tis a Law-Term, signifying to oblige a Person to give Secu∣rity, that promises he shall on a certain Day ap∣pear in Court: If he fails, his Surety has actio∣nem vadimonii deserti against him, i. e. an Acti∣on for leaving his Bail. VATICANUS, the Vatican, one of the small Hills of Rome, near the Tiber, adjoining to the Janiculum, where the Pope's Palace is, it was thus called from the Responses and Oracles, called in Latin Vaticinia, which the Romans re∣ceived here, according to Varro. There was al∣so a Deity so named in the same Place, who was believed to be the Author of the first Speech of Children, which was Va; from whence comes the Word Vatican, and among the Latins Vagire, to cry like an Infant. VE-JOVIS, a hurtful Deity, to whom the Romans erected Temples, and offered Sacrifices, that he might do them no Mischief: He was pictured with a Bow and Arrow in his Hand ready to let it flie. VELABRUM; was a Place full of Trades∣mens Shops, and especially of Oil-men; it was divided into two parts by the Fish-Market, and stood near to the Tuscan Division.
VENILIA; a Nymph, and the Mother of Faunus; she was also reputed to be Neptune's Wife, otherwise called Salacia. Venilia, says Var∣ro, is the Water that washes the Shoar, and Sa∣lacia, that which returns into the Bottom of the Sea. VENTUS, the Wind, is nothing else but a Flux of Air agitated by an unequal and violent Motion; which is done, says Vitruvius, when the Heat working upon the Moisture, by its Acti∣on produces a great Quantity of new Air, that violently drives on the other: Those who were the Worshippers of the Wind in all likelihood believed they worshipped the Air in the Agita∣tion thereof; from whence it is the Persians wor∣shipped the Stars and Earth, Water, Fire and Winds. Herodotus tells us, that the Grecians being in a Consternation, because of Xerxes his formidable Army, that came to fall upon them, the Oracle of Delphos commanded them to offer Sacrifice to the Winds, from whom they were to expect their greatest Relief. Aeneas sacri∣ficed to the Winds; Pecudem Zephyris felicibus albam. Augustus erected a Temple for the Wind Circius of the Gauls, because they were incom∣moded therewith, and had their Houses blow'd down by it. The Poets made Aeolus to be King of the Winds; and Servius says, they were Nine Islands in the Sicilian Sea, of which Aeolus, ac∣cording Varro, was King; from whence they feigned he had the Winds under his Dominion, because he foretold the Storms that should hap∣pen by observing the Vapours and Steams that arose from those Islands, and especially from that called after Vulcan's Name: Ʋt Varro dixit, Rex fuit infularum, ex quarum nebulis, & fumo Vul∣caniae insulae, praedicens ventura flabra ventorum, ab imperitis visus est ventos suâ potestate retinere. Pliny says, that Strongylus was one of those burnt and smoaking Islands; and that the Inhabitants from the Fumes thereof predicted what Winds should follow three Days before; and that for this Reason they feigned Aeolus was Master of the Winds: E cujus fumo, quinam flaturi sint venti in triduum praedicere incolae traduntur: unde ventos Aeolo paruisse existimatum. Nevertheless 'tis certain, the Worshipping of the Winds is ancienter than Aeolus his Reign, whom they pretend to have lived in the Time of the Tro∣jan War. The Persians, who, according to Stra∣bo and Herodotus, worshipped the Winds, never heard of the King of these little Islands, and 'twas not to him they addrest their Worship: As much may be said in respect to the Scythians, of whom Lucian in his Toxaris, says, that they swore by the Wind and Sword, per ventum & acinacem. When Solomon in his Proverbs, says, there were Men so mad as to adore the Winds; he little thought of Aeolus in the Matter. All those Eastern Idolaters worshipped the Winds before the Fable of Aeolus was invented: And so we have Reason to believe, that as the Wor∣shipping of the Winds as well as that of other parts of Nature, passed from the East to the West, so the Grecians, Sicilians, and Italians took occasion from the Nature of those Islands, to make them to be the Kingdom of the Winds, because they often found Whirl-winds, Va∣pours, Winds and Fire to proceed from thence. Strabo relates unto us the Observations of Polybius upon the Isle of Lipara, which is the greatest of Aeolus his Seven Islands, viz. that when the South Wind blew, it was covered with so thick a Cloud, that those who were but a little way off, could not see Sicily; but when the North Wind blew, the Island sent forth purer Flames, and made a greater Noise and Concus∣sion; and this gave occasion to say, that the King of these Islands was King of the Winds. Hesiod openly declares for the Doctrine of Phy∣siology, when he gives us the Genealogy of the Winds, and makes them to be the Chil∣dren of Astraeus and Aurora; for this is plainly to make those Winds to proceed from the Stars and Aurora, or the Horizon, or rather from the Stars and Vapours that are always in the Hori∣zon in a very great quantity, in order to form Aurora and the Winds therein. We know 'tis the Opinion of Naturalists and Astrologers that the Stars have a great Influence in the Genera∣tion of the Winds: He says a little farther, that except those three Winds that are useful to Mankind, all the rest were the Children of Ty∣phon, the famous Gyant, whom victorious Ju∣piter Thunder-struck, and buried under the Mountains, thro' which he groaned, sighed and vomited up Flames, Winds and Tempests. This Poet therefore distinguishes between two sorts of Winds, the one which are moderate and use∣ful, the other violent and dangerous; the first are the Children of the Stars and Aurora, and the last those Winds which proceed from the Caverns of Mountains, or Burning-Islands, from whence come Fires, Whirl-winds and Storms; and this gave occasion to the Fiction, that they were Gyants who breathed out these Winds from those Mountains where they continually burned. Pausanias says, there was no Deity at Megalo∣polis in Greece, more honoured than the Wind Boreas, for they had been powerfully assisted by him in the Enterprize made upon them by the Lacedaemonians: They sacrificed a Horse with Perfumes to the Winds, to the End that his Ashes might be dispersed abroad, says Festus: Lacedaemonii in monte Taygeto equum Ventis immo∣lant; ibidemque adolent, ut eorum flatu cinis ejus per fines deferatur. And whereas Homer says, that the Wind Boreas was transformed into a Horse, which covered very fine Mares, that foal∣ed twelve Colts, whose Lightness and Swiftness was so wonderful, that they could run over the
Blades of Corn without bending them, and upon the Waves without sinking; there was no other reason for it, but that People really be∣lieved, there were some Mares that conceived by the Wind. Virgil tells that as a true Story concerning Zephyrus, which Homer relates of Boreas for a Fable. Vossius also refers to the Winds the Fight of the Titans with Jupiter, which he pretends to be no more than the War of the Winds in the Air, for which he cites Hesiod, who places Gyges, Briareus and Cottus in the Number of the Winds, who were also Ti∣tans. The Winds according to some Mens Opinion, are no more than Four in Number, viz. Sola∣nus, which blows from the South-East; Auster from the South; Favonius from the South-West; and Septentrio from the North. But those who have been more curious Enquirers into the Na∣ture of Winds, have made them to be Eight, and especially Andronicus Cyrrbestes, who for this End built a Marble Tower at Athens, of an Octogone Figure, which on every side had the Picture of one of the Winds, over-against that Quarter from which they were wont to blow; and at the Top of the Tower which ended pyra∣midically, he placed a Brass Triton with a Rod in his Hand; and the Machine was so contrived, that the Triton turning about, and always be∣ing opposite to the Wind that blew, with its Rod shewed in what Corner it then was. The other Four Winds are Eurus, between Solanus and Au∣ster to the Winter-East; Africus between Auster and Favonius to the Winter-West; Caurus or Corus between Favonius and Septentrio; and A∣quilo between Septentrio and Solanus: We call them South-East, South-West, North-West and North-East. VENUS, the Goddess of Beauty, that was always accompanied by the Graces. Cicero, L. 3. de Nat. Deor. shews there were Four several Ve∣nus's: The first, the Daughter of Coelum; the second she, that sprung from the Foam of the Sea and Cupid's Mother; the third, was Jupiter and Dione's Daughter, who was married to Vul∣can, and on whom Mars begot Anteros; the fourth Tyr, called Astarte, who was married to Adonis. The first and fourth were in all likeli∣hood the same as the Venus of Assyria, which was called Ʋrania or Coelestis, as being the Daugh∣ter of Heaven, whose Worship passed from As∣syria or Babylon into Syria. Sanchuniathon makes Astarte to be the Daughter of Coelum, and Sa∣turn's Wife, and the Mother of Seven Daugh∣ters called Titanides. Lucian speaks of Venus that was worshipped at Biblos in Phoenicia, and of Adonis with whom she was in Love, and whose Death she bewailed after he had been killed by a wild Boar. Herodotus makes the Temple of Venus Ʋrania to be in the City of Ascalon in Phoenicia, which was the Ancientest of all the Temples of this Goddess; the Temples of Venus in Cyprus, and at Cythera or Cerigo were much in request; but they were built by the Phoenicians according to the Model of that at Ascalon. The Worship of Venus passed to Arabia; from whence 'tis that Herodotus himself says, the Arabians worshipped but two Deities, viz. Dionysius and Ʋrania: The Persians, in Imitation of the Assy∣rians, did also worship Venus Ʋrania, and called her Mitra. There were the Cities of Paphos, Amathus, and Ʋrania in the Isle of Cyprus, and all these were famous for the Worship of Venus; and as 'twas but a short Passage from Phoenicia to Cyprus, the Worship of this Goddess was easi∣ly carried thither; and as Venus was transported thither by Sea, they feigned she was produced of the Foam of the Sea; so Horace calls her Marina Venus. Tacitus speaking of the Temple of Venus at Paphos, uses the following Words, that clearly shew that the Forming of Venus of the Foam of the Sea, was nothing else but that she was brought thither by Sea: Fama recentior tradit, à Cinyra sacratum Templum, Deamque ipsam con∣ceptam mari hùc appulsam. This Historian, L. 2. Hist. speaks also of that Temple in this manner: The Ancients, says he, made King Aërias to be the Founder of it, altho' some were of Opinion, it was the Name of the Goddess; but modern Authors will have the Temple to have been built by Cinyra, when Venus coming by Sea landed in that Country; he adds, that he sent for the Prophet Thamyrus into Cilicia, and a∣greed that their Descendants should divide the Priesthood between them: But those of Thamyrus his Race did afterwards resign it to the King's Posterity, as a Point of Prerogative yielded to the Royal Family, insomuch that no other were consulted there but the Successors of Cinyra. All sorts of Victims were allowed of, provided they were of the Male kind, but the He-goat was accounted the best; they shed none of the Blood upon the Altar; for they of∣fered nothing there but Prayers and pure Fire, which no Rain could put out, tho' the same were open to the Air: The Goddess was re∣presented in the Form of a Globe, ending py∣ramidically, without any other resemblance, and the Reason is not known. Pausanias acknowledges that Venus of Cythera came also from Phoenicia: He elsewhere describes her bearing Arms: Hesychius says as much, and in another place speaks of a Temple of Venus, into which none but the Sacristan ever entred, (and the same Person was forbid to marry) and a Virgin that exercised the Priesthood here for one Year only. This Author takes notice of several Places in Greece, where Venus Ʋrania was worshipped, and wherein there was nothing practised like those Effeminacies and Impurities, which were attributed to the Common Venus; since we find, besides the Name of Ʋrania or
Coelestis, that her Priestesses were Virgins, and that she her self was represented armed. Pau∣sanias in another place distinguishes between Venus Ʋrania, whose Statue was made of Gold or Ivory by Phidias, and Venus Popularis, , that was made of Brass; he hath not forgot that place in Arcadia, where there were three Statues set up for Venus, one for Coelestis, the other for Popularis, and the third without any Surname, which distinguished it from the rest. Xenophon makes a Distinction between Venus Coelestis and Popularis, and attributes to the first a Love of Knowledge and Vertue, as he does to the other the Love of Corporeal Pleasures. This Name of Venus Coelestis comes either from her being represented upon a Lion's Back, and ascending up to Heaven, or from her being the Daughter of Heaven; from whence the Greeks called her Ʋrania, or because the ancient and true Ʋrania was very different from that which they called the Common one, and inspired Men with no∣thing but pure and chaste Love, which raised up the Heart to Heaven. Apuleius also in his Apo∣logy bears the same Testimony, wherein he shews, that that Venus Coelestis, which is distin∣guished from the Common Venus, allows us to love no other Beauty than that which can re∣vive the Idea and Love of Heavenly Beauties in our Souls. Plutarch speaks of Venus at Rome, surnamed Libitina, in whose Temple they sold all things belonging to Burials: He likewise adds, that those of Delphos, had also their Venus Sepul∣chralis, where they conjured up the Dead by Ma∣gick Spells. Calvus the Poet calls Venus a God, Pollentemque Deum Venerem, as well as Virgil, in Aen. 2. Discedo, ac ducente Deo flammam inter & hostes Expedior. Some Criticks who have not perhaps made this Observation, would correct this place, and put Dea instead of Deo, contrary to the Authority of the Manuscripts. Levinus speaking of this Dei∣ty, says; having worshipped Venus, whether Fe∣male or Male, which is the same as the Moon. Aristophanes calls her  in the Neuter Gender, and Hesychius , as Salmatius has corrected it. Theophrastus, says he, assures us, that Aphroditos or Venus is an Hermophro∣dite; and that her Statue with a Beard on like a Man was to be seen in the Island of Cyprus, near Amathusa. Venus Victrix was represented some∣times carrying Victory in her Right Hand, and a Scepter in her Left, and leaning her Arm up∣on a great Shield; and another time with a Mu∣rion or Steel-piece in her Hand instead of Victo∣ry, and the Apple which Paris adjudged to her as the Reward of her Beauty, which she got from Pallas and Juno: The Poets make her Chariot to be drawn by Swans and two flying Cupids, They represented her like a beautiful Goddess sitting in a Chariot drawn by two Swans and as many Doves, crowned with Myrtle, and having a burning Torch in her Bosom. Pausanias also speaks of a Statue of Venus made of Ivory and Gold by Phidias, with one Foot upon a Tor∣toise, and likewise another of Venus, riding upon a He-Goat, and made by Scopas; the Venus of Praxiteles at Cnidos was made of white Marble, and half opened her Lips as if she smiled. Venus the Mother of Love, and the Goddess of Pleasures would by no means comply to make Vulcan her Husband, but as he could not compass his Design in Heaven, and that he was weary with her Coiness, Jupiter advised him to give her some Poppy in her Drink, which put her unto such a Love-fit, that without think∣ing any more of the Persons that so entirely loved her, she took up with what fell in her Way, and make that sorry Smith her Husband, Cum primùm cupido Venus est deducta marito, Hoc bibit; ex illo tempore nupta fuit. But she reassumed her disdainful Carriage again when her Love-fit was over, and she always lived at Variance with her wretched Cripple. Au∣gustus Caesar dedicated the Temple of Venus Genetrix to Julius Caesar, whose Statue was made by Archesilaus. VERBENA Vervein; an Herb used by the Pagans at their Sacrifices, and which they thought to have something that was Divine in it: The Romans in the Beginning of the Year made a Present of this Herb to their Friends. VERGILIAE, Constellations whose Ap∣pearance denote the Approach of the Spring: They were the Daughters of Atlas, according to the Poets, and by the Greeks were called Pleiades, but the Romans named them Vergiliae. VERITAS, Truth, of whom the Ancients made a Deity and called her the Daughter of Saturn and Time, and the Mother of Vertue; they painted her like a handsome and modest Woman clad very plain, but shining with Splen∣dor and Majesty. VERTICORDIA, a Surname given to Venus, who diverted the Minds of Men from impure and unlawful Love. VERTUMNUS, à God of Change and Gardens; he was also an Emblem of the Year: This God was woshipped under a Thousand Forms, for which reason Horace says, Vertumnis natus iniquis, as if there were as many different Vertumnus's, as there were different Forms by which this Deity was represented: He was in Love with Pomona; the Greeks called him Pro∣teus. VERUS, a Roman Emperor that reigned with Marcus Aurelius, and who by his Beard af∣fected
to appear like a Philosopher, though he had no Inclination nor Disposition to Learning: He was much addicted to the Vices of Drunken∣ness, Gaming and Women: So that what was most remarkable in his Physiogmony was, that he resembled the Portraitures made of the Satyrs by the Ancients, who were said to be very le∣cherous. Authors say, he had a ruby and Cop∣per Face by which they readily concluded he lo∣ved Wine, which he drunk to that Excess, that at his Return from Syria, he appointed an A∣partment in his Pallace, which he called the Em∣peror's Tavern: He died of an Apoplexy at the Age of 42. VESPATIAN, a Roman Emperor that succeeded Vitellius, the Lineaments of this Em∣peror's face, as Suetonius has described them, are very well exprest on his Medals; for he had the Mien of a costive Person, he was a valiant and good-natured Prince, and was guilty of no other Vice but Covetousness, which he shewed by the Taxes he laid upon his Subjects: In the mean time he was very liberal to poor Senators, learned Men and ruined Cities: He was much addicted to Raillery and continued it to his dying Day, for being upon the Point of Expi∣ring, he said to those that were about him, I perceive I begin to become a God, and thereby ridiculed the Custom of the Romans deifying their Emperors after their Decease. VESPER, the Evening-Star, VESPERUGO; the Planet Venus when it appears in the Evening. VESTA, a Heathen Goddess; Lactantius relates the Words of Ennius or Euhemerus, who makes Vesta to be the Wife of Ʋranus, the Fa∣ther of Saturn, the first that reigned in the World, and after having spoken of the Contest between Titan the eldest Son of Ʋranus and Sa∣turn the younger about the Kingdom, he says, that their Mother Vesta advised Saturn not to it the Sovereignty: This Genealogy is very like unto that of Sanchuniathon, saving that he calls the Earth the Wife of Ʋranus, which we know has been confounded with Vesta. Vesta passed from Phoenicia into Greece, where Diodo∣rus Siculus says, they made her to be the Daugh∣ter of Saturn and Rhea, and the first In∣ventress of Architecture. Nevertheless it's not to be doubted, but Vesta was every-where else rather taken for a Goddess of Nature, un∣der whose Name they worshipped the Earth and Fire, than an historical Goddess. Ovid says, that Vesta being the Daughter of Saturn and Rhea, as well as Juno and Ceres, these last Two were married, but Vesta continued a Virgin and barren, as the Fire is pure and barren: The same Poet adds, that the perpetual Fire was the only Representation they had of Vesta, the true Representation of Fire being not to be given; that formerly it was a Custom to keep a Fire at the Entry of their Houses which from thence retained the Name of Vestibulum. VESTALES, Vestal Virgins, either so called from Vesta the Foundress of them, or be∣cause they were consecrated to the Service of the Goddess Vesta. They hold, that this Order and the Ceremonies they used came from Troy, Aeneas having carried that sacred Fire into Italy, which represented Vesta, with the Image of Pallas and the Houshold Gods. Ascanius the Son of Aeneas, and the other Kings his Succes∣sors highly honoured the Vestal Virgins, be∣cause Rhea Silvia who was a King's Grand-daugh∣ter took upon her the solemn Profession of a Vestal. Livy will have Numa to have been the Insti∣tutor of this Order at Rome and that he built a Temple there for the Goddess Vesta, with a House for the Virgins consecrated to her Ser∣vice: The Divinity of Vesta was taken for the sacred Fire that was kept in her Temple or for the Earth which conceals a Fire within it's Bo∣wels; and for this Reason that Temple was round as the Earth is, and the sacred Fire kindled within it, to represent that which is hid in its Bowels: They had no Representation of Vesta there, because the Fire has none. Nec tu aliud Vestam quàm vivam intellige flammam........ Ignis inextinctus templo celatur in illo, Effigiem nullam Vesta nec ignis habent. Numa instituted no more than Four Vestals, cal∣led in History Gegamia or Gegania, Berenia, Ca∣milia or Gamilia, and Tarpeia. Servius Tullus ad∣ded two more, if we believe Plutarch, and this made the Number Six, which continued during the whole Roman Empire, according to the Te∣stimony of Plutarch and Dionysius of Hallicar∣nassus; nevertheless, St. Ambrose makes them to be Seven and Alexander Neapolitanus Twenty, but without any good Authority for it. They were to be Virgins, and for that Rea∣son they were received into the Order at the Age of Six Years, and their Parents were then to be living, and not of a Servile Condition. The Papian Law required that upon the Death of a Vestal they should take Twenty Virgins, whom before the People they conducted to the Pointiff's Presence, who of the Twenty took one by Lot, and ordering her to kneel, said these Words over her: Sacerdotalem Vestalem, quae sacra faciat, quae jussi & Sacerdotalem Vestalem fa∣cere pro populo Romano Quiritibus, uti quod opti∣mâ lege fiat, ita te Amata capio. This Ceremo∣ny was called Captio Virginis, and Capere Vestalem; they afterwards shaved their Heads and hung the Hair to a certain Tree, which the Greeks and Romans called Lotos, the Lote-tree, as Pliny says; Antiquior illa lotos quae capillata dicitur, quo∣niam
virginum Vestalium ad eam capillus defer∣tur. They assigned them a particular habit, that consisted of a Head-dress called Infula, which sat close to their Heads, and from whence hung some Hair-laces called Vittae; they wore another white Vest uppermost with a Purple Border to it, they had a Surplice or Rochet of white Linnen, called Suparum linteum, and over that a great Purple Mantle with a long Train to it, which they tucked up when they sacri∣ficed. They were consecrated to the Service of this Goddess for 30 Years, after which time they were free to go out and be married; but if other∣wise, they continued in the House and without any other Business, than to be assistant only in point of Advise to the other Vestals: Their chief Functions were to sacrifice to Vesta, to keep the sacred Fire in her Temple and not suffer it to go out; but if through their Neglect that Misfortune happened, they were whipped by the Pontifex maximus, and the Fire was kindled a∣gain by the Help of Burning-glasses and Sun∣beams and no otherwise: This Order was very rich as well upon the Account of the Allowances which the Kings and Emperors, and especially Augustus, made them for their Maintenance, as also other Gifts and Legacies left them by Will. When they went abroad, there was an Usher with a Bundle of Rods walked before them; they had the Priviledge to be carried in a Cha∣riot through the City and as far as the Capitol, and if they happened to meet with the Consuls or some great Magistrate, they turned aside, or else were obliged to kiss the Bundle of Rods that were carried before them. Wills and the most secret Acts were usually committed to their Custody,, as Julius Caesar did, according to Suetonius: Testamentum factum ab eo depositum∣que apud sex virgines Vestales; and the Articles of the Treaty made between the Trium-virs were likewise put into the Hands of these Virgins, as Dio says. They had a particular Place as∣signed them at the Games and Shews made in Rome; they were priviledged to be buried in the City, and they swore by no other than the Goddess Vesta. When a Vestal was convicted of Unchastity, the Pontiff ordered her to be brought before him, prohibited her to exercise her Functions, to go among the other Vestals, and to make her Slaves free, for they were to be examined in order to prove the Crime: When the Crime was proved, she was condemned to be buried a∣live in a Pit dug for that purpoe without Porta Collina in a Place called Campus Sceleratus: Exe∣cution Day being come, the Pontiff degraded and stript her of her Habit, which she kissed keeping, a Valerius Flaceus says, Ʋltima virgine is tum flens dedit oscula vittis. She was carried upon a Bier or in a Litter enclo∣sed on all Sides, and crossing the great Place, when they came to the Place of Execution, they took the Criminal out of the Litter, and then the Pontiff pray'd to the Gods with his Head covered, and afterwards withdrew; which done, they made her go down into the Pit, wherein they had put a lighted Lamp, a little Water and Milk, and then covered the Pit with Earth, and so buried her alive. As for the Person that deflowred a Vestal Virgin, he was whip∣ped to Death, as Cato tells us, Vir qui eam ince∣stavisset, verberibus necaretur. VESUVIUS or VESEVUS, a Moun∣tain in Campania near Naples, of a very fruitful Soil, yet from whose Top proceed Flames of Fire. Pliny the younger says, that Plinius se∣cundus being desirous to find out the Cause thereof was swallowed up and stiffled by the Flames. VIAE, Streets and Roads: They reckoned there were 424 Streets in Rome in all the Divi∣tions of the City, whereof there were but 31 that were considerable, which all began at a gilt Pillar, for that reason called Milliarium au∣ream, that was set up at the Entrance into the great Place below the Temple of Saturn, and lead to as many Gates and to made the like Number of great Roads, that passed through all Italy. These great Streets were called Viae re∣giae, militares & publicae, of which the three most famous were Appia, the Road of Appius, which was made and paed by him, Flaminia that of Flaminius: made by a Consul of that Name, and reach'd from Porta Flamentana near Campus Martius as far as Rimini upon the Adriatick Sea, and Via Aemilia, Aemilius his Road. VICTORIA, Victory, a Deity adored by the Ancients, and made by Varro to be the Daughter of Coelum and Terra, for whom the Romans built a Temple during their War with the Samnites in the Consulship of L. Posthumius and M. Attilius Regulus, and dedicated to her a Temple of Jupiter Optimus, after the Overthrow at Cannae, according to Livy: L. Sylla instituted Games in Honour of her. The Athenians also built her Statue without Wings that so she might not fly away from their City, in the same manner as the Lacedaemonians represented Mars with Chains, that so he might continue with them, according to Pausanias. She was usually represented like a young Goddess winged, and standing upon a Globe, with a Lawrel Crown in one Hand and a Palm in the other: Domitian represented her with a Horn of Plenty, to inti∣mate that Victory brought Plenty of all Things with it. On the Reverse of the Silver Medal of L. Hostilius, Victory is represented with a Cadu∣ceus,
which was Mercurie's Rod of Peace, in one Hand and a Trophy of the Enemies Spoils in the other. Victory is represented upon the Re∣verse of a Gold Medal of Augustus, with her Feet upon a Globe, and extended Wings as if she flew, a Lawrel Crown in her Right-Hand and a Labarum or Emperor's Banner in the Left: She is also represented sitting upon the Spoils of the Enemy, with a Trophy set before her, and carrying a Crown with these Words Victoria Au∣gusti. VINDICTA, the Rod or Switch where∣with the Praetor touched a Slave's Head when he was affranchised. VIRBIUS, surnamed Hippolytus, the Son of Theseus, whom Aesculapius at Diana's Request raised from the Dead, and was surnamed so, as being born twice. VIRGA, the Rod of Moses, which, accord∣ing to the Rabins, God made between the two Vespers of the Sabbath, that is, on the Evening of the sixth Day of the Creation of the World, and on which the Holy, Great and Glorious Name of God. called Tetragrammaton was in∣scribed after a wonderful Manner; and there∣fore 'tis said in the Zoar upon Exodus, that the Miracles were graven and the most holy Name of God inscribed upon it. Galatinus writ a great deal concerning this Rod, and he relates some Things remarkable out of a Jewish Book entitu∣led Gale resaia, i. e. Revelans arcana. It's to be observed, according to the Sentiments of the Jews, that this Rod by reason of the particular and divine Vertue it had to work Miracles, was never given to any other but Moses; that Jo∣suah himself, though his Disciple and most worthy Successor, never made use of it, but only of a Lance and Javelin: It's true, when other sa∣cred Things as Aaron's Rod, the Pot of Manna, and Vessel of sacred Incense were laid up in the Ark by Josuah, we could never learn what became of Moses his Rod; and we do not find either in the holy Scriptures, or Books of the Rabbins any mention made of it: And Abarbinel inferrs from Moses his going up to the Mount Abarim to die there, that he took Gods Rod in his Hand, and that it was buried with the Body of that Prophet in the same Grave, God being unwilling that any other Man should make use of it after him; for as there never was a Man in Israel like unto Moses, either in respect to the Heighth of Prophesie or Signs and Wonders done by him, so no other but himself made use of that Rod for working all those Miracles: As Moses was the Conductor of the People of God into the promi∣sed Land, the Pagans also ascribe unto Mercury the Charge of conducting Souls into Hell: They likewise endue him with a Rod twisted round with Serpents, called Caduceus, in Imitation of Moses his Rod that was changed into a Serpent, and was so famous amongst them, that what∣ever miraculous and strange Thing was per∣formed by him, it was attributed to that Rod. Virgil describes the Vertue of that Rod in his Aeneids. Tum virgam capit, hac animas ille evocat orca Pallentes, alias sub tristia tartara mittit, Dat somnos, adimitque, & lumina morte resignat: Illâ fretus agit ventos, & turbida tranat Nubila: He therefore used his Rod as well when he fetch'd Souls from Hell as when he carried them thither: By the Help of this Rod he made the one sleep, and awaked the other, and made whom he would to die: He expelled the Winds, and pas∣sed through the Clouds. VIRGILIUS, Virgil, the Prince of the Latin Poets, born at Andes near the City of Man∣tua, and named Publius Maro. The Romans ad∣mired him for the Excellency of his Works, and honoured him as much as the Emperor himself; and his Modesty acquired him the Name of Par∣thenius: He has left us his Bucolicks, Four-Books of Georgicks, and Twelve of the Aeneids, wherein he has imitated the Iliads and Odysses of Homer: The Emperor Augustus hindered this last Piece to be burnt, as Virgil had ordered it by his Will. VIRTUS, Vertue, a Goddess among the Romans, whose Temple was joined to that of Ho∣nour, so that you must first pass through the Temple of Honour to it. VISCERATIONES, a Gift consisting of the Entrails of Animals conferred upon the People at the burying of great Men in Rome. VITA, Life; Homer seems to allude to the long Lives of Men in the first Ages of the World, when he says, that Nestor was cotemporary with the Men of the Two preceding Ages, and ha∣ving survived them, did also then live with those of the third Age, and he told them, that the former People with whom he had conversed were a great deal stronger than those born afterwards; so that they were not afraid to encounter wild Beasts: Hesiod gives us a compleat Description of the Terrestrial Happiness of those People that lived in the first Age; but he has not given an Account of the Duration of their Lives, which he makes to end in a sweet Sleep, Moriebantur ceu somno obruti; but he clearly intimates that this Life must have been very long, when he says, that those of the succeeding Age, who came far short of the other, were a Hundred Years in a State of Infancy: We cannot truly determine how many Years an Age consisted of; by what is said concerning Nestor that he lived Three, some believe an Age was Thirty Years, others with more Reason take it to be an Hundred. Ovid was of this Opinion, when he made Nestor say,
Vixi annos bis centum, nuneteria vivitur atas. The same Poet in another place seigned that Sy∣billa Cumaea was 700 Years old, when Aeneas came to consult her, and that she was to live 300 Years longer, Nam jam mihi secula septem Acta vides; superest, numeros ut pulveris aquem, Tercentum messes, tercentum musta videre. It was a Request she had made and obtained, that she should live as many Years as she held Grains of Sand in her Hand. We do not know from whence Ovid had this Fable, but he allows her above 1000 Years to live. In the Argonauticon attributed to Orpheus we have an Account given of a People called Macrobii that comes near unto that of our Age of Innocence and Terrestrial Pa∣radice: The Length of their Lives from which they derive their Names is no less than 1000 Years, Omnique exparte beatos Macrobios, facilem qui vitam in longa trabentes Secula, millenos implent feliciter annos. Horace attributes the shortening of Men's Lives only to Prometheus his stealing Fire from Heaven, and the Vengeance of God that has poured an Infinity of Evil upon us, Post ignem athereâ domo Subductum, macies, & nova febrium Terris incubuit cohors: Semotique priùs tarda necessitas Lethi corripuit gradum. Silius Italicus tells us of an ancient King of Spain called Arganthonius who lived 300 Years: Hero∣dotus speaks of the Aethiopians of Africa who were called Macrobii, and says, they commonly lived 120 Years, and 'twas believed the Length of their Lives proceeded from the Water they drank, which was lighter than Wood it self: Lucian gives the Title of Macrobii, that is, of Long livers, to one of his Dialogues: He does not only make an Enumeration of particular Persons, but also of Nations famous for their being long-lived; he says, it was reported that some People in the Country of Seres, that is China, lived 300 Years. Diodorus Siculus relates the Account given by the Egyptians of their Gods, or rather Kings, some of whom had reigned 300 Years, and o∣thers 112, but 'tis believed their Years were lu∣nar, and no more than a Month: Others are of Opinion that they confounded their History with Astronomy, and attributed to their Kings the Names of the Stars, and the Length of their Re∣volutions, and so that they are rather Astrono∣mical Computations which they have made, than the Dynasties and historical Successions of their Kings. Eusebius relates a Passage out of Josephus, which shews, that prophane Authors have in their Writings acknowledged and bore Testimo∣ny to the Truth of the Length of Mens Lives in the first Ages: Josephus says, that the first Men were permitted to live thus so extraordina∣rily long, not only upon the Account of their Piety, but out of a Necessity that the Earth should be peopled in a short time, and Arts in∣vented, especially Astronomy, which required the Observations of several Ages to make it per∣fect. These Two Reasons discover the Falsity of their Opinion, who thought that the Years which made up the first Mens long Lives, con∣sisted of no more than One Month or at the most Three; but the most convincing Proof of any is, that the Year of the Deluge is so well circum∣stanciated in the Book of Genesis, that the 12 Months and 365 Days are there exprest. Neither would Moses in Five or Six Chapters successively have given such different Significati∣ons to this Term Year: St. Augustine has very vigorously pushed on this Argument concerning the Year of the Deluge. Lactantius tells us, that Varro was so confident that Men in ancient Days lived even to be a Tousand Years old, that in order to facilitate the Understanding of a Truth that was so universally received, he in∣stanced in the lunar Years that consisted of one Month only, in which time the Moon ran thro' the Twelve Signs of the the Zodiac. VITELLIUS, a Roman Emperor that suc∣ceeded Otho: Johannes Baptista Porta in his Trea∣tise of Physiognomy, observes, he had an Owl's Face: His thick short Neck, reddish Com∣plexion and a great Belly, as Suetonius de∣scribes him, threatned him with an Apoplexy, if a violent Death had not shortened his Life as well as his continual Debaucheries: Of the most sumptuous Feasts, where with he was treat∣ed, that which his Brother Lucius made for him is taken Notice of, where there were 2000 Fishes and 7000 Fowls served to the Table: He made one Feast wherein he was not so profuse, but more dainty, and wherein one Course consisted of the Livers of a sort of rare Fishes called Seari, Pheasants and Peacocks Brains, the Tongues of Phoenicopteri, which are very rare Birds, and the Rows of Lamprey's: All these Dainties were brought from the Carpatbian Sea, Straights of Gibraltar and other remote Parts of the World. In short, his whole Reign was but one continued Debauch and Profuseness, which made Vibius Crispus say, who had the good Fortune to fall sick at that Time, and so to avoid those Excesses, that had it no been for his Illness he must infallibly have burst. Vitellius was slain by the Soldiers who advanced Vespasian to the Throne, and after he had been dragged through the Streets of Rome
with a Rope about his Neck and his Body run through in several Parts, he was with his Bro∣ther and Son thrown into the Tiber, having reign∣ed but Eight Months. VITRUM; Glass. The Invention of Glass is very ancient, and 'tis long ago since they have made very fine Things of it, nevertheless, the Art of making Glass for Windows did not come in use till a long time after, and the same may be looked upon as an Invention of latter Ages: Indeed Marcus Scaurus in Pompey's Time made part of the Scene of that stately Theater, which was built at Rome for the People's Diversion, of Glass; but in the mean time they had then no Glass Windows to their Houses, and if any great Men and of the richest sort had a mind to have   in their Houses, and to which the Light might come, they closed up the Passage with Transparent Stones such as Agates, Alabaster, and Marble finely polished; but when they came afterwards to know the Use of Glass for that Purpose, they used it instead of these sorts of Stones. ULYSSES; Prince of Ithaca, and the Son of Laertes and Anticlea; he had Penelope to Wife, whom he loved so entirely, that to the end he might not leave her and not be obliged to go to the Trojan War, he pretended himself mad, and tied his Plough the wrong way to Two Animals of a different Kind, with which he ploughed; but Palamedes making a Shew as if he went about to kill his Son, or rather laying him in the Furrow, that so the Coulter of the Plough might kill him, as 'twas drawn along, Ʋlysses that knew the Danger stopt, and in so doing discovered he was not really what he pretended to be: He was a very wise and cun∣ning Prince, and performed a great many brave Actions both in point of Valour and Prudence at the Siege of Troy: After the taking of the City, he embarked in order to return home; but he wandered up and down a long time through Neptune's Hatred to him, that he might be revenged on him for the Death of his Son Polyphemus. Homer in the ninth Book of his O∣dysses makes him begin the Story of his Voyages and Misfortunes, saying, that Jupiter at his leaving of Troy, cast him upon the Country of the Cicones, which he pillaged; but those Peo∣ple getting together, slew several of his Men. He went afterwards to the Country of the Loto∣phagi, who gave him a very kind Reception; but after some of his People had eaten of the Herb called Lotos, which was the Food of the Natives, they wholly lost the Remembrance of, and Love they had for their Country, insomuch that they were, oblig'd to carry them away by Force, and tie them fast till they went aboard. From thence he went to the Isle of Cyclops, where Polyphemus in Contempt of Jupiter and other Gods, who were the Protectors of Hospitality, devoúred two of his Companions; but Ʋlysses was revenged on him by putting out his only Eye with a Firebrand, after he had made him drunk: He landed at the Isle of Aeolus, King of the Winds, who presented him with a Zephy∣rus put up in an He-goat's Skin: His Compani∣ons thinking it to be some hid Gold, opened the Skin while Ʋlysses was asleep, and the Wind drove him back to the Island from whence he came. Aeolus would not receive him a second time, and this made him sail away and land in the Country of the Lestrigons; where near unto a Fountain they found the Daughters of King Antiphates, who were come thither to draw Wa∣ter; the Cruelty of that King and People ha∣ving forced them to flee away hastily. Lastly. After they had lost Eleven of their Ships they arrived at an Island where Circe was Queen, who was the Daughter of the Sun, and a cunning Sorceress: She presently changed his Compa∣nions, whom he had sent to view the Country, into Swine: Mercury prevented him from run∣ing the same Danger, and gave him the Herb called Moly, as a sure Preservative against Circe's Enchantments, and told him at the same time, that when Circe struck him with her Rod, he should draw his Sword and threaten to kill her, till such time as she made an Offer of her Friend∣ship and Bed unto him, and swear by the great Oath of the Gods, to do him no manner of hurt. Ʋlysses punctually followed Mercury's Advice, and Circe restored his Companions to him in their former Shape: She foretold him his Descent into Hell, and order'd what Sacrifice he should first offer to Pluto, Proserpina, and the Prophet Tiresias. Circe also foretold him the Accidents he ought to avoid, as the Sirens, and the Rocks Scylla and Carybdis, which he had much ado to escape, by being tied to the Mast of his Ship, and stopping his Ears. Scylla swallowed six of his Companions: He landed in Sicily, which with her Flocks was consecrated to the Sun; but while he was asleep, his Companions killed some of those Oxen: This Sacriledge was revenged with a dreadful Tempest, which drove Ʋlysses and his Company to the Isle of Ogygia, where the Nymph Calipso received and entertained him seven Years, and promised to make him immor∣tal, if he would consent to tarry with her. But Jupiter deputed Mercury to go and command Calypso to let Ʋlysses depart, who having been detained only by force, went on board: Neptune rose a great Storm, and dash'd his Ship to pieces, but Ino the Goddess of the Sea saved him from Shipwrack, gave him a Scarf which could keep him from being drowned, and Minerva sent a favourable Wind which carried him to the Coun∣try of the Phaeaces to Alcinoüs, who sent him home to Ithaca. When he was come to his Pa∣lace in the Habit of a poor Traveller, he was known by his Dogs; but the Great Men of Ithaca
who eat Ʋlysses his Bread, and courted his Wife, having conspired the Death of his Son Telema∣chus, used Ʋlysses very scornfully. Penelope enter∣tained him without knowing him, then com∣manded his Feet to be washed, and that he should be put to Bed: Old Euryclea in washing his Feet, found he was Ʋlysses by the Scar of a Wound which he had received in Hunting a wild Boar, but he would not allow her to discover him: Pe∣nelope having promised to marry that Person who could bend Ʋlysses his Bow, all the Great Men endeavoured to do it in vain, but Ʋlysses himself did it, they being unworthy of it: He after∣wards made himself known to his Son, and the Shepherd Eumaeus, and by Minerva's Help killed all his Wife's Suitors with Arrows, beginning with Antinoüs. UMBILICUS, the Middle of a Thing: The Navel is the Middle of a Man; Ad umbili∣cum ducere opus, in Horace, signifies to finish a Thing; for the Romans writing their Works up∣on Parchment, or the Barks of Trees long-ways, they rolled them up when all was writ, and clo∣sed them with little Studs or Bosses made of Horn or Ivory, in the Form of a Navel, to keep them tight. VOLUMEN; the winding and folding of a Serpent; it was likewise a Volume, or Book; for the ancient Romans before Paper was invent∣ed, wrote at first upon Table-Books covered over with Wax; and when they had put the fi∣nishing Stroak to their Works, they neatly laid them long-ways upon Parchments, or Barks of Trees, and afterwards rolled them up; from whence Evolvere librum signifies to read a Book, because the Volume must be unrolled to read it. VOLUPIA, the Goddess of Pleasure, to whom the Romans built a Temple, and repre∣sented her like a young handsome Woman, pret∣taly drest, and treading upon Vertue. VOTA, Vows made by the Romans every Year after the Calends of January for the Eter∣nity of their Empire, and Health of the Empe∣ror and Citizens; and this was called Nuncupare vota. We find by the Emperors Moneys that there were Vows called Quinquennalia, Decennalia, Vi∣cennalia, Tricennalia, and Quadricennalia: The Magistrates ordered these Vows to be graven upon Brass Plates and Marble, which denoted the Number of Years they pray'd for, as 5, 10, 20, 30, and 40 Years: We find these Words on Maxentius and Decentius's Money, Votis Quinquen∣nalibus, multis Decennalibus. By the Medals of Antoninus Pius and Marcus Aurelius, we find Vows made for twenty Years, Vota suscepta Vi∣cennalia; which are thus inscribed: VOT.XXX MULTIS XXXX. When these Vows were accomplished, they e∣rected Altars, kindled Fires, and offered Sacri∣fices, and feasted in the Streets and publick Places. URANIA, which signifies as much as Cae∣lestial, was one of the Nine Muses; she presided over Astronomy. URNA, an Urn, was a Vase made of diffe∣rent Matter, and made use of to draw out of it the Names of those who were first to engage at the publick Plays, or to throw in the Notes, and give their Votes in the Assemblies held at Rome and Courts of Judicature; as also to keep the Ashes of Mens Bodies after they had been burn'd, according to ancient Custom: The An∣cients placed these Urns either under the Stones on which their Epitaphs were cut, or under par∣ticular Monuments, or else they kept them in their Houses. Trajan would have his Ashes laid up in a Golden Urn, and put upon that noble Pillar of his that is still standing. That of King Demetrius was also made of Gold, as Plutarch says; and the Great Marcellus, who took Syra∣cuse, had a Silver Ʋrn. Spartian says, the Ashes of the Emperor Severus were carried to Rome in a Golden Urn: But Dio, who is of better Autho∣rity, says, it was only made of Porphyry; and He∣rodian assures us, it was Alabaster. Glass-Urns are a little more common. Marcus Varro would have his Ashes put up in an Earthen Vessel, with Myrtle, Olive and Poplar Leaves, being that which Pliny calls the Pythagorean Fashion, be∣cause they were the meanest and most ordinary of any: Earthen Urns that were used by the Vulgar were commonly larger, for as there was less Care taken to reduce them entirely to Ashes, the Bones which were half burnt took up also more room, or else they many times served for the Ashes of the whole Family, at leastwise, for those of Husband and Wife, as we are inform∣ed by the first Verse of this Antique Inscrip∣tion: Ʋrna brevis geminum quamvis tenet ista Ca∣daver. As to the Shape of the Us, the Earthen ones were made very near like to our common Ear∣then Pots, saving that they were taller and straighter about the Neck: There were several of them whose Foot was sharp at the End, some that had Handles and others none: They have no Fashion nor base Relievo, saving that there are some that have the Figures of Men or Animals upon them.
But for those made of Brass or other Mettals, as they were designed for Persons of Quality; there were few of them which had not some sort of Sculpture and base Relievo round them, as we find by several Authors who have given us the Forms of them. There were some Egyptian Urns made of baked Earth, full of Hieroglyphicks and Mummy, which is remarkable enough, since the Egyptians being accustomed to embalm the Bo∣dies whole, the Urns were not big enough to hold them. Among the greater Number of those that were to be seen at Rome, some were round, others square, some great, others small, some again all over plain, and others done in base Relievo: Some were to be met with that had Epitaphs on them, while others bare only the Names of the Persons to whom they belonged; but there were no other Characters upon some besides the two Letters D. M. or the Name of the Potter only that made them upon the Handle, or at the Bottom. The Ancients had a Way to preserve their Urns, and to hinder the Ashes from mixing with the Earth; in the first place they often placed the Urn on the Top of those small Square Pillars on which their Epitaphs were inscribed, and which upon the account of the Shape of them we call Cippi or Grave-stones. They also put them up in Stone or Marble Coffins: The fol∣lowing Inscriptions indicate both the said Cu∣stoms, Te lapis obtestor, leviter super ossa quiesce: Et nostro cineri ne gravis esse velu. In the next place, Persons of Quality had their Burying-Vaults, where they laid up the Ashes of their Ancestors; and there was one like this for∣merly found at Nismes, with a rich inlaid Pave∣ment, with Niches round about in the Wall, in each of which guilded Glass Urns full of Ashes were set in order. The Urn also was of use to cast the Lots of Praeneste, and this is noted by Horace, Divina motâ anus Ʋrná; The Prtesiess having stirred the inchanted Ʋrn. Horace in that place speaks of the Divination used by the Urn and Lots which was practised thus: They put a great many Letters and whole Words into an Urn, which they stirred together, and when those Letters were well mixed, they turned them; and that which Change effected in the place of those Letters, made the Divination: This is that which they called the Lots of Prae∣neste, because they were found in that place: This sort of Divination in Cicero's Time was little regarded, there being none but the com∣mon People that made any account of it: It had been much in vogue among the Grecians. USTRINA, or USTRINUM; the Place at Rome where they burnt the Bodies of the Dead: It was commonly Campus Martius, or some other place in the Suburbs, and sometimes in the City for Persons of Quality. The com∣mon People were burnt upon Mount Esquiline. For this Purpose they erected a Heap of Wood, which they called a Pile, filled on the inside with dry and combustible Matter, and with Cypress and Pine branches without. They were not spa∣ring of the rarest Perfumes upon this Occasion, which they threw lavishly upon the Pile. Plu∣tarch tells us, that they burnt 210 Handfuls at the Funeral Obsequies of Sylla the Dictator: But at the Funerals of meaner Citizens they content∣ed themselves with Pitch, as appears by this Antique Inscription: D. M. P. Attilio Rufo & Actiliae Beronicae Ʋxor. Vixer. A. XXIIII. sed Pub. Mens. X. Ante Natus Est & Eadem Hora Fungor. Esu Ambo Mortui Sunt. Ille Acu, Ista Lanificio Vitam Agebant. Nec ex Eorum Bonis Plus Inventum est quam quod Sufficeret ad Emendam Pyram & Picem quibus Corpora Cremarentur, Et Praefica Conducta, & Ʋrna Empta. When the Wood-pile was thus ordered and made ready, the Relations and Children of the Deceased helped to lay the Body upon the Pile, whence that Latin Expression in Horace in one of his Satyrs, Omnes composui, that is, I have buried all my Relations; then the Person who closed the Eyes of the Deceased at his Departure, opened them that he might look up to Heaven as the Place of his abode; those whose Business it was to burn the Bodies, and were called Ʋstarii, finished the rest of the Ceremony, by adorning the Deceased with rich Purple Tapistry, and conferring on him the Ensigns of his Dignity. Then the next of Kin taking a Torch in his Hand, and turning his Head aside, to intimate he did that Office with Regret, he set the Pile on Fire at the mournful Sound of Trumpets and Hautboys: Then the Relations and Friends of the Deceased offered Sacrifices, cut the Throats of Animals, and served the Manes with several Messes to appease them, praying to the Winds to blow through the Pile to set it more on Fire and consume it, according to the Custom of the Grecians. When the Flame decreased and that the Body seemed to have been burnt, the Relations gave their last Farewell to the De∣ceased in these Words; Salve aeternum & vale ae∣ternum,
nos eo ordine, quo Natura dederit, te sequemur. USURA CENTESIMIS, Usury; In∣terest at One per Cent. They paid Interest by the Month, and not by the Year, as we do; and so this implies the Hundredth Part of the Sum every Month, and consequently Twelve per Cent. per Ann. This sort of Usury was looked upon as exorbitant; and therefore the Law of the Twelve Tables, confirmed long after by the Tribunes, regulated Usury to One per Cent. per Ann. and this was called Ʋnciarium foenus, nay, and the same was regulated one Time at one Half less. Tacitus, L. 5. Ann. speaks of Usu∣rers thus; For, says he, they had publickly acted contrary to the Law which Caesar had enacted for regulating the Interest of Money and Mat∣ters relating to the Estates that were possest in Italy; and the Advantage of particular Per∣sons made the Publick Good to be neglected: Usury doubtless is one of the oldest Evils of the Republick, and the most usual Cause of Seditions, and that is the Reason why so many Laws have been made to restrain it, even in a Time when Mens Manners were not so cor∣rupt; for first it was forbid by the Laws of the Twelve Tables to lend Money at an higher Interest than the Eighth Denarius, whereas be∣fore, all kinds of Interests were allowed of: Af∣terwards it was at the Desire of the Tribunes reduced to Sixteen Denarii, and some time after forbidden altogether: The People afterwards made several Orders for the Prevention of the Cheats practised in this Respect, but notwith∣standing any Regulations that they could make, the Covetousness of Men always found out new Ways to elude them. VULCANUS, Vulcan, whom they com∣monly make to be the Son of Juno, of whom she conceived without the Help of Jupiter her Hus∣band, she threw him down from Heaven, and he fell into the Isle of Lemnos, where he had broke his Neck, says Lucian, had not the Inha∣bitants of the Country received him in their Arms as he tumbled through the Air, and pre∣vented him from running the Fate of Astianax; however, this could not prevent his having his Leg broke, which made him always go lame. The same Lucian says in his Dialogue of the Gods, where he introduces Jupiter and Vulcan speaking, that after the latter had cleft the o∣thers Head with an Ax, there came an Amazon forth, who was Pallas, armed with a Lance and Shield, and he as his Reward for so happily deli∣vering him desired he might have her to Wife: Jupiter agreed to it, but he could not perswade her to marry him, because she was resolved to live a Virgin all her Life-time: So he married Venus who proved false to his Bed, prostituting her self to God Mars, which being suspected by Vulcan he watched an Opportunity to surprize them, for which end he beset his Bed with invi∣sible Nets and then went to his Forge: The Gal∣lant laying hold on the Opportunity of the Hus∣band's Absence went to enjoy his Mistress, but the Sun discovered them and informed Vulcan of it, who took them both in the Fact, and wrapped them up in his Nets. Then he called all the Gods to be Witnesses of his Disgrace: They made him to be the Smith of the Gods, and gave him the Islands of Lesbos and Lipara for his for∣ging Places, in the Company of the Cyclops. The Poets tell us, that Vulcan had once a Con∣test with Neptune and Minerva about the Excel∣lency of their Arts; Neptune as his Master-piece made a Bull, Minerva a House, and Vulcan, a Man; when they came before Momus whom they chose for Judge, he blamed Vulcan because he had not made a Window in the Man's Heart, to see if his Words agreed with his Thoughts. So much concerning the Fable of Vulcan, now we come to the History, and so Vulcan is found to be the first in the Dynasties of the Egyptian Kings, who were Gods, as they have been trans∣mitted down to us by Syncellus: He is also called the Father of the Gods in the proud Inscriptions of the Kings of Egypt, Et Vulcanus Deorum pater. Herodotus speaks of a magnificent Temple of Vulcan's, whose Porch on the North-side was built by Moeris King of Egypt, and Ramsinitus erected that to the West: It's said, it was King Menes who built that stately and magnificent Temple of Vulcan's at Thebes, from whom the Priefts reckoned 360 Kings in Egypt; he speaks in another Place of a Colossus of Vulcan's which was 75 Foot high, and stood before his Temple. Sanchuniathon does also place Vulcan among the Phoenician Gods, and calls him Chrysor and gives him a far greater Extent of Power than that attributed to Vulcan by the Greeks: Diodorus Siculus also assures us, the Egyptian Priests re∣ckoned Vulcan among the Kings of Egypt, and said, he was the first of them all; lastly, they attributed the Invention of Fire to him, for a Thunder-bolt happening to fall upon a Tree and setting it on Fire, he brought more Wood to it, and so preserved the Use of Fire. They attribu∣ted the Lightning to Vulcan, which gave Men occasion to say, he made Jupiter's Thunder-bolts, so they did those fiery Irruptions in Mountains which vomit out Flames, because they suppo∣sed that the Cyclops or Smiths wrought there according to Vulcan's Directions; or lastly, they attributed to him the Fire made use of for all Arts and especially for Smithing; for Vulcan be∣ing the Tubal-cain of the Pagans, he presided over all those Arts that concerned the Working of Mettals. The Poets made Vulcan to be the Son of Juno alone, however, Homer gives him also Jupiter for his Father: Now Jupiter who is the Coele∣stial Fire might very well give Being to the Ter∣restrial,
and Juno who is the Air, might also all alone work that Agitation in the Clouds, that forms Thunder. Lastly, if Juno be the Earth, it's also not to be doubted but that she alone forces out of her Bosom, those Fires which some Mountains send forth, and which they call Vulca∣noes: Servius says something like this: In Lem∣num insulam decidit Vulcanus, à Junone propter de∣formitatem dejectus, quam aërem esse constat, ex quo fulmina procreantur. Ideò autem Vulcanus de femore Junonis fingitur natus, quòd fulmina de imo aëre nascuntur. One might in my Opinion, says Father Thomassin, from hence draw a Proof that could give some Weight to the Physiological Meaning of Fables, and shew that Fable upon some Occasions has been invented only for the vailing of natural Truths, and thereby giving them a new Grace; wherefore after they had made Juno to be the Sister and only Wife of Jupiter, and Queen of all the World, why should she have no other Son but Vulcan only; or when Vulcan is made to be her Son, why should he have such and such Functions and Qualifications? But the Thunder-bolts being, as it were, Pro∣ductions of the Air, which is Juno, or of the Air which is Jupiter, and of Juno that is the Earth, the Fable must have been accommodated to the Nature of those Things; and the Reason why they should say, that Vulcan at his Birth was thrown down from Heaven to the Earth, and made a Cripple by the Fall, was because the Thunder never falls directly: Servius adds, that the Reason why the Poets say, that Vulcan fell in the Isle of Lesbos, was because it thundered often in that Island: Lastly, the same Author says, that as to their Poets Fiction in respect to Vulcan's marrying of Venus, 'twas because the getting of Children proceeded from Heat only: And this is confirmed by St. Augustine, L. 7. de Civ. Dei. C. 16. Now we are to speak of the Fable of Mars and Venus being taken in Adultery, and wrapped up in invisible Nets by Vulcan, who at the Interces∣sion of Neptune set them free, according to Ho∣mer in his Odysses. Varro gives us the Etymology of the Word Vulcan, ab ignis majori vi ac violen∣tiâ Vulcanus dictus: The Greek Name  comes from , succendi. Tzetzes will have it to have been the Name of an Egypti∣an, that found out the Use of Fire in Noah's Time, and afterwards invented the Art of Smith∣ing; the Greeks having attributed to him what they had learned of the Egyptians. Bochart derives the Name of Vulcan from the Hebrew Words Af esto, Pater ignis; and that with great likelihood of Truth, since Vulcan is reckoned to be of the Number of those who made up the ancient Dy∣nasties of the Gods or Kings of Egypt: The E∣gyptians according to Elian consecrated Lions to him: And Servius says, it was a Custom after the Gaining of a Victory, to gather the Arms of the Enemy together, and to make a Sacrifice of them to Vulcan in the Field of Battle. X. X Is a double Letter in the Latin Tongue, and the 21th in the Alphabet, being equi∣valent to cs, as Ducs put for Ducs, whence ducis in the Genitive; and so it is with gs, as Rex for Regs, whence comes Regis in the Genitive Case. The X is sometime put with the C, as vicxit, junexit, and sometimes with the S, as Cappadoxs. St. Isidore says, it was not in use before Augustus his Time; and Victorinus affirms, Nigidius would never make use of it. XAIPE, a Greek Word used in Epitaphs, signifying as much as Salve, Good-morrow. XANTHUS, a River of Troy: Lucian in a Dialogue of the Sea-Gods introduces this River speaking to the Sea thus: Xanthus. Mother of Rivers, receive me into thy Bosom to quench the Flame that devours me. Sea. Poor Xanthus, who has abused thee in this manner, Xant. Vulcan, because I defended the poor Trojans from the Fury of Achilles, who slew them upon my Banks; for the Multitude of the dead Bodies having caused me to overflow, I could not swallow them, wherewith Vulcan growing an∣gry, he vomited so many Flames upon me, as dryed up all the Plants growing upon my Banks, and killed all my Fish; and I had much ado to escape in the Condition you see me. Sea. But why would you meddle with A∣chilles? Xant. Would you have me betray the People that revered me? Sea. And would you on your part have Vul∣can forsake the Son of a Goddess he is in Love with? XENIA, Presents made by the Greeks to their Guests for the Renewal of Friendship and a Token of Hospitality; for such of the Grecians as were rich and magnificent, had Apartments to spare furnished with all Conveniencies, where∣in they received those who came from afar to lodge with them: The Custom was, that when they had treated them the first Day only, they afterwards every Day sent them some Presents of such Things as were brought them from the Country, as Pullets, Eggs, Herbs and Fruits; and hence it was, that the Painters, who repre∣sented those Things which every one sent to their Guests, called them Xenia, and that we
give the Name of Xenodochîum to an Hospital that entertains Pilgrims and Strangers. , Best; it was also used in an∣cient Epitaphs, in respect to the Dead. XYSTOS; it was a large and spacious Por∣tico among the Greeks, wherein the Wrestlers practised in Winter-time. XYSTUS; it signified among the Romans an open Walking-place, where People entertained one another. Y. Y Is the 22th Letter in the Alphabet and the Sixth Vowel, used in Words derived from the Greek; 'tis the Ʋpsilón of the Grecians, which is one of the Three Vowels that they call common. We make use of the Letter Y very often in the End of Words in the English Tongue, though we have lost the Sound of it and pro∣nounce it always like an I; and have also passed the same Pronunciation into the Latin, which in some measure must be allowed of because of Custom, though it would by no means be re∣ceived into the Greek Tongue, where the Ʋpsilon should always be pronounced like our Vowel Ʋ, according to the Opinion both of ancient and modern Grammarians. Z. Z Is the 23d and last Letter in the Alphabet, and a double one among the Latins, as wen as the Z of the Greeks: Its Pronunciation is much more soft than the X, which makes Quinti∣lian call it mollissimum and suavissimum: Never∣theless, this Pronunciation was not always the same as it is this Day, to which we allow it but Half that of an S. Moreover it had something in it of the D, but such as sounded very smoothly as Mezentius was pronounced as if it had been Medsentius, &c. The Z had also an Affi∣nity with the G, as Capella says: Z, said he, à Graecis venit, licet etiam ipsi primò G Graecâ ute∣bantur. ZENOBIA, Queen of Palmyra, and a Princess who perfectly understood the Oriental Tongues, and the Greek and Latin in their Pu∣rity: Trebellius Poliio said, she was the handso∣mest and bravest of Women: She made all the East tremble, beat the Lieutenants of the Em∣peror Gallienus, and maintained a vigorous War against the Romans, wherein the Emperor Aure∣lian after many Battles vanquished and carried her in Triumph to Rome: In Consequence to that famous Victory Aurelian built a Temple at Rome dedicated to the Sun, and enriched with the Spoils of the Palmyrenians, and the Statues of the Sun and Bacchus, which were brought from Pal∣myra thither, as Herodotus assures us. ZEPHYRUS, the Wind which blows from the Cardinal Point of the Horizon in the West. It's also called Favonius, and some confound it with Africus, which blows from the Winter west because of the Nearness thereof. Virgil makes them sacrifice a white Beast to the Wind Ze∣phyrus. Pecudem Zephyris felicibus albam. Hesiod makes him to be the Son of Astraea and Aurora: Astraeo verò Aurora Ventis peperit violen∣tos, celerem Zephyrum, Boreamque rapidum & No∣tum, in amore cum Deo Dea congressa. What Homer says by way of Fable concern∣ing Boreas, Virgil relates as a true Story of Ze∣phyrus, in speaking concerning Mares. Ore omnes versae in Zephyrum stant rapibus altis, Exceptantque leves auras, & saepè sine ullis Conjugiis vento gravidae. Georg. L. 3. They turned up their Mouths to the West-wind and conceived by the Power of it without a Stallion. ZETES, one of the Sons of the Wind Boreas and Nymph Orithya, whom he stole away from A∣thens; he was engaged with the Argonauts in the Expedition to Colchos; and being descended from King Phineus the Son of Agenor, who was perse∣cuted by his own Daughters the Harpies, he ex∣pelled them and pursued them as far as the Isles of Strophades; he was afterwards put to Death by Hercules, and changed into a Wind that blew Eight Days before the rising of the Dog-star: Hy∣ginus says, he was buried, and that his Grave-stone trembled when the Wind Boreas blew. ZETHUS, the Son of Jupiter and Antiope, and the Brother of Amphion, whom he helped to build the City of Thebes. ZEUXIS, an ancient Painter very famous in Antiquity; Tzetzes makes him to be a Native of Ephesus, and Cicero, Pliny and Elian would have it, that he was born at Heraclea near Cro∣tonia in Italy: He flourished in the 29th Olympiad towards the Year of Rome 355, and about 400 Years before our Saviour's Nativity. Having found the Art of Painting in the Intancy of its Lustre, he raised it, from the Beginning of the Glory Apollodorus had brought it, to great Per∣fection. Quintilian says, it was he that found out the Way of ordering Lights and Shadow∣ings;
Luminum umbrarumque rationem invenisse tra∣ditur And 'tis agreed on all hands that he was excel∣lent at Colours. Aristotle found this Fault with his Painting, that Manners and Passions were not exprest therein, however, Pliny witnesses quite the Contrary in respect to Penelope's Picture, wherein, say, he, it seems as if Zeuxis had paint∣ed her Manners. He got a great Estate, and once appeared very gay during the Celebration of the Olympick Games, with his Cloak embroi∣dered with Letters of Gold which formed his own Name, says Pliny; and after he grew so rich, he would sell no more of his Works, but gave them away, saying plainly, he did not know how to set a Price upon them equal to their Value: Before he made People pay for the Sight of them, and none were admitted to see his Helen without Money in hand, and hence by way of Raillery the Picture was called Helen the Cour∣tizan, Etian, L. 4. C. 22. He scrupsed not to put those Three Verses of the Iliads under this Picture, wherein Homer says, that good King Priamus and the venerable Senators of his Council agreed, that the Gre∣cians and Trojans were not to be blamed for ex∣posing themselves for so long a Time to so many Evils for the Love of Helen, whose Beauty was equal to that of the Goddesses: Val. Max. L. 3. C. 7. We cannot well say whether this Helen of Zeuxis was the same as that at Rome in Pliny's Time, or that which he made for the People of Crotona to be set up in Juno's Temple. Valerius Maximus says, Marsyas bound painted by Zeuxis was to be seen in the Temple of Concord. It will not be impertinent in this Place to take Notice of what Zeuxis required of the In∣habitants of Crotona for this Picture, they had got him to come thither by the Power of Mo∣ney, that they might be furnished with a good Quantity of Pictures by his Hand, wherewith to adorn that emple; and when he told them, he had Thoughts of painting Helen, they were very well satisfied, because they knew his Ta∣lent lay in painting of Women. He afterwards asked them what fine young Women they had in their City, and they brought him to the Place where their Boys performed their Exerci∣ses, and he had all the Conveniency imagina∣ble to discern whether they were handsome, for they were naked; and as he appeared much sa∣tisfied therewith, they gave him to understand by that, that they had handsome Girls in the City, since those Boys whom he most admired had Sisters: He then desired he might see the prettielt of them, and the Council of the City having ordered all of them to assemble in one Place, that Zeuxis might take his Choice, he pitch'd upon Five of them and taking what was most beautiful from each of them, he made the Picture of Helen by that. Cicero and Pliny tell us all this. Inspexerit eorum nudas virgines, & quinque elegerit, ut quod in quaque laudatissimum esset pictura redderet. Pliny will have it, that he wrought for the Agrigentines, and not for the Crotonians, and he does not say whose Picture it was: We find he does in a manner tell the same Story as Cicero. We must not forget that Zeuxis having disputed with Parrhasius which of them was the best Painter, Zeuxis lost it: the Story is this; Zeuxis had painted some Grapes so well, that the Birds alighted upon them to peck them: Parrhasius painted a Curtain so ingenuously, that Zeuxis taking it for a real Curtain which hid his Antagonist's Work, he very confidently de∣sired that Curtain might be quickly drawn, that so he might see what Parrhasius had done, but coming to know his mistake, he acknowledged he was outdone, since he had deceived none but Birds, but Parrhasius had deceived the Masters even of the Art it self: Another time he painted a Boy carrying Grapes; the Birds flew also to that Picture, which made him angry, and inge∣nuously confess, his Work was not compleat e∣nough, seeing if he had drawn the Boy as well as he did the Grapes, the Birds would have been affraid of him: It's said, he rubbed out the Grapes, and that he reserved nothing but the Figure wherein he had the least Success. Sen. Controv. 5. L. 5. The best Picture made by this Painter was an Hercules in a Cradle, who killed the Snakes in his frightened Mother's Pre∣sence, but he valued his Champion more than any of the rest, under which he put a Verse that afterward became famous. It's said, that ha∣ving painted an old Woman, the Sight of that Picture put him into such a Fit of Laughter that he died with it. 'Tis Verrius Flaccus who relates this, with these Two Verses that allude to this Accident. Nam quid modi facturus risu denique, Ni pictor fieri vult, qui risu mortuus est. We have the Description of a Picture of Zeu∣xis in Lucian, that deserves Commendation. ZODIACUS, the Zodiac, an imaginary Circle in the Heavens containing the Twelve Signs or Constellations, which the Sun runs thro in a Year's Space; it's interfected into Two e∣qual Parts by the Equator, one of which contains the Six Northern Signs towards the Artick Pole, and the other the Six Southern Signs towards the Antartick: It's called the Zodiac, that is, Life-bearer, by reason of the Figure of the Ani∣mals in it that represent the Twelve Signs, viz. Aries, Taurus and Gemini, for the Spring; Can∣cer, Leo and Virgo, for Summer; Libra, Scorpio and Sagittarius, for Autumn; Capricornus, Aqua∣rius and Pisces, for Winter: In Verse thus.
Sunt Aries, Taurus, Gemini; Cancer, Lec, Virgo; Libraque, Scorpius, Arcitenens; Caper, Ampho∣ra, Pisces. ZONAE, the Zones, are the Five Circles which divide the World and Sphear into Five Parts; one is called the Torrid Zone, because of its great Heat, Two more temperate, and the other Two Frigid Zones. Virg. in L. 1. Georg. gives a Description of these Zones, as Ovid does also, L. 1. Met. Those Five Circles have ob∣tained this Name because the Word Zona in Latin signifies a Girdle. The Torrid Zone is under the Equator, included between the Two Tropicks; the Two Temperate Zones lie be∣tween the Tropicks and Polar Circles, and the Frigid Zones reach from the Polar Circles to the Poles. The Ancients thought the Torrid Zone was altogether uninhabitable, but now all the World know the Contrary, and that it is ren∣dered very temperate by an Intermixture of Heat in the Day-time, and of Coolness in the Night: They also find it very cold there in the Months of June, July and August; as to the Frigid Zones we could never yet sail beyond 75 Degrees: In the mean time the Lapland Hi∣story informs us, that the Heat is sometimes so great there, that they cannot let their bare Feet rest a Minute upon a Stone, without burn∣ing them. ZOROASTER, whom Pliny makes to be so much ancienter than Moses, is believed by Clemens in his Recognitions to be Cham, and to have been worshipped for a Deity: Justine says positively, that Zoroaster was King of the Bactri∣ans, and the Inventor of Magick. Rex Bactria∣norum Zoroaster, qui primus dicitur artes magieas invenisse: It was the same Zoroaster against whom Ninus made War: Suidas also places. Zoroaster in Media or Persia, and makes him to be the Chief of the Magi and Magicians: Several Au∣thors make Zoroaster to have lived more lately, and place him no higher than the Time of Da∣rius Histaspes; but 'tis like they might confound several Zoroasters in one, and that this being a common Name to several Magi, they attribu∣ted something of what appertained to the first to the others that came after. FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by John Nicholson, at the King's-Arms, in Little-Britain; where may be had all sorts of School-Books, and most Chymical-Books. THE Characters or Manners of the Age. By Mons. de la Bruyere, with the Characters of Theophrastus. Translated from the Greek. The Second Edition corrected and enlarged, with a Key in the Margent. Printed for J. Bullord; and sold by J. Nicholson, and Tho. Newborough. Index Villaris, or an Alphabetical Register of all Cities, Market-Towns, Pa∣rishes, Villages, the Hundred, Lath, Wapentake, or other Division of each Coun∣ty. The Valuations of the Livings, with the Seats of the Nobility and Gentry; and a List of the Lords to this Time. Folio. Price 16 s. The whole Comical Works of Mons. Scarron. Containing his Comical Ro∣mance. Compleat in Three Parts. All his Novels and Histories. His Letters, Characters, &c. Translated by Mr. Tho. Brown, Mr. Savage, and others. Illu∣strated with Cutts. In Octavo. Price 6 s. The whole Works of the Reverend Divine Dr. Isaac Barrow, in Three Vol. Folio. Price 2l. 10 s. The History of the Old and New Testament; with a large Historical Chro∣nology. Illustrated with Two Hundred and Forty large Cutts and Five Maps: Printed upon Royal Paper. Folio. Price 3l. 10 s. The History of the Old and New Testament, &c. Illustrated with Two Hundred and Forty Cutts and Maps. Quarto. 15 s. The History of the Buccaniers of America, from their first Original down to this Time Written in several Languages, and now collected into one Volume. Illustrated with Twenty Six Copper Cutts. Price 6 s. A Compleat History of Europe, or a View of the Affairs thereof, Civil and Military, from the Treaty of Nimeguen to this present Time, intermixt with above One Hundred Original Papers, as Declarations, Letters, Memoirs, &c. Octavo. Price 6 s. The newest and best French Grammar. Written for the Use of his Highness the Duke of Gloncester. By Mr. Boyer, Author of the Royal Dictionary. The Se∣cond Edition. Price 2 s. The Gazetteer or Newsman's Interpreter, being a Geographical Index of all the considerable Cities, Patriarchships, Bishopricks, Universities, Dukedoms, Earldoms, and such like: Imperial and Hans Towns, Ports, Forts, Castles, &c. in Europe, shewing in what Kingdoms, Provinces and Counties they are; what Prince they are now subject to; upon or high what Rivers, Bays, Seas, Moun∣tains, &c. they stand; their Distances in English Miles, with their Longitude and Latitude, according to the best approved Maps. The Fourth Edition enlarg'd. A most compleat Compendium of Geography, General and Special, describing all the Empires, Kingdoms and Dominions in the whole World. The Fifth Edition corrected. Price 1 s. 6 d. Both written by Lawrence Echard, M. A. Mr. William Oughtred's Key of the Mathematicks. Newly translated from the best Edition, with Notes rendring it easie and intelligible to the less skilful Read∣er; absolutely necessary for all Gangers, Surveyors, Gunners, Military Officers, Mariners, &c. Recommended by Mr. Halley, Fellow of the Royal Society. Price 2 s. 6 d. Tullii Orationes Selectae in usum Delphini. In Octavo.
SCHOOL-BOOKS sold by Tho. Newborough, at the Golden-Ball, in St. Paul's Church-yard. POvidii Nasonis Fastorum, Libri VI. Cum notis selectissimis Variorum ac∣curante C. Schrevelio. Octavo. C. Julii Caesaris quae extant Interpretatione & notis Illustravit Joannes Godvinus, Professor Regis in usum Delphini juxta Editionem Parisiensem. Octavo. Phoedri Fabulae. Interpretatione & notis illustravit Petrus Danet, in usum se∣renissimi Delphini. Octavo. Novum Jesu Christi Testamentum à Sebastiano Castalione Latine reditum in usum Scholarum. Editio Novissima prioribus longe immaculatior. Octavo. Mythologia Esopica in qua continentur Esopi Fabulae, Graeco Latinae. 298. Secundum Editionem Gabrielis Bractii omnium antiquissimam cum variis Lectio∣nibus in usum Scholae Etonensis. Octavo. Electa ex Ovidio Tibullo & Propertio usui Scholae Etonensis. Octavo. Decerpta ex Ovidio, Tibullo, Propertio & Pedone ad Scholarum Grammati∣carum usus. Editio secunda. Octavo. Phraseologia Generalis; or, a Full, Large and General Phrase-Book, com∣prehending whatsoever is necessary and useful in all other Phraseological Books (hitherto published) and methodically digested for the more speedy and pro∣sperous Progress of Students in their Humanity Studies. By William Robert∣som, A. M. Octavo. Idiomatologia Anglo-Latina, sive Dictionarium Idiomaticum Anglo-Lati∣num: in quo Phrases tam Latinae quam Anglicanae Linguae sibi mutuo respon∣dentes, sub certis quibusdam Capitibus secundum Alphabeti ordinem e regione collocantur. In usum tam Peregrinorum, qui Sermonem nostrum Anglicanum, quam Nostratium, qui Latinum Idioma callere student. Sexta Editio. Cui ac∣cessit istiusmodi Phrasium & Idiomatum additio in Utraque Lingua ad minus trium Millium. Opera, Studio, & Industria Gulielmi Walker, S. T. B. Octavo. Some Improvements to the Art of Teaching, especially in the first grounding of a young Scholar in Grammar-Learning, being a short, sure and easie way to bring a Scholar to Variety and Excellency in writing Latin. Written for the Help and Ease of all Ushers of Schools, and for the Use and Profit of all young Scholars. By William Walker, B. D. L. Annoi Senecae Philosophi Sententiae Morales praecipuae: Ex omnibus ejus, quae extant, operibus diligenter excerptae: In certa capita, seu locos commu∣nes summa cura digestae: In modum brevium orationum variis argumentis ac rationibus amplificatae; exemplis preclaris, summam prudentiam, summamque utilitatem large in lectorem fundentibus, ex ipso Authore totidem verbis illu∣stratae: Omni Christiano homine, tam sene quam juvene dignissimae. Nunc pri∣mum in usum Scholarum accommodatae. Studio & Opera Georgii Sylvani Pan∣nonii Medici. Editio Secunda. Xenophon de lyri Institutione Libri duo juxta Exemplar Etonense cum Latina Interpretatione Johannis Leunclavii, Gr. & Lat. Octavo. Eachard's, Kennet's, Potter's, Codwin's and Brown's Roman and Greek An∣tiquities.
