D1847 12264998 57998
MODERN NOVELS: VOL. V. CONTAINING, I. Don Sebastian King of Por∣tugal. II. Agnes de Castro, or Fatal Beauty. III. Amorous Abbess.: In Two Parts. LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley, in Russel-street, in Covent-Garden, 1692.
Don Sebastian KING OF Portugal. An Historical Novel. IN FOUR PARTS. Done out of French by Mr. FERRAND SPENCE. LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley and S. Mag∣nes, in Russel-street in Covent-garden, 1683.
TO THE Right Honourable THE COUNTESS OF STANFORD. Madam, AN Unfortunate Prince begs Au∣dience of Your Ladiship, in hopes of re∣presenting His Unhappy
Circumstances to be such, as that he may with Ju∣stice lay claim to Your Ladiships Protection. He is sensible that nei∣ther His Ambition, or rather His Destiny, could make Him amends for the Mis∣fortunes they have plung'd Him in, than by suffering Him to reappear in the World under Your Ladi∣ships Commission. If He succeeds in this Request, He questions not to Reign again with as much Glory and Lustre, as He was
before oppress'd with the Malignity and Perverse∣ness of His Fate. To You, Madam, He flies for Refuge, knowing the Whole Universe must pay Veneration to such an Asyle, and that the Sactu∣ary cannot but be inviola∣ble, that is supported by so much Beauty, so much Wit and Vertue. He is assur'd His greatest Enemies will be forc'd to court His Re∣conciliation and Friend∣ship, when under Your Co∣lours;
and that they will freely make Restitution of all the Stars unjustly gave them to His disadvantage, rather than incur the Blame and Censure of the present Age, and all Po∣sterity. For it is Declaring War to All, to continue at variance with a Prince, under the Guarranty of a Lady, whose many Charm∣ing Qualities would have obtain'd her even the Ado∣ration of the Ancients. But he is most capable of telling His own Story:
And as for doing You Ju∣stice, Madam, in so nice a Character as that of Your Ladiships, a Chara∣cter that entitles You to the Love of Heaven, and demands the Esteem and Admiration of all Man∣kind, is what surpasses the Art and Skill both of Pen and Pencil. Every Action of Yours is a Panegyrique of it self. You stand in no need of the Daubing either of the Writer or the Painter: Daubing, I said, Pardon the Word, Ma∣dam;
but every thing must prove Course, that vainly attempts to Copy so perfect an Original. So much Merit needs no Hi∣storian. As it has alrea∣dy rendred You the Favou∣rite of the present Age, so Tradition will transmit you to Posterity, as an Ex∣traordinary Instance of all the Advantages of Birth and of Fortune, of Body and of Mind, without any of the Vanities that almost con∣stantly attend these Blessings and Accomplishments in o∣thers.
But this is a Subject so bewitching, that it had almost transported me be∣yond the Bounds of the most profound Respect and Submission wherewith I am, Madam, Your Ladiships Most humble and most obedient Servant, F. SPENCE.
Don Sebastian, KING OF PORTUGAL. IN the first Years of the Reign of Don Sebastian, Portugal was the most Peaceable and Flouri∣shing Kingdom of all Europe. The Divisions and Contests about Religion, which so cruelly shatter∣ed other Provinces, had not spread their fury into that Country: And ever since Don Alphonso Hen∣ry, the first King of Portugal, aid∣ed by William Long-sword, had chaced the Moors out of his Terri∣tories, the Quiet of that People had not been troubled by any fears. This King had hardly at∣tained his fifteenth year, but he made himself admired by all his
People, and fear'd by all his Neigh∣bours: The vivacity of his Wit, the elevation of his Soul, the dex∣terity he made appear in all his Exercises, and the greatness of his Courage, rendred him the most accomplished Prince of that Age. He was Handsome, well made, Va∣liant, and Liberal: He had a Ma∣jestick Port, Royal Inclinations, and it seemed as if Nature had taken leisure to form him with all the Qualities that can make a Prince recommendable to Man∣kind. A crowd of young Cour∣tiers, who were brought up with him, or whom the desire of time∣ly advancing themselves by Em∣ployes, had drawn from all parts to Lisbon, composed his most a∣greeable Court. And as Youth, Amours, and Pleasures have ever been inseparable, and as Love is the first and softest amusement of Man∣kind, all these Courtiers insensi∣bly applyed themselves more to
their Mistresses, than to their Prince; and their hearts being little touched with Ambition, made them give sighs to Love, when they fancied they rendred Assiduities to Fortune. That Court was made up of Persons of extraordinary Merit: Queen Katherine, the Kings Grand∣mother, was no less elevated above those of her Sex, by her Virtue than by her Quality. She had e∣ver applyed her self with a great deal of Prudence and Success to dissipate the troubles that threat∣ned the State, during the Infancy of Don Sebastian; And when this young Prince took upon him the Government of his Kingdom, she gave her self entirely to the Pra∣ctice of all those Virtues that can recommend a Queen to the World. The Dutchess of Braganza had a great share of Wit and Beau∣ty, and though she had a Son of the same age with the King, she
despaired not of charming that Prince, and employ'd all her Arts to inspire him with Friendship, E∣steem, or Affection. She was much in Katherine's favour, and mana∣ged her self with so much Cun∣ning, that Acting as well the part of a Lucretia as of a Gossip, she sha∣red in all the Exercises of the Queens Devotion, and in all the Matches of the Kings Divertisements. The Duke her Husband knowing her heart to be too susceptible of Ambition to be the like of Love, suffered her with Tranquility e∣nough at Lisbon with the Young Duke of Barcellos their Son; and was himself almost always at his Country-House. Eugenia, whose Relations had ever had the most considerable Charges of the State, admirably well maintained her Quality in that Court: She was brown, of an advantageous Shape, and had a sweet and solid Wit: And though she had lost her Father
and Mother when she was very young, her Carriage had been ever so regular, that she gave as much admiration for her Virtue, as for her Beauty. Christopher de Cavora, who was Master of the Horse to the King, and his Fa∣vourite, had a Daughter called Leonora; who, maugre her ten∣der Age, was already the Orna∣ment of the Court, and with her Blooming Beauty made the most insensible to tremble. That Court was filled with seve∣ral other Persons, who had no less merit than those I have mentioned; though they were of a less Ele∣vated condition. Violanta was of these last: She was Maid of Ho∣nour to Jane of Austria, a perfect Beauty and infinite Deserts, and if her Charms were proper to give Birth to a great Passion, her heart was capable of being sensible of the like. But all the lustre of the Court
was not confined within the Circle of the Beauty of this Sex, the Men made there likewise admirable Fi∣gures. Cardinal Henry, Don Sebasti∣an's Uncle, had ever made appear great deal of Conduct in the Tute∣lage, that was committed to him, of the Young King. Don Lewis, who was likewise his Uncle, had sig∣nalized his Courage in several Ren∣counters, and with Justice passed for the bravest and handsomest Prince of that Kingdom. He had had a long time a very tender En∣gagement with Violanta; and the report even run at Court, that he had Married her, and by her had a Son, whom he brought up at one of his Houses near Lis∣bon. Duke d'Avero had made his Prudence and Valour appear on several occasions under the Reign of John the III, and had been one of his Favourites; but Cardinal Henry had no great kindness for him, knowing him to be ambiti∣ous
and daring. The Young Duke of Barcellos gave great hopes of his Dexterity and Wit, and began to view of the Beauty of Leo∣nora with a tender emotion. The Count de Sousa was much esteem∣ed both by the King and Cardi∣nal Henry: He maintained his Fa∣vour by a great merit, and had taken care to joyn to all the fine Qualities that make a well bred-Man, the solid Virtues that com∣pose an honest-man. Don Henry had a thousand good Qualities, that made him be beloved by all the World, he was well Built, and Vallant, and breathed nothing but dangers: And as he was the chief of an Illustrious Family both for Nobility and Riches; his Father had taken care before his Death, to Conclude his Marriage with Eugenia, they having loved one another from their most tender Infancy. All things seem'd to conspire to unite them; their Hu∣mours
being alike, their Quali∣ties suitable, and their Age almost equal, gave all People great hopes of their happiness. Amours were the Soul of that Court, and even those who were only sensible of Ambition were constrained to call Love to their succours, that they might the bet∣ter succeed in their Designs. The Dutchess of Braganza would have been willing to have been indept∣ed for the advancement of her Fortune to this last Passion; she placed all her cares to make the King love her; but was not able to render his heart sensible: He had no other Passion than for Arms, he had raised a Regiment which he Exercised continually, and frequently Review'd: He would as often undertake the La∣bours of Common Souldiers, as the Cares of chief Officers, the great∣est Perils had a secret Charm to invite him, and not believing that
any common danger was worthy of him, he would not undertake any thing that was not attended with difficulties: If he had any Voy∣age to make upon the Sea, he affect∣ed to Embark during the Tempest, disdaining to rock peaceably in a Calm that might lull his Virtue asleep. Duke d'Avero had no less Ambition than the Dutchess of Bra∣ganza, and likewise fancied that Love might be useful to his De∣signs. He had a Daughter called Elvira: He sought in her Beauty for the reputation that was refused his own merit, and imagin'd that she had Charms enough to touch the heart of that Young King: She had not yet been seen at Court, though she was at an Age to ap∣pear there with lustre, because the Dutchess her Mother, having a long time languished in a Disease which occasioned her Death two Years before, had retired her self to one of her Country Houses,
and had ever kept her with her; and the Duke, after the Death of his Wife, had put his Daughter in∣to a Nunnery near his House, not designing to take her from thence, till he had found out a Match sui∣table to her Circumstances. In the mean time Eugenia had too many Charms to satisfie them∣selves with the Conquest of Don Henry. The Count de Sousa had been long Passionately in love with her: His Respects, his Com∣plaisances and Assiduities had suffi∣ciently assured her of it; but whe∣ther she was not willing to un∣derstand them, or she had only Eyes for Don Henry, the Count de Sousa always found in her so much in∣difference for him, that he judg'd it not convenient to declare his Passion more openly: He had too much respect and discretion to ha∣zard an unprofitable Declaration. Don Henry was his Friend, Euge∣nia had ever seen him only under the notion of Friendship, which
he could not any longer support the constraint of: He saw her eve∣ry day; she was ever lovely in his Eyes; she had hardly in the least concealed from him the Passion she had for Henry: That Lover likewise made him the Confident of his happiness. What a torture is this to a Man, whose love is extream, and was not capable of easing him∣self by betraying his Mistress and his Friend? After having been for some time in these Extremities, and having in vain Employ'd the Succours of his Reason for to cure him, he fancied, that absence would diminish his Sufferings, by weakning his Passion, and so was de∣sirous to remove from Court; but his Merit had put him there in too good a posture for him to go away without some specious pretext. Elizabeth, whom Philip the II. had Married in his third Nuptials, died in Spain about that time; wherefore one was to be sent to
make the Compliments of Condo∣lance to this King on the behalf of Queen Katherine his Sister, and Don Sebastian his Nephew▪ Sousa fancied that occasion was favou∣rable to him, and for the obtain∣ing that Commission, he Employed Cardinal Henry's Credit with the King; the Cardinal highly esteem∣ing his Virtue, used to Queen Ka∣therine, the Solicitations of Lewis of Granada his Friend; whose Birth and Piety were had in veneration by all People; and whom that King had caused to come from Spain to communicate to her, all that concerned the Salvation of her Soul and the good of the Kingdom. He ob∣tained what he desired, was sent to the King of Spain; but could not depart without going to take his leave of Eugenia, with whom he found Don Henry. He used all his endeavours to con∣ceal his Grief, and his Love in
that separation; the Words he spoke had no coherence with one another, and the Sighs he vented were half stifled: And seeing he could not resist his Grief▪ he quitted those two Lovers, and Em∣braced them, bidding 'em, Farewell, and live happy, while I do lead a Lan∣guishing life, far from you and my Friends. His Sighs hindred him from speaking more than these Words; he went immediately away for fear they should see him shed tears: And Eugenia and Don Henry were really afflicted at his depar∣ture, and attributed to Friendship alone, what a more violent Passion had produced. The Duke d'Avero, caused Elvi∣ra to come and second his Projects: He was himself surpriz'd with her Beauty, and conceived fresh hopes at the sight of so dazeling an Object. The truth is, she was capable so n∣gage the most insensible: Her blew Eyes were sweet and piercing; all
her Features were regular, her Complexion was admirable, and Hair was the finest in the World, delicately accompanied by all the Beauty of her Face: She was of a middle Stature, but her Wit was above what is common; she had an insinuating Prefence, and en∣gaging ways with her; her Con∣versation was easie, of a soft hu∣mour and a Gentle Soul. Her Fa∣ther would at first instruct her with the measures she ought to keep in regard of all the Persons that composed the Court, into which he would introduce her: But found in her so much Wir, so much Judgment, and a dispositi∣on so Natural to second his de∣sires, that he had nothing else to do than to describe to her, the different Characters of those, who held the first Rank. The day after she arrived, the Duke Conducted her to Queen Katherines Appart∣ment, to pay her her Respects. Her
Dress admirably well seconded her Beauty; the Queen found her the Loveliest Person she had ever seen: The Dutchess of Braganza, Eugenia, Leonora, Violanta, and all those who were there, were sur∣prized with her Lustre. After which they examined all her Fea∣tures with a Jealous Spite, and not finding any defect, they all fancied they saw in her a formi∣dable Rival, who was going to ravish all their Conquests from them. The Dutchess of Braganza more Jealous than any other, would see if her Wit was answer∣able to her Charms. She said to her, all she thought would per∣plex her, and all the others by the same motive, Engaged her in a Conversation upon several Sub∣jects; but she ever reply'd with so much Sweetness and Wit, that they even admired her against their Will. This Conversation was inter∣rupted
by the Count de Tavora, who came to acquaint the Queen, that the King was a coming. She immediately Commanded all those in her Chamber not to make Elvira known, and bid the Duke d'Avero retire, for fear of disco∣vering her. He obeyed with some vexation, ardently desiring to be a Witness of the interview of Don Sebastian and his Daughter. The King came, Elvira was the first Object he saw, and he was so lively struck, that he was some∣time without being able to speak, and without knowing what he should say; a thousand confused Motions agitated him at that sight, and he was sensible of 'em all, but could not distinguish any; and of all the several thoughts a∣rising then in his Mind, he was not able to know or explain any, but that which told him that El∣vira was the most Beautiful Per∣son in the World. All the Court
perceived the Kings trouble, and as he saw the Queen likewise ob∣served it, he endeavoured to speak, and conceal his disorder: Who it that Charming Person, you have em∣belished the Court with, Madam, said he to the Queen, still eyeing Elvira? She is a Native of Spain, answered she, whom King Philip my Brother has sent me, to be of the number of my Maids; but not being willing to have any more, I am going to send her back: For Hea∣ven's sake don't send her back, (he interrupted her with a trasport) tht would be but an ill return to the Civilities of the King of Spain: Well then, reply'd the Queen smi∣ling, I will not send her back with∣out first Consulting you, and she shall have your leave if she returns. The King clearly faw they had per∣ceived his disorder, he blushed; and Elvira, who had ever had her Eyes down from the time the King entred, raised 'em at that
instant, and met with those of that Prince, but so tenderly and so passionately, that she blusht, and was in as great a Confusion as himself. The Queen after some other Discourses, at length ac∣quainted Don Sebastian, how this Lady was the Duke d' Avero's Daughter. He was as little capa∣ble of dissembling the joy this News gave him, as he had been to conceal the disorder that the sight of Elvira had caused in him. He made her a thousand tender Compliments, and the day being already much advanced, and the Queen using to withdraw be∣times, every one took leave of her and retired. Elvira went to her Father's, with the Women who had waited on her, and was at first in some trouble, that Don Sebastian had raised Motions in her, which she was not acquainted with, and which she however attributed af∣ter
she had well examined 'em, on∣ly to the respect that the looks of a King inspire. She was still making these Reflexions, when the Duke her Father entred her Appartment, to know what she thought of the Court. She answered him very exactly upon all the different Cha∣racters she had seen there. But when he asked her, if the King had been there, if she had seen him, and what she thought of him, she made appear so much disorder in her Face and understanding, that the Duke divined the reason of that Confusion, and changed Dis∣course immediately. The Dut∣chess of Braganza, retired with sentiments very different from those of Elvira: She was Ambiti∣ous, and Jealous, and penetra∣ting: She aimed at the heart, or rather the grandeur of the King. She knew from that moment that Elvira was capable of depriving her of both; and Ambition and Jealou∣sie
inspired her with an aversion for that Rival, that her Policy would hardly dissemble; but amongst all the different Motions this Visit had caused, there were none so lively and so tender as those of the King. He was so full of Elvira's Beauty, that it was impossible for him to speak of any thing else as long as Supper lasted. He lay all Night thinking of her Charms; fan∣cied, that the blushing he had ob∣served in her Face, when their Eyes met, was a good presage for his Love; and that her Eyes were ever too animated for it to be a meer Modesty, which had given occasion to this Confusion. How happy, said he, should I be to be beloved by this Charming Person: How Beautiful is she, and how Rich in Wit and Sweetness! And how miserable should I be, continu∣ed he immediately after, if her heart were engaged, or if it were insensible. For some moments that
fear interrupted the delights of those Reflections, but his hopes coming immediately to his help, calmed his Mind and revived his Affection. The Duke d' Avero being im∣patient to know what Effects his Daughters Beauty had produced, did not fail to be the next day at the Kings rising, who, as soon as he saw him, cryed out to him a∣loud: Ah Duke: how Charming is your Daughter, and how Beautiful did I find her Yesterday? The Duke was so good a Courtier, as to take this Compliment kindly, and every one made him some upon this Subject, and the Duke de Barcellos approaching him, told him, The Dutchess my Mother has made me so advantageous a De∣scription of her Wit and Beauty, that the very recital Charmed me. The truth is, that the Dutchess of Braganza, who foresaw the King would have a very great Passion
for Elvira, was desirous that the Duke de Barcellos might fall in love with her, for traversing this Commerce which she fear'd. But if by chance Elvira should have any inclination for this Young Duke, then she might at least become ne∣cessary through the part her Son would take in that Intreague, and by the absolute power she had over him. But necessary it was, he should declare himself speedily, and not stay till the King had explained his budding Passion. Wherefore she passed over Formalities, and went the next day with her Son to see Elvira. You will find per∣haps, said she to her entring, my Visit rash and too hasty, Madam; this is not the only fatigue your Beauty will cause you, and the Duke to whom I made Yester day the recital of it, has forced me to come and importune you with so much precipitation: But he is still Young Madam, continued she
smiling, and knows not what he de∣mands. Elvira answered with a thousand Civilities. At this meet∣ing, the Conversation was less se∣rious, and more warm than usual∣ly those are of the first Visits, and the Duke de Barcellos shewed so much admiration for Elvira, that the Count de Tavora, who was then there, fancied he had conceived a great Passion for her, and said, the day following, in Entertaining some Persons that came to see him, with the News of the Court, that Elvira's Beau∣ty made a great noise there, that the Duke de Barcellos was ex∣treamly in love with her, had been to see her, and decla∣red to her a great deal of kind∣ness. Leonora was present at this Dis∣course, and could not hear it with∣out shivering. For above two Years that the Duke de Barcellos saw her with assiduity, he had
not dared to declare what her Charms had made him suffer; and their hearts having been used to love one another from their tender∣est Infancy, upon the credit of their sighs, without having otherwise ex∣plained themselves, they had spared themselves the vexation, that Re∣flexions give at the birth of a Pas∣sion, and the confusion which these forts of Declarations cause in those that hear them: She returned in∣to her Chamber to conceal her trouble; and as soon as she was at liberty, she let some tears fall, with∣out knowing the reason that made her weep: She saw her self opprest with a grief that she had never felt; sometimes she abandoned her self to all imaginable hatred against Elvira, sometimes she complained confusedly of the Duke of Bar∣cellos; and not knowing what Motions to keep to, Why should I complain of him, said she, did he pro∣mise me never to love any one?
has he told me, he had a kindness for me? does he know that I have an inclination for him▪ or rather, have ever loved him? Alas, I know nothing of it my self, continued she, but I know very well, I have been deceived in the opinion I had of the care he took to purchase and pre∣serve my favour. She had not yet so strictly Examined the Senti∣ments she had of the Duke de Barcellos; she durst not even in that moment tell her self, that she loved him, and attributed to the hatred she had for Elvira, all that the strongest Jealousie made her suffer. I should not care, said she sometimes, though he loved a∣nother, but I have so great an An∣tipathy for Elvira, that I cannot suffer the Passion he has for her; he must renounce it, or never see me more, I'le rather from this present deprive my self of the pleasure of seeing him, without asking him any thing, continued she; and likewise
the sacrifice that I pretend from him would oblige me to too much ac∣knowledgment. Ah! what would my Father say, if I should engage my self without his Consent: Alas! perhaps he has already discovered my trouble, and perhaps he attributes to Jealousie the disorder I have made appear. This fear for some time suspended the violence of her Mo∣tions, and made her at length take the resolution of concealing her grief from the Eyes even of those who caused it. The Duke d' Avero rely'd much upon the merit of his Daughter, and hoped to see her one day Queen of Portugal. She likewise conceived great hopes of her Charms; and both in concert, without imparting to one another their Designs, laid Ambushes for the liberty of a Prince, who came and cast himself into Chains. Don Sebastian distinguished Elvira from all those that endeavoured to
please him: He paid her a thou∣sand little passionate addresses, that are never offer'd but to one Person, and are the forerunners of the tenderest Passion. Elvira's heart was too sensible, and her Soul too ambitious not to be touch∣ed at the distinctions and the eager∣nesses of a Prince, so gallant, so well made, and so lovely as Don Sebastian; but how prone soever he was for Love, his domineering Passion was Glory: He impatient∣ly suffered the prudent Zeal of Cardinal Henry, who opposed the boyling ardour with which he sought out dangers; he often stole from the vigilance of his Guards, and quitted the company of Ladies and tender Conversations, to go en∣counter the most Savage Beasts in the midst of the Forest. He passio∣nately loved Hunting, the more dangerous it was the more Charm∣ing it seemed to him. And as Queen Katherine and Cardinal Hen∣ry
did with all their power mol∣lifie the violence of that Exercise, and the ardour which he gave himself up to it, they got the Ladies of the Court to be often of the Parties, and endeavoured to make a Diversion of so rude and so dan∣gerous an amusement. He was one day at Queen Katherine's, and pro∣posed a Match to go hunt Lions the next day. The Queen, whom this Proposition had caused to tremble, and who knew very well that directly to oppose this Prin∣ces Designs, would but so much the more irritate his desires, cun∣ningly made use of the Power she saw Elvira had over the King, and told him gently; The only name of Lions has made Elvira tremble, my Son, and I believe if you hunt them to morrow, you will have but few Ladies in your train: I love hunting passionately, answer∣ed Elvira, having penetrated in∣to the Queens Design; but the
truth is, this Chace seems to me too terrible, and there are much gent∣ler, wherein I made the greatest de∣lights of my solitude consist. Well then, we will run a Stag to morrow, answered the King hastily, the La∣dies shall be of the party, and you will be there Madam, pursued he, look∣ing tenderly on Elvira? The Queen had a great deal of joy, she had made her Son change his design: Elvira was much pleased she had served the Queens inten∣tions, and she had received this mark of Complaisance from Don Sebastian. The Dutchess of Bra∣ganza, who was present at this Conversation, could not see, with∣out blushing for spight, this slight proof of the Kings tenderness for another than her self; and eve∣ry one retired some moments af∣ter to give Orders for all that was necessary for that Match.
The King sent one to tell the Duke d'Avero the next day, that as Elvira had not perhaps had time to prepare her Hunting Clotths, he prayed him to give her those he sent her; which was a Justicore covered with Spanish Point of Gold and Silver; the Flowers of which were raised to the life with Jewels of several Colours; a Riding Petticoate of the same Fashi∣on, and a Cap loaded with a num∣ber of long and very beautiful Blew Feathers: The Duke accep∣ted this Present for his Daughter with a great deal of respect, and went immediately to Elvira's Ap∣partment, where having found her still in Bed, he told her, after ha∣ving caused all her Women to re∣tire: My Daughter, I bring you a Hunting Habit, which the King has Commanded me to give you. This Present and Message deliver∣ed by a Father, could not but cause much trouble in her, who
received them. Elvira appeared at it amazed and confused, and not knowing how to answer the Duke, she told him with a trem∣bling voice: I am very much sur∣prized my Lord, at the Present the King makes me, and still more, that you your self would take the care to offer it me. It would however have more perplexed me, had it been pre∣sented me by any other, continued she, and as I have neither Rank nor Merit that can draw the Cares of this King—No my Daughter, interrupted the Duke, I know, Don Sebastian distinguishes you from all those that are at Court: You are young, he is sensible, and nothing sur∣prises me of all that I have seen from him in your favour; it might alarum a more severe Virtue than mine, but I think I know you, and I know the Court. All I desire of you at present, continued he, is, that you would without repugnance and dissimulation discover to me, all that
shall pass of most importance, in the Commerce Don Sbastian would en∣gage you in. You have no longer a Mother, my Daughter, pursued he, with an affectionate and mourn∣ing accent, perhaps being both of the same Sex, you would have been more bold and easie to have discovered to her what you thought upon this Subject, and her Prudence would without doubt have aided you, to conduct your self in an Affair of this importance. You have given tears enough to her death, seeing she began to weep, you must at present reunite in me alone, all the confidence and tenderness you had both for her and me, and you must speak to me with the same frank∣ness, you would have done to her, to the end, my Counsels may supply the want of her, and we may take just mea∣sures in all that concerns you. My Lord, answered Elvira, penetrated with grief and confusion, I have for you, as much sincerity and respect as I ever had for my Mother, whom
I cannot too much lament: But I dare assure you, without being want∣ing in what I owe you, that as Don Sebastian has never acquainted me, he had an inclination for me, I have never yet consulted my self in what concerns him. I do not ask you what passes in your heart, (said the Duke) I could not prescribe you other Rules than those your Duty dictates to you; you know them all, and I am persuad∣ed you will ever follow them: My Honour, your Reputation, the Memory of your Mother, and your own Ad∣vantage have too much power over your Spirit, to let your self be sedu∣ced by a Passion that is contrary to them. I will only know from you, continued he, if you have not any aversion for the King, and if you find in your self ambition enough to desire to become one day Queen of Portugal. This design I know is something rash, and it would be even extravagance to let it appear in the Eyes of all the World, but the en∣deavouring
it cannot be dangerous; and provided you have but greatness of Soul enough to form the Project, and pursue it with Care and Caution, I do not despair of success. My Lord, answered Elvira, whom these last Words had animated with hopes, if I must speak to you with all the Confidence you desire of me, I confess to you, that the Courtship of a King so well formed, so young, and so gal∣lant as ours is, cannot displease a Person, who is not prepossessed, and that not being forestalled with any Sentiment to his disadvantage, the Crown of Portugal would seem full of Charms to me, if I saw the least likelyhood of pretending to it. Ah! my Daughter, reply'd the Duke with joy in embracing her, these are the sentiments I would have in∣spired you withal: Pursue this great Work with all the Conduct, and all the Perseverance you are capable of; but fill all your heart with that Noble Ambition, for fear some other
Passion should seize it, and not leave you all the freedom, that is necessary for this Project. He gave her se∣veral other Counsels for her Car∣riage: Elvira promised him to re∣gulate it always according to his wishes, after which the Duke went out of her Chamber, and left her to think at liberty of all she had been newly acquainted with, and of the Dresses that were necessa∣ry for her in the Hunting-Match, of which she might apparently re∣ceive all the Honours. The hour for Hunting being come, every one went to the Ren∣dezvouz: The most part of the Ladies were dressed like Amazons, and mounted upon very fine Horses: But Elvira appeared Beau∣tiful in her Dress, the King hard∣ly knew again the Habit he had sent her, so much lustre it had up∣on her; her Hair was ty'd back in great Buckles round her Cap; and this Dress gave her a lively
and penetrating Air, which she had not ordinarily. Don Sebastian said to her a thousand fine things upon her Beauty, and she Com∣plimented him upon his Present. All the Ladies had their Knights near them; and there was only Leonora, who ever avoided the Duke de Barcellos; and this Troop dividing it self into Couples with∣out being too particular, furnish∣ed the Lovers with favourable Oc∣casions of speaking to them of their Passion. Elvira, Riding better than any of her Sex, out∣went them all, and was almost ever up with the Dogs; the King, being Charmed with her Grace and her Address, ever accompani∣ed her, and being come with her far enough from the rest, to a Pond, which the Stag they Hunt∣ed leapt into. Your Presence has brought this Stag to the last gasp, Madam, said he to her, there is no Liberty but what yields to you; I
have not been able to defend mine a gainst you, pursued he tenderly, and I shall not regret it, if I can but hope to please you. How bold soever Don Sebastian naturally was, he could not pronounce these words with his usual resolution, he felt that instant such fear as a whole Army would not have been capable of giving him; and Elvira, who had expected such a kind of Declaration, did not fail to affect the surprize and bashful∣ness, that such an avowal might cause in a Person less witty and less prepared than her self. Your Highness (for thus are the Kings of that Nation stiled) said she to  then blushing, will never lose  Liberty, without costing the Parties repose, who shall  it from him—But Sir, said she stop∣ping her self, wholly confused I was a going to, answer seriously  a thing you only told me in raillery▪ and my innocence
your Discourses have almost made me forget that you are a great Monarch, and I am your Subject. No, Ma∣dam, answered Don Sebastian, with all the transport the heat of his Temper and Passion was capable of, I love you, I adore you, my Eyes have told it you; my Sighs have assu∣red it you; my assiduities shall confirm it: I know not whether I am King or Subject when with you; and you alone can render me happy. Wherefore tell me in the Name of Heaven, pursu'd he, what I ought to hope or fear, and do not make me languish in un∣certainty. Elvira doubtful and con∣fused, had, during this Discourse, her Eyes upon the ground, her Carriage uncertain, and her Coun∣tenance languishing; and as she was sometime without answering, the King prepared himself to tell her still something more pressing, when the Dutchess of Braganza ta∣king notice of this Conversation, spitefully run to them, and could
not forbear interrupting them, notwithstanding all the measures she had resolved to keep in regard of those Lovers: Elvira ran mali∣ciously to her; but however made Don Sebastian see in her Eyes, in quitting him, a languishing sweet∣ness, that, without explaining too much, gave him great hopes. After the Troop was come to the death of the Stag, they return'd to Lisbon, where Cardinal Henry came to shew the king Letters that he had newly received from Spain in the Packet of Souza, by which Phi∣lip let him know, that Millei Mo∣luc, Brother of the lately deceased King of Morocco, was come into Spain to demand Succours of him, which he had not thought fit to grant him; neither did he think, that Don Sebastian ought to grant it him, because the Pretentions of Moluc were too opposite to the Laws of the Europeans, and it would be but to perplex themselves in a War,
that could not be advantageous on their side, Moluc having neither Troops nor Money to Execute so great an Enterprise. But the King, impatiently longing to signalize himself, and having his Mind only filled with Wars and Conquests, told the Cardinal his Uncle, That the Succours he should give to Moluc, might be advantageous to the Crown of Portugal; that the Moors would destroy themselves in that War; that in Succouring that Prince, they might weaken the strongest without strength∣ening the weakest: And at leng than those Quarrels, he should not fail to gain some Cities or Places, which they might joyn to those that Portu∣gal already had in Africa. The Cardinal, who saw with delight the Warlike Ardour of this young King, but could have wish'd to have something moderated its ex∣cess, answered him: Before you de∣termide your self for this War, Sir, it is convenient you be perfectly well
acquainted with the Subject of the Quarrel betwixt those two Kings: And for the Explaining to you their different Pretentions, I must be a little more particular in their Histo∣ry, and tell you things that no occa∣sion has yet been offered to discover to you. The Kingdoms of Fez, Morocco, and Turedant, (pursued he, seeing the King gave Ear attentively to him) have ever been governed by two different Kings, till Mulei Mahu∣met-Cherif possessing, together with his Brother Mulei Hamet, those di∣vided Kingdoms, endeavoured to re∣unite them under his Power: These two Kings then made a Law, by which they ordered, that Brother should succeed Brother, and should thus Reign after one another, to the exclusion of the deceased Kings Chil∣dren. Some time after, one of Ma∣humets Sons called Abdala, seeing this Law opposed his Ambition, cau∣sed several of his Brothers and Ne∣phews
to be killed and strangled, under divers pretexts of interest of State; at last he succeeded his Fa∣ther, and had the most happy and peaceable Reign that the Cherifs had ever enjoy'd. Though Abdala had Policy and Cruelty enough, to commit all the Crimes that should seem advantage∣ous to him, he did not cause all his Brothers Throats to be cut at his coming to the Throne; he let three of those unfortunate persons live, who by reason they were very young, did not ap∣pear to him formidable enough for him to take care to dispatch them. These weak Children feared his Fury, as soon as they were capable of reason. Two of them took Refuge with the Grand Seignior, to avoid the death that threatned them; and the third fled to the Arabians, where he died some years after. Abdala having Reigned peaceably the space of seven∣teen years, and finding himself decay∣ing, delivered his Kingdom into the
Hands of his Eldest Son, called Ma∣humet, and caused him to be Pro∣claimed King through all his Terri∣tories, notwithstanding the Law of the Cherifs, which was contrary to that Election. Abdala died in a lit∣tle time after, and left a Daughter very young, called Almeida, whom he caused to be brought up in Spain, and whose blooming Beauty began to make great noise in that Court, when she departed from it to retire to her Brother Mahumet: But as this new King feared at his coming to the Crown, that those two Ʋncles, who had took Refuge in Turky, for the avoiding his Fathers fury, would come, grounded upon the Laws of their Ancestors, and dispute the Kingdom with him: He sent a Moor to Tremisena, to Assassinate the eldest, who was retired thither. It is but two years since this Assassi∣nation was committed, with all the Rage and Success, that Mahumet had wished, and only one that re∣mains
at present of those three Crea∣tures, is this Mulei Moluc, whom the King of Spain makes mention of to us in these Letters: He has given marks of a great Valour amongst the Ottomans, where he had taken Re∣fuge. He has Signalized himself a∣gainst the League which the Christi∣ans lately made, to fight the Turks: He has done a thousand Actions worthy of an Eternal Memory, in the late engagement of those two Fleets, and when Charles the V. took Go∣lette, he was almost the only one, who resisted him with vigour; but judg∣ing himself too near Mahumet in that Country, where he had not any Troops, and fearing such a treache∣ry, as that which had deprived his last Brother of his life, he left Al∣giers, where he then resided, to come into Spain, and implore the Succours of Philip, imagining, though a Wan∣derer and a Vagabond, without Forces, and without Money, he could by his Vallour alone recover the Kingdomes,
belonging to him by their Laws, and Conquer Mahumet his Nephew, who is settled upon the Throne, beloved by his Subjects, fortified in his Cities, and maintained by a powerful Army. Thus, pursued Cardinal Henry, your Highness sees clearly, how King Phi∣lip had reason to refuse Succour to Moluc, and how to second his De∣sign's would be to maintain a Law, contrary to ours, and to declare a∣gainst him, who is Naturally Heir of the Crown. These and such o∣ther like reasons dissuaded Don Se∣bostion from aiding Moluc: He judged after some Reflexion, that this African would not come to demand Succours in Portugal, af∣ter having been refused by the King of Spain, being acquainted with the strict Engagements of those two Kings. These Politick Consi∣derations did not so take up the Kings Mind, but that he bestow∣ed some thoughts upon his Love. If the Declaration he had made of
it, gave some ease to the violence of his Passion, the vexation of not having been able to get from Elvira any favourable Answer, made him pass very troublesome Moments: He sometimes Figured to himself, that he could never be beloved by her: The Langui∣shing and the Tenderness which Elvira made appear to him in her Eyes when she left him, could not reassure him against this fear; but he was not long in his Suspicions, and he had all manner of reason to believe in the Conversations he had afterwards with Elvira, that she had no aversion for him. She even assured him in several Ren∣counters that she could suffer that Passion with joy, provided it might sute with her Duty, and told him all these things with all the sweetness and complaisance, that though she cunningly refer∣red her self to her Father, as to all the sentiments of her heart, the
King conceived hopes that he should be beloved, and even some∣times flattered himself with having some part in her tenderness, their Commerce became at length so great and so manifest, that the Dutchess of Braganza, seeing she could not break it, feigned to se∣cond it, and fancied, that introdu∣cing her self to those two Lovers, by the Title of a Confident, she might on some occasions of falling out, or inconstancy, recover her favour with the King, rather than by the Jealousie she might make appear. She quitted the Design she had taken of Engaging her Son in an Intreague with Elvira, rightly judging, that in the po∣sture things were, this enterprise would be more disadvantageous than profitable to her Projects. And the young Duke having never had any inclination but for Leono∣ra, and seeing himself treated with more rigour than usnally, without
having yet penetrated into the Cause of it, endeavoured to clear this point with her. He saw her all alone; Vexation did in her, what all his Tenderness had not been able yet to do, and Jealousie made known to the Duke the love she had for him. He first com∣plained of her, and then comfor∣ted her with a great deal of affecti∣on for all that unlucky juncture had made her suffer, and gave her a thousand assurances of fidelity a∣gainst her suspicions. All these Lovers enjoy'd, with Tranquility enough, during some time, the pleasures of their inclina∣tions. But how accomplished soe∣ver Don Sebastian was, he was not born to be happy, and the most ci∣vil Man of the Court was the in∣nocent cause of these first misfor∣tunes. The Count de Souza having worthily acquitted himself of his Embassy, abandoned the Court of Spain, loaded with Glory and
Presents. The News of his spee∣dy return was immediately spread about Lisbon. As he had a great deal of Merit, and a great many Friends, he was only heard spoken of in all Companies; and the Con∣versations were almost all compo∣sed of his Praises. Elvira heard his fine Qualities cry'd up in seve∣ral Places: She had never seen him, and conceived a great desire to know him. Don Lewis had a very fine Country House, two Leagues from Lisbon, and near un∣to a Lordship that belonged to Souza, whither he often carried Violanta and her Friends. Elvira was one of her most intimate ac∣quaintance: and Don Lewis Trea∣ting them there one day, after the Ball was begun, four Persons were seen to enter disguised like Slaves, who drew the Eyes of all the As∣sembly, by the Magnificence of their habit. But one among 'em charmed all People by his Air and
his manners; they took him at first for Don Henry, because Euge∣nia having never had any great kindness for Violanta, they were not of that Assembly, and could only come in Masquerade; but they afterwards observ'd, that Don Henry was much fatter, and of a less advantageous shape than this Slave. He at first placed himself at Elvira's Feet, and told her with the best Grace imaginable, that he came from the farthest part of A∣frica, to have the honour of wea∣ring her Chains: She answered him very Obligingly. And by the discourse she had with him, she easily observed, that this Slave had as much Wit as he had a good Meen. Violanta took him out to dance, and he acquitted himself in the most seemly and pleasing way that can be fancied. He took out Elvira, who danced better with him than she had done before. None knew him, and they all im∣patiently
longed to see his Masque off. At length Elvira so earnest∣ly begged it of him, that he was constrained to retire apart, and shew her his Face. She was much surpriz'd, she did not know him, but much more at his Lustre. Ah! since I do not know you, said she to him, (being somewhat recovered out of her astonishment) and you are so well formed, you must be the Count de Souza? I beg you would not name me, Madam, said he to her; I am unwilling to be known; I had a desire to pass this night at my Country-House, and have not been yet at Court. Elvira promised she would not discover him, and kept her Word. As no body knew, that the Count de Souza was Arri∣ved at his House, none of them suspected any thing of the truth. He made his Court to her during the Ball, as to the Mistress of his King; whose favour he ought to manage. She hearkned to him
with a delight that caused an e∣motion in her, and found a secret Charm in his Words and Actions. The Ball being ended, Elvira re∣turned to Lisbon with a numerous Train of Coaches, and Souza came several times into her mind in the Night, under the most agreeable Idea that can ever be formed of an accomplish'd Man. He appeared the next day at Court, and went to give an ac∣count of his Commission to the King, who was with Elvira. She could not forbear blushing at the sight of him; she found him yet more charming than he had appea∣red to her; but she so well knew how to conceal her Blushes and E∣motions, that no body perceived 'em. They discoursed of the Court of Spain; the Count de Souza, of whom they asked the News of it, said, that Don John, Natural Son to Charles the V. was lately Arri∣ved there, and appeared in great
Splendour; that he was a Prince equally understanding in War and in Policy; that he had shewn him a great deal of kindness, and had a particular Esteem of his Merit: That King Philip, who had been three times a Widdower, was go∣ing to Marry Ann of Austria his Niece, and Sister of Maximilian II. and that Katherine Michela, Daugh∣ter to Philip and the late Decea∣sed Queen, was one of the most Beautiful Persons of Europe. He was going to tell several other particu∣lars more of that Court; but Don Henry, entring in that moment, caused him so much trouble, that he could not continue his Di∣scourse: He received his kindnesses with the greatest Civility, having resolved to avoid as much as he could the meeting with his Mi∣stress and his Rival; and being a∣fraid, that Eugenia would sudden∣ly come to see Elvira, he took leave of the King, and retired to
his House, where he employ'd all the Efforts of his Reason to stifle a Passion, that he perceived was rea∣dy to revive, notwithstanding all the Cares he had taken to extin∣guish it. In the mean while Elvira no longer gave her thoughts up to Greatness, and was not so much dazled with the Crown of Don Se∣bastian, but that she considered of the merit of the Count de Souza with much admiration. Her Heart en∣gaged it self by degrees in seeing him; and Love evermore usurping somewhat upon Ambition; she begun to have more desire to please the Count, than care to engage the King. She saw Souza every day, and always discovered in him some new Quality, capable of plea∣sing: She found that he did the most indifferent thing, with a most particular Charm. Not any Man about the Court appeared to her so well Made, so Active, or so
Witty as he; the greatest Diver∣tisements tired her, when he was not there; and the inclination she was sensible of at first for him, in a short time, augmented after such a manner, that it became at length a most violent Passion. It is true, that the Assiduities and Complaisan∣ces, which this Count rendred her, contributed very much to the Violence of her Love. As he no longer made Visits to Eugenia, and had resolved to apply himself en∣tirely to the cares of his Fortune, Elvira had with joy observed, that she was the Person of all the Court, whom he oftenest Visited; she took for amorous Addresses, the Devoirs he rendred her as the Mi∣stress of his King, and so ardently desired to be beloved by him, that she easily imagined he had a love for her. There appeared so much affectati∣on in the Complaisances she had for Don Sebastian, and she answe∣red
his tender respects with so great a Constraint, that the King quickly perceived he was not beloved; and as he loved with all the fervency that a first Passion can be capable of, these coldnesses did very sensi∣bly aggrieve him. Sometimes he openly complained; and walking one day with her, and those that were the Companions of his Plea∣sures, in the Gardens of Don Lewis: After having proposed to her se∣veral sorts of Divertisements, none of which she would accept of, he reproached her for the indifference she seemed to be in to Pleasures. She defended her self, and told him, there were a thousand Recreations capable of diverting her: They are those then that I have no part in, said the King to her, and I do not believe, that of a long time any of those has pleased you, which I have proposed? Elvira could not hold from blushing at these Words, and Violanta, who loved her tenderly,
perceiving her disorder, and the King's vexation, told him, for to make up the business: Ah! Sir, it is impossible to be more gay than El∣vira was at the Ball, you gave two days ago: (And in truth she was in a very good humour in that As∣sembly; because the King had Commanded Souza to do the Ho∣nours of it) I must confess, said Leo∣nora, that Elvira found the Ball ve∣ry Charming: I remember that at a Regal, which Don Lewis gave to the Ladies, sometime since, she ap∣peared the merriest of the Company; I remember too, said Don Lewis, and I believe the four Moors, who came to be her Slaves, had put her into that humour. These last Words put Elvira so out of Countenance, that she would never have been able to have concealed her trouble, if she had not luckily made a stum∣ble, which gave a pretext to this disorder. The King after having lent her his Hand to hold her up,
enquired very earnestly who those Moors were; the Count de Souza Arrived when the King asked this Question. He himself was struck dumb, and the sight of him redou∣bled Elvira's disorder, they were both of them in an equal pain; though they had different Senti∣ments; and this trouble would without doubt have discovered El∣vira's secret Passion, if Cardinal Henry, whom Don Sebastian still considered as his Tutour, had not arrived at that instant, and broke off that Conversation by his pre∣sence. The King going to Supper presently after, the Ladies retired; and as Souza had perceived he was the cause of Elvira's trouble, he very prudently avoided any parti∣cular Conversation with her, and pretended he was obliged to be at the Kings Supper, that he might be dispensed from leading Elvira as he was used to do. But what Address and Care soever he employ'd to
avoid the assurance of a thing, which his Zeal and Modesty ever refused, it was impossible for him to be long in suspence of what he feared. Elvira loved him with too much Passion, to be able to con∣strain her self: When she ever talked with him, she was strangely disordered; she was even some∣times so bold, as to let him know how much the Kings Cares and Complaisances fatigued her, and what a torture it was to her, that she could not follow her inclinati∣ons with an entire Liberty; she began several times to talk to him of the disorder the Moors Conver∣sation put her in; the Count came always off from these perplexities with a great deal of Prudence and Civility; but at length Elvira fan. cying to her self, that he had some affection for her and that respect hindred him from telling it, she be∣lieved it was her part to encourage him. She resolved one day in
the violence of her Passion, to de∣clare to him openly, what she was sensible of; but the occasion could not easily be found, because the Count carefully avoided her, and saw her but at the Kings, whither he could not dispense himself from going. A light indisposition had detai∣ned this Prince in Bed that day, El∣vira was to see him, the Dorekeep∣ers told her, he was asleep; where∣upon she stepped into the Anticham∣ber, and perceived near the Win∣dow Count Souza, in all likely hood expecting Don Sebastian's waking, and seemed to be profoundly pen∣sive: She approached him trem∣bling, and as they were far enough off from those, who were present, as not to be understood: May I ask you, what you think of at present, Count, said she to him all amazed? Souza being surpriz'd at her pre∣sence, would have retired after some Civilities: No, no, stay, said
she to him, stopping him, I will Discourse you about something con∣cerns you; I participate too much in all that touches you, to leave you in the trouble I have seen you in for some time: Do you love, are you ambiti∣ous? continued she, my Credit may equally serve you in those two things, and I offer it you all entire, if you will tell me, what it is that makes you sad. The Count de Souza was much out of Countenance to hear this Discourse, and told her, after having thanked her for her Civili∣ties, that he had no other ambiti∣on, than that of maintaining him∣self at Court, in the rank his Birth had placed him: You are then in Love, reply'd she immediately, with an extream disorder. I assure you, Madam, interrupted Souza gently, I Love only my King. A little af∣fection is not incompatible with a great deal of Zeal, reply'd Elvira tenderly. A Heart all entire is not too much for so great a Prince, an∣swered
he firmly, we owe him all our thoughts; and I make it my busi∣ness, and am proud of Consecrating to him even the very least of my Acti∣ons. This Discourse so discouraged Elvira, and put her so out of Coun∣tenance, that she could no longer bear the looks of Souza, nor reply∣ed any thing to him, and she knew not whether she had best quit him, or stay with him, when the Door∣keepers came and told her, that the King was awake, and that they might see him: They went both into his Chamber, the Court grew full in a little time, and Souza reti∣red presently after, more troubled at what he had newly heard, than he had been in all his life time. The Duke d'Avero observing all his Daughters Actions, and seeing the sequel did not answer the happy beginning, suspected, that some stronger Passion triumphed over El∣vira's Ambition. She had talked to him so often, and with so much
admiration of Souza, and this Count appeared to him so proper to in∣spire love, that he Examined them both with Care; he saw, El∣vira blusht, and was ever troubled at the sight of him. He no longer doubted, but he was the cause of this change, and resolved to reme∣dy it without seeming to be the least concerned. The Count de Souza was of a Rank, Merit, and Con∣duct, not to be easily ruined at Court: Wherefore the Duke em∣ploy'd his Cares and his Credit to remove him after another manner. An Ambassadour was to be sent to Pope Pius the V, who was newly raised to the Pontificate by the Cares and Solicitations of the Great Boromeus, and Cardinal Farnese. The Duke d'Avero took such a course, as that the King cast his Eyes upon the Count de Souza for that Embassy: But so soon as Elvi∣ra had learnt this News, the dis∣pleasure of ceasing to see what she
could not forbear loving, made such an impression upon her Mind, that she went with all haste to the King, pretending to be ignorant of what he had resolved, to pray him with earnestness to give that Com∣mission to Don Alvaro Castro, whom all the Court knew to be one of her Creatures; and the King having told her, he had granted that Em∣ploy to the Count d'Souza at the Duke de Avero's desire, the fear she was in that her Father had disco∣vered her Passion, and for that rea∣son was desirous to remove him from Court, made her so dumb and out of Countenance, that she almost suffered all which passed in her Heart to be read in her Eyes; but after being come somewhat to her self again, she spoke with so tender and pressing an Air to Don Sebastian, that not being able to re∣fuse her any thing, he told the Count de Souza in the Evening, who came to thank him, that his Coun∣cil
had judged it more convenient to give that Commission to Don Alvaro Castro, who had already one of the same Nature, and was perfectly well instructed in the se∣veral Interests of the Court of Rome. This Change surprized all the Court: They sought for the reason of it, and it was found, that Elvira's Credit was the cause. Her Father did not doubt of her Passion: He make her a thousand reproaches, which did no good at all. Alvaro Castro departed, after having thank∣ed her for a favour, he was not in∣debted to her goodness for; and the Count de Souza knew with an ex∣tream grief, that 'twas as great a misfortune to him to be beloved by the person he did not love, as to be hated by her he loved. The King daily perceiving more and more indifference in Elvira, was so mortally grieved at it, that it rendred him the most unhappy of all Men, though he seemed the
most happy. And that which still augmented his trouble was, that at that time arose one called Peter Bertrand, the Eldest Son of the Il∣lustrious Montluc, not being willing to steep his Hands in the Blood of Frenchmen, not to be on either side in the Civil Wars and Heresies that so Plagued all France; fitted out a little Fleet, and Manned it with about Twelve hundred Men, or thereabouts: His youngest Son, and another younger Brother of the Family of Pompadour accompa∣nied him in this Voyage, and be∣ing come upon the Coasts of Made∣ra, they would have Landed to have taken in fresh Water; but the Portugals, who were Masters of that Island, Fired their Canon upon them, and Sallied out against Ber∣trand. He immedietely set Eight hundred of his Men on Shore, Cut the Portugals to pieces, Sack'd the City that bears the Name of the Island, and died a little after, of a
wound he received in that Fight. Don Sebastian could not hear this News without a great deal of vex∣ation, he caused satisfaction to be de∣manded of Charles the IX, and ac∣cused Bertrand and his Companions of being Pyrates and Infractours of the Treaties. France having then Intestine Enemies enough, without needing to draw upon it others, was willing to Sacrifice to the King of Portugal's anger, all those who had followed Bertrand in that Voyage; but the reputation of Montluc, and the Power of the Admiral, who ever maintained the Glory of the French Nation, fenced off this blow by his Subtilty. The Count de San∣zay was sent to Don Sebastian to justifie the French-men, and Queen Margarite, who was ever contri∣ving Great Designs, took that occa∣sion to attempt a Match between Don Sebastian, and the Sister of Charles the IX, to the intent this Al∣liance might the more closely unite
France and Portugal, and might augment the Rights, that the French pretend to have upon that Crown. The Count de Sanzay departed with secret Instructions for that Marri∣age. He justified Bertrand and his Companions; and knowing that pleasures are often very good means to succeed in Affairs, he was at all the Divertisements of the Court, to the intent he might the more easily bring to pass his secret Negotiation. He was young and well made, which was sufficient to get into the favour of the Portugal Ladies. His Discourses and his Manners had a certain agreeableness, that had the Art of Charming even in the best of things; that free and easie Air that makes Gentleman be distin∣guished from others, was more Natural to him than to any Man besides; he was of that sort of gal∣lant humour, which ever engages it self in Love, but is ever for all manner of Divertisements: But
his Wit was yet more Solid than Gallant, and he oftentimes made those Trifles be useful to the great∣est Affairs. Leonora seem'd to him worthy of his Cares, and fit for some little Engagements; she had an Air of Sweetness and Sinceri∣ty, which made one not afraid of those Artifices in her, which her Sex commonly makes use of: The Count de Sanzay, entertained her with a thousand Gallantries. He gave her Treats and Diversions nearly contrived; he spoke to her of Love upon all occasions, but he spoke after such a manner, that one could not take seriously enough so as to be displeased, and however appeared so sincere, that Credit might be given to it, designing to give high Ideas of the Court of France for the facilitating the Mar∣riage which he negotiated: All that he did for Leonora was so mag∣nificent, that the Duke of Barcel∣los's affection was alarm'd, and
he was sometimes very uneasie. He immediately found that El∣vira had great Power over the King; he endeavoured to make her his Friend, and though he judged, that the Ambition of the Duke d'Avero, and the tender Commerce of his Daughter, with Don Sebasti∣an, would bring great Obstacles to his Negotiation, he persuaded himself that they would soon pene∣trate into his Designs, and that be∣fore they could know them, he might have perhaps brought them to pass. He fancied he might draw great light from her for the carry∣ing on his Projects: He forgot none of all those little Cares, that might procure him some part in her Friendship. She could not re∣fuse it him; she took delight in seeing him, she spoke to him with Confidence, she often enquired of him News of his Amour; he did not excuse himself from telling her, hoping that the Confidence he put
in her, would obtain the like, and others from her, that might be use∣ful to his enterprize; but persons for Wit are too reserv'd in that mat∣ter; she would sooner have ac∣quainted him with the most secret Affairs of State, than the least mo∣tion of her Heart, and all that the Counts penetration could discover in that Intreague, was, that Elvi∣ra had no great inclination for the King, but that he had a violent Passion for her. He spoke imme∣diately of this Marriage unto Queen Katharine, because he saw her well intentioned enough for France, she assured him, she would endeavour it with all her Power: But as she no longer concerned her self hardly at all with Affairs of State, she was no great help to him. He likewise managed Car∣dinal Henry with great Care: He perceived, that this Prelate did not approve of the Passion which Don Sebastian had for Elvira, and that
it was not his meaning to Contract a New Alliance with the Spaniards. He spoke to him very slightly of that which Portugal might make with France: But whether this Cardinal was not willing to procure Heirs to the Crown, that devolved upon him after Don Sebastian's Death, or not any of those Matches did please him, he found difficulties every where, and the Count de Sanzay did not think fit to Discourse him any more about it. He turned all his Designs upon the King: He praised upon all oc∣casions, the Wit and Beauty of the Ladies of France; he shewed him all the advantages he might have by making an Alliance with that Crown. He likewise cunningly let him see the Picture of the Prin∣cess Marguerite, and often descri∣bed her to him in all the extent of her Charms: But of what effect are all endeavours against a prepos∣sest Heart, it was in vain he laid
in view all the reasons of Policy, and Charms of Beauty; Don Seba∣stian had only Eyes for Elvira, though she rendred him the most unhappy of all Men. The Dutchess of Braganza, whose Jealousie did continually make some discovery of her Rivals incli∣nations, and being also one of Sanzay's Friends, was the first who made him observe, that Elvira had a kindness for Souza. This Dut∣chess fearing, that all she could say to the King upon this Subject would be suspected, cunningly set on Foot a report amidst the Secret News of the Court, that Elvira had a greater Passion for another than for the King. But as Souza saw Elvira less than any other, the King did not suspect he had any part in that Intrigue, and was not able to discover his Rival. Chance at length acquainted him with what not any one about Court durst have told him, and what
was suspected but by very few Peo∣ple. Elvira was coming one day to the Queen's, as the Count de Sou∣za was going out; and as he always endeavoured to avoid meeting her, bowing, he would have passed by hastily; but she stopped him, and said to him: Methinks Count, you take a great deal of Care to shun me, and I should have been glad, you would have told me, what reason you have to do so. The Count, per∣plexed at this Discourse, answered her with a great deal of respect: Since I have merited your hatred, and you have judged me unworthy of serving my King, in the Commission he had given me, I ought to hide my self from all the World. Is that hating you, Count, replyed she ten∣derly, not to be willing you should go from us? The King came at these Words, and they were all three so discomposed, that it was impossible for any one of them to speak so much as one Word: Don Sebastian
entred the Queens Appartment, where his disquiet did not permit him to stay long. Elvira did not make her Visit. The Count reti∣red to his House. And the King, who had only heard the last Words of that Conversation, impatient to Explain himself with Elvira, and all on a Fire to make her a thou∣sand Reproaches, went to her House in such a rage as threatned the ruin of Souza. But the King's anger could not last against the feeble Reasons of Elvira; she per∣suaded him, that in the coldest in∣difference, she could do no less than answer the Count to appease his trouble; and she gave so inno∣cent a Colour to that Conversati∣on, that the King went from her with very little suspicion, and a woundrous deal of Love. The Kings Choller being appea∣sed, all the Lovers of that Court enjoy'd for some time a very de∣icious Peace. Elvira took care
not to give any Jealousie to the King: Souza comported himself so prudently, that no suspicions could be conceived of his Behaviour. The Dutchess of Braganza seeing all her endeavours were in vain, renounced her Design, and retired to the Duke her Husband. The Duke de Barcellos being cleared of all Jealousies by Leonora, was sure of her Affection, and no longer a∣larm'd at the Addresses of the Count de Sanzay, who did not apply him∣self very passionately to that Con∣quest. Don Lewis and Violanta en∣joy'd the sweetest pleasures of Love. Don Henry was full of joy to know he was beloved of Euge∣nia: And Souza's Reason was be∣come so much Master of his Love, that his presence gave not trouble at all to their Pleasures, and there was only the Duke d' Avero, who was still in disquiet and suspici∣ons.
As he had to no purpose endea∣voured to remove Souza from Court, and his presence perpetually allarming him, he fancied, that the Count being Married, he should be exempt from all those fears, and should deprive his Daughter of the hopes that entertained her love. He cast his Eyes upon Eugenia for that Design. Some light suspicions that Don Sebastian made appear one day of Souza, gave an oppor∣tunity to the Duke, of proposing this Match to the King, which he did not fail to Colour with sevenal Reasons of State. This Proposition was well received by the King, he undertook it with a great deal of heat, and told Souza the next day, that some important reasons had made him think of Marrying him to Eugenia; that he took up∣on himself, the care of making her Consent to that Match, and that he should prepare himself for it. A Thunderbolt could not have
astonished Souza more than this Di∣scourse did: He made no other answer by a low Bow, and a prompt Retreat. The Count de San∣zay being then at the King's, and having heard the Order Souza had newly received, made use of that occasion for the fully clearing his suspicions. He went to Elvira's, and told her this News with so much art, that she was not able to conceal either her trouble, or her weakness. The Count of Sanzay took advantage of her disorder, and pitied her with a great deal of kindness. Compassion is the surest way to insinuate ones self into the favour of the unhappy; he pressed her with so much address, and so obligingly offered her his Service, for the preventing this Match, that she Ingenuously Confessed to him the Affection she had for Sou∣za; he murmered against the Am∣bition of the Duke d'Avero; he ex∣tolled the Constancy of Elvira;
and in fine, when he took his leave, he promised her to use his endea∣vours to deliver her out of this perplexity. When Souza was returned to his House, he felt a thousand different motions of Grief and Joy: He at first suffered himself to be lured with the hopes of possessing Euge∣nia, which was the greatest of all happinesses to him; but making reflexion, that if he obtained her, it would be against her Will, he found something so culpable and so base in those hopes, as he laid them by immediately. He search'd into the cause of that Proposition; he saw, that to Marry Eugenia would be to make himself her Tyrant; he foresaw, that the disobeying Don Sebastian, would make all the Court believe he had some Engage∣ment with Elvira, and it would be to expose himself to all the fury and hatred, that a Jealous and Of∣fended King can be capable of.
But in short, the Count being ever a Compleat Wellbred-Man, chose rather to be Unhappy than Crimi∣nal, and resolved to lose rather the favour of his Prince, than to Ty∣rannize over his Mistriss; he would however speak to her be∣fore all things. He went to her House the next day, where having found her alone, he asked her a moments Audience, without being interrupted, and told her with the most Submissive and Passionate Air Imaginable, I come to declare to you a secret, which I conceal from all the World: For above four years I have lov'd you, Madam, with the purest and most violent Pas∣sion that ever was, I have in vain endeavoured to stifle this Flame; I went away from Lisbon; I depriv'd my self of seeing you; I used a thou∣sand Efforts every day; and all that I have been hitherto able to gain up∣on my self, was, not to let any thing escape from this Passion that might
displease you: No Madam, continu∣ed he respectfully, I could not yet have made a Confession of it to you if I were not constrained by the most pres∣sing necessity that can be imagined. My Lord, reply'd Eugenia, very much surpriz'd at a Discourse whose end she did not foresee, if my Heart was not engag'd—I know it, Interrupted Souza, Don Henry loves you, and you love him; by my sighs I never troubled a Commerce, that did not displease you; I have ever re∣spected your choice; I would die a thousand times rather than Traverse the Joys of your Ʋnion. However, Madam, however, for reasons, I can∣not tell you, the King would constrain you to Marry me. Ah Count! an∣swered Eugenia all disordered, I cannot persuade my self, that the King would use violence upon any one. I do not believe, Madam, reply'd Sou∣za, penetrated with grief, that you suspect me capable of any Artifice, and what I am ready to do for you,
well merits, that you had other senti∣ments: 'Tis the Kings Will, that we Marry one another: These Words set you a shivering, as they do me a trembling; not but that it would be the greatest happiness of my life, for I adore you. My Lord, interrupted Eugenia impatiently, these repetiti∣ons are useless, and I will believe all you would have me. Ah! Madam, reply'd Souza passionately, let me have at least the pleasure of telling you this time; I suffer so much, that I fancy it might very well be permit∣ted me, and 'tis the only satisfaction I shall have in the misfortunes that are ready to oppress me. I vow to you, Madam, the Passion I have for you has not exacted the Order which the King has given me, more Power∣ful Motives have obliged him to re∣solve of this Marriage, and our diso∣bedience will draw upon us all his anger. And of what importance can this match be to the King, answered Eugenia? who begun to suspect him
guilty of Artifice, No, Cruel Man, continued she in a Fassion, 'tis you, who misuse the Royal Authority, for the dividing two Hearts whom you thought took pleasure in being united. How have I been deceived in the esteem I have had for you? How are you changed? All your Friendship is only Artifice; you have seduced the King, and would seduce me: But this is not the securest course for you, and by these means, you will draw upon your self all my hatred. Eugenia spoke these Words with a great deal of Grief, and Anger, and accopam∣ed them with some Tears: What a Spectacle, and what a Discourse was this to poor Souza? He was ready to renounce what he loved, to disobey the King, to be accused of a Criminal Infidelity in regard of his Prince, to lose his Reputati∣on, his Fortune, and perhaps his Life, and all this in favour of a Rival and a Mistriss, who accused him of Imposture and Cruelty. He
was so lively pierc'd with her re∣proaches and tears, that he could not forbear shedding some himself. And after having eyed Eugenia some time, without being able to answer her. No, no, said he to her, do not fear any thing from the King, nor my Artifices, Madam, I deserved a kinder Treatment, but you are re∣solved to compleat my misfortune, and deprive me of the pleasure of being pittied by you, which was the only one I durst aspire to. I do not pre∣tend to force you from Don Henry; I never had even the least hopes you would change your sentiments in fa∣vour of me, and I would only have been a little more certain of my mis∣fortune. Yes, Madam, continued he, with an extream Grief, I love you too much to make you unhappy: Our Marriage could not make you happy, wherefore I must Renounce it; and though this refusal perhaps will cost me my life, I would rather run to death, than lose your esteem, and
sooner endeavonr your Happiness than my own Fortune: I do not desire you should come before the King, and joyn your disobedience to mine; I should be but a little better justified, and I shall expose my self alone to his Choller, as soon as you shall have have made me a litle more certain of your aversion. My Lord, an∣swered Eugenia, in Confusion at what she had said, and what she had newly heard, so far from hating you, I have ever had a perfect friend∣ship for you, I esteemed your Merit as soon as I knew you, but I was not acquainted with your Love before I was engaged, and I did not believe the Kings Orders would be so fatal to us. Alas! they are only so to me, answe∣red Souza, you will injoy in Peace what you love, and I am deprived of what I adore, and opprest with the hatred of my King, I shall wait for death with impatience. Ah Count, said she to him in suspence, I would not have my happiness cost you so
Dear, and if your Life be concerned, I will do all I can to save you. 'Tis enough, Madam, said the Count to her, falling at her Feet, I am content, and I am going to think how to satisfie you: No, my Lord, said Eugenia stopping him, it is not just you should make me hap∣py by your unhappiness; Duty and Friendship conspire against my Passi∣on; I must obey, I must follow your Example; I have not so much force, and so much firmness as you. But what Torments soever it may cost me, you may tell the King, that if your Life be concerned, I am ready to do all that is necessary to save you. She could not speak these Words with∣out an extream constraint and grief: The horrour she figured to her self in losing Don Henry, put her into a Condition to have raised pity: And Souza, who saw all sort of grief painted in her Face, told her in reassuring her, Madam, it is for me to conquer my self, my
love has ever been concealed in silence, and this season is very improper to make it appear. You love Don Hen∣ry, he loves you; you have both con∣ceived great hopes to enjoy your hap∣piness; you never loved me; I ne∣ver had any hopes you would; let me die, I shall be content provided the King believes me innocent, and you allow some Tears to my Misfortunes. The Count went our having spo∣ken these Words, and did not wait for Eugenia's answer, who was in the Cruellst perplexity that ever was, admiring Sanza's Gnerosity, fearing the Kings Power, and infi∣nitely concerned for her love. Don Henry came to her House, as she was still in these Reflexions, and asked her the reason of the sad∣ness he saw in her Face. She made him a sincere recital of all the Count had newly said to her; com∣mending his Generosity and his Constancy: But as we ever fear to lose what we love, Don Henry
could not assure himself of Souza's Resolution; he fancied there was never such an Honest Wellbred-Man, as could resist an ardent love, and so favourable an occasion, he could not suffer himself to be con∣vinc'd by the strong reasons Euge∣nia brought to reassure his affecti∣on. He said to her the most touching things imaginable upon his fears; he would have gone, and flung himself at the Kings Feet, and offered him his life instead of his Mistriss: But she let him know that it was to expose two Heads instead of one to the anger of Don Sebastian, and this Declaration would without doubt include him in the same disgrace, there need∣ed no more than this Declaration to stop Don Henry; they both agreed that they ought to content themselves with employing all the Friends they had at Court to serve the Count de Souza, in the misfor∣tune that threatned him.
Souza was to make his Court the day following: The King did not fail to ask him, if he had exe∣cuted those Orders: He answered with a profound respect, that he should be ever ready to obey his Highness; but he had acquired so lit∣tle Reputation, and had yet so fee∣bly served the State, that he could not resolve to Marry, and that such Engagements evermore took up the better part of the Cares, that are due to ones Prince. The King much displeased at this refusal, did no longer doubt, but he had an Intrigue with Elvira, and told him furiously, That a disobedient Sub∣ject could not render him good Ser∣vices, and bid appear no more in his presence. The Count went a∣way opprest with sorrow, and was no sooner at his House, than a Captain of the Guards came to Command him from the King to leave the Kingdom with the soon∣nest. He received this Order with
all the respect imaginable, and not reproaching himself with any Crime, nor imputing any thing to the King of his misfortune, and Sacrificing all to his love, he went out of the City some moments af∣ter without murmering, and with∣out going to any Friends House for fear of being oblig'd to see Elvira. The Count de Souza's Ex∣ile being spread a little time after through all the City, the best sort of People pitied him, and in the Grief that Elvira was in for his a fence, she could not forbear ha∣ving a secret joy, being he had refused Engenia, she fancied, (as it is usual to flatter ones self) that she might well be the Cause of that refusal; and entertaing her self with that thought, she resolved to employ all her Friends secretly to solicite Souza's return, not da∣ring to ask it her self. This incident did help much to encourage the Confidence and Friendship she had
for the Count de Sanzay; she ima∣gined, that in the offers of Services, and the promises he had made her, he contributed very much towards the hindring the Execution of this Match; she imparted to him all the Griefs that Souza's absence gave her; she even confessed to him one day, that the indifference she had before for the King was e∣ven changed into an aversion, since this Exile. Sanzay laboured in Court with her, to cause Souza to be recalled: All the better sort of People at Court begged the same of the King, but their Pray∣ers were useless; Jealousie is not appeased like other troubles; and the King being ever inexorable. Elvira had coldnesses for him that they would have been capable of revenging Souza if he had known them, and if he had been a less good Subject.
He was some time deliberating into what Kingdom he should go into Banishment, and for what Quarrel he should expose his Life. The End of the First Part.
Don Sebastian KING OF Portugal. An Historical Novel. PART II. Done out of French by Mr. FERRAND SPENCE. LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley and S. Mag∣nes in Russel-street in Covent∣garden, 1683.
Don Sebastian, KING OF PORTUGAL. FRance had at length, in a Ge∣neral Peace, lulled asleep the Rage and Fury of the Civil-Wars; all things were preparing in that Kingdom for the Marriage of Charles IX, with Eli∣zabeth Daughter to the Emperour Maximilian II. Queen Margarite, who in the intestine troubles of the most Cruel Wars, had ever carri∣ed along with her Divertisements and Pleasures, prepared to Cele∣brate
this Marriage by such Sports and Rejoycings as were worthy of the Princess. But what Souza sought was quite different from Joy. And Pius V, had in his Politick Zeal ob∣liged the King of Spain, and the Venetians to joyn with him, to make War against the Grand-Seig∣nior, the Count de Souza finding an occasion of Signalizing the Zeal he had ever had for Religion, took the Road of Cephalonia, o∣therwise called the Isle of Zantes, where was the Randezvous of all the Christian Troops. He deman∣ded Employ of Don John, Natu∣ral Son of the Emperour Charles V, who Commanded the Spanish Forces, and was Generalissimo. He mounted a Galley, tho Don John, knowing his Merit, and having Contracted a Friendship with him in Spain, would have given him a more Considerable Command. The Ottoman Forces assembled in the Gulph of Lepanto: The Armies
approached, a profound Calm e∣qually favoured both the Fleets; the Winds, and the Sea seemed to remain in suspence between so ma∣ny Combatants. At last the En∣gagement began; Souza's ardour made his Galley to fly every where, where he saw Danger and Glory. A hundred Illustrious Actions fig∣nalized him in that Rencounter; he sank Ships, took Galleys, pursued so vigorously Bashaw Br∣thai, that he was constrained to fly in a Pinace to Lepanto. This great Victory acquired an Immortal Glory to the Christians, and caused an Irreparable loss to the Infidels: A hundred and four∣score Galleys were taken from 'em▪ fourscore and ten sunk, fifteen thousand Christian Slaves freed; thirty thousand Turks were there drowned, ten thousand taken Pri∣soners, and almost all their Chief Officers perished in that Battel. Tho the Count of Souza had no
very considerable Employ in that Battel, he was one of those who gained the most Honour, and all he sought was to die in that occasion. He was mortally troubled at the Advice he had received some days before, that Don Henry had Mar∣ried Eugenia, and that Don Sebasti∣an's displeasure still continued. In the mean time, the grief and slight of Elvira became an insup∣portable rigour to the King. The Duke d' Avero was in despair, and could no ways remedy it. All those, who took a just interest in the Affairs of State, made use of that occasion for to force this love from the heart of Don Sebastian: Count Sanzay employ'd himself in it more cunningly than any o∣ther. The King combated on all sides, and extreamly vexed he should be so much in love with Elvira, used all manner of Efforts to overcome that Passion: But he was too deeply engaged, and irri∣tating
himself against a Love he was not able to triumph over, re∣proaching himself, that he had not yet performed any thing Glorious, he resolved to absent himself from Elvira, and go seek in his Enemies Territories the means of signali∣zing and curing himself. While he made these Reflexions, the report of Don Lewis and Violanta's Marri∣age became publick. Their Son called Don Antonio appeared openly at Court, and Don Lewis obtained the Priory of Crato for him. The King disapproved in himself the inequality of his Uncles Match, but feared to become culpable of as great a weakness. He caused all things necessary to be prepared for a speedy departure, he strongly en∣deavoured to over come that Passion, and to begin the triumph of it, he granted the return of the Count de Souza upon the pressing solicitations of Don Lewis of Granada, who had ever been his Friend, and who
fully justified him in his opinion. The Count de Sanzay believing this time was favourable for his De∣sign, began to make the Proposals of it to the King, and in the desire that this Prince had to make some Voyage to cure him, he immedi∣ately proposed to him, the going into France, where he would find Feasts, Divertisements and Sights worthy of him: But the King sought for Glory, and not for Plea∣sures; his trouble was too great to shew himself in a Court filled with so much joy. That Ambassador represented to him, how the King∣doms of France and Portugal had ever been in a strict Union; but the King his Master desired to con∣tinue it always, and to make it even more binding; how it was to be de∣sired, that their Councils would conclude a Marriage betwixt the King of Portugal, and the Princess Marguerite the French Kings Sister, who joyned to her High-Birth, a
thousand Beautiful Qualities, that tendred her worthy of the great∣est Monarchs. Don Sebastian re∣ceived this Proposition as an advantageous mark of esteem and friendship on the part of Charles IX. But his Mind and Heart were in too great a perplexity to come to a speedy determinati∣on in an Affait of that Importance. He told the Count de Sanzay, that there required time to consider of it; and he would propose it to his Council, and give him an answer within eight days: This Proposi∣tion was Debated in Council, but all the Members having particular Interests to hinder this Marriage, and the King himself having no great inclination to it, the Count of Sanzay made the advantages ap∣pear to no purpose, which the Crown of Portugal might receive from that Allyance. Cardinal Hen∣ry, and the Duke d'Avero always opposed it. The Pensioners the
King of Spain had in this Council disapproved it likewise, and the French Ambassadour was at length constrained to take his Audience of leave, and to return into France, without having succeeded in that Affair, or made any progress upon the Heart of Leonora. The great∣est Wits, and the greatest Gallants not being always the most success∣ful in Business and in Love. All these Propositions, and others that were made to the King to prevent the Voyage he was resolved to make into Africa, were not capable of disswading him from it. And when he Communicated to his Council the desire he had to make War up∣on the Moors, Cardinal Henry seeing he could not raise Troops enough for that Expedition, Dis∣puted with all his force the bold∣ness of this Design, and the Duke d'Avero, who notwithstanding so many Obstacles, had not abandoned his Ambitious Project, would by spe∣cious
reasons hinder an absence, that might quite destroy a Passion he had seen budding with delight. But the King was fixt in his reso∣lutions, he was no longer willing to see Elvira, he would fly her, and Court Glory, and for a pretext to this Design, he represented to his Council, how Mulei Moluc, to whom the King of Spain had re∣fused his Succours, had newly routed the Moors, with three thou∣sand Men only that the Grand-Signior had given him, and was ready to chace away his Nephew Mahumet from the Throne; that his Heart was as great, and his Forces more considerable than Mo∣luc's; that Enemies who destroy one another, were not difficult to be Vanquished; and in fine, that he might take advantage of the disorder the Civil-Wars had brought that Country into. They were forc'd to yield to the reasons, and to the ardour of Don Sebastian:
Orders were given for the fitting out four Galleys, and some Ships; Troops were raised, and the King went but with a small Force into Africa, whither the Duke d' Avero, the young Duke de Barcellos, Don Lewis, the Count of Souza, who was arrived some days before, and all the other Lords followed him: And Elvira, treated ill by her Fa∣ther, neglected by her King, a∣bandoned by her Lover, returned into the Convent, the Duke d' A∣vero had caused her to come out of, and there gave her self up so to grief, that a lingring Feaver took her, that was not judged dange∣rous at first, but in a short time made a considerable change in her Person. Though the King had neither Forces nor Ships enough, to undertake a great War against the Moors, who were in their own Country, and had beaten an Army much more numerous, he did things that surpassed all hopes and
expectations. He gave in all Pla∣ces Testimonies of his Valour; he was in Person in the least At∣tacks. He went into the very Ports of the Enemies to burn their Ships: He Attacqued all that he found, without being daunted at the num∣ber of the Moors. Coming near Arsilla, he immediately resolv'd to Besiege it: That City is Situa∣ted upon the Sea side; its Out∣works and In works being Fortified with all things necessary for its de∣sence, it had been taken formerly by the Portuguez. The King had not Troops enough to undertake that Siege: But the vexation he was in, when he considered how the Moors had gained from him that Conquest, and when he made reflexion upon the Glory which would follow that enterprize, made him pass over all difficulties. he caused with a great deal of Expedition, to be prepared all things necessary for the Execu∣tion of that attempt; he sur∣priz'd
the Garrison, entred the Ci∣ty by Scaling the Walls, and was in the midst of its Inhabitants with two hundred Men at most of his Attendants. The Arsilians some∣what recovered from their first surprize, sold their Liberty very dear, and Defended themselves ve∣ey vigorously. This Fight was Bloody; several were killed on both sides upon the spot; and the King having at length made him∣self a passage thro all his Enemies, and got to the Castle of the City, which vielded without fighting, upon Condition all the Moorish Women should be left at Liberty, that had taken Refuge there, and no outrage should be done them; the King willingly granted them this Condition, and entred the Castle, followed only by his Prin∣cipal Officers. He went to see the Ladies, who were retired thither, and offered safe Conduct for what way soever they would take: One
amongst others by an Air of great∣ness and Majesty made him desi∣rous to consider her more nearly. He found that the Charms of her Face were answerable to the Beau∣ty of her Shape: She was brown, and her Features were so fine, her Complexion so delicate, and her Eyes so piercing, that Don Sebasti∣an was amazed: He forgot Elvira in that moment, and afterwards Comparing the Idea he had of her Beauty, with hers he saw, he found that African, a thousand times more Charming; he asked her Pardon for appearing with Arms in his Hands before her, and offered her all the Succours she should have occasion for. But she received his Compliments with so haughty an Air, and retired with so much Maiesty, that Don Scha∣stian inquired, who she was. They told him, that she was a Princess called Almeida, Sister of Mahumet; that this King having
already lost two considerable Bat∣tels against Moluc his Uncle, had sent her to that City, where he believed her in more safety than in the midst of his Kingdom, which Moluc furiously ravaged. He had no sooner learnt the Name and Quality of that African, than he remembred that the Car∣dinal his Uncle, had spoke to him of her formerly. He was vexed he had not shew'd her more respects: He asked to see her, but she let him know by the Governour of that City, that the greatest mark of goodness he could give, was to consent to her retreat without see∣ing her, and she prayed him not to make use of the Rights of Victo∣ry against her Liberty: The King made known to this Governour, that he impatiently longed to pay her the Devoirs he could not ac∣quit himself of, before he knew her; but this Envoy told him so plainly, that his Visit would be
so extream a violence to the Prin∣cess, that this King consented at that instant to her departure, not∣withstanding all the desire be had to see her again. She departed im∣mediately, and retired towards her Brother. Don Sebastian could not lose the Idea of her Beauty; he thought of her night and day, and sometimes repented he had let her depart: if there had been no more required than Besieging of Placea, and Taking of Cities for the ha∣ving her again; he would have undertook the most difficult Sieges; but he could not learn to what Place she was retired. He feared he should displease her, if he pusht his Conquests farther, and his Council of War was not wil∣ling to let him engage farther in an Enemies Country. His Principal Officers remonstra∣ted to him, how the Troops he had left, were not sufficient to keep and defend the Places he might Conquer, and if he went on at
this rate, he must employ all his Army in Garrisons. He was obliged to return to Lisbon, Crowned with Honour, and full of the Idea of Almeida. The other Lovers put on their Chains again; and Souza not being able to see without grief the happiness of Don Henry, and being evermore in fear of be∣ing disgraced at Court, retired to one of his Country Houses, where he became so much in Love with solitude, that there was no less re∣quisite than an Order from the King to make him leave it. No∣tice was given to the Duke d'Ave∣ro, that his Daughter was dange∣rously Sick in the Convent where she made her abode. He went to see her, but did not find her in a Condition to be brought to Lis∣bon. She died four days after: Her Father was a long time in the deep∣est affection, having passionately loved her, and not quite lost all the hopes he had conceived from her Charms. The King was sensibly
grieved at her Death; but as his Mind was possessed with another Idea, his grief was not so violent as 'twould have been at another time. The Duke d'Avero seeing that Love had not been Assistant to his Ambition, was willing to see if War would make it more suc∣cessful. He did all he could to enflame the Passion Don Sebastian had for Arms. The King had gi∣ven him Orders to cause Forces to be raised in all Parts; he zealously seconded his Designs, how troubled and averse soever Queen Katherine and Cardinal Henry seemed to be to them. The Duke was perpe∣tually representing to this Young King the Glorious Success he had in Africa, and the Conquests he had made with a little handful of Men. He assured him, that if he would return thither with a con∣siderable Army, he would render himself Master of all Tituan and Alarache in a little time. Don Se∣bastian's
Courage needed not to be raised, and never Man loved Arms so much as he, but he could not resolve to make War upon Almeida's Countrey. She still re∣turned into his Mind, with that Majestick Air with which she had received him in Africa; he feared her Indignation more than that of the Mightiest Kings; and would glad∣ly have followed his Warlike Ar∣dour without renouncing the re∣spect he had for her. While his Mind floated between these two Motions, the Gover∣nour he had put into Arsilla sent him word, that Moluc had vanqui∣shed his Nephew a third time, in a set Battel, that with a handful of Men he led, he had defeated in that last Battel an Army of sixty∣thousand Horse, and ten thousand Foot; that he had newly constrai∣ned Mahumet to fly the Kingdom, and 'twas to be feared, that this Conquerour, after having drove a∣way
his Nephew out of Africa, would recover the Places the Por∣tugals had in that Country. This piece of News inspired Don Sebastian with so much Courage and Emulation, that he conside∣red the Glory which Moluc had acquired, as a Jewel he had rob∣bed him of, and which he was re∣solved to make him restore; he impatiently longed to signalize himself against him, and the occa∣sion was but too soon offered, for the good of the State. Ma∣humet being drove out of his Country, came sometime after with Almeida to take refuge in Portugal. The King learn't with an expressible Joy, that he should suddenly have the happiness of see∣ing that Princess again, who had Charmed him, and who he had ne∣ver seen but in that Instant, and had so often desired to see since that moment. He would immedi∣ately have made them a Magnificent
Entry, but that the King and Princess let him know, that Pomp and Triumph were not very suita∣ble to the deplorable condition they were then in. The King went to meet 'em with all his Court; he Embraced Mahumet a thousand times; he rendred pro∣found respects to Almeida, and af∣ter the first Civilities were passed on both sides. You see Sir, said that Princess to him, I am come to Demand the Succours you offered me so obligingly in Arsilla. Have you not forgot that Goodness, conti∣nued she, in a Modest and Langui∣shing Air, or rather, do you re∣member you have seen me? Never any first sight made so much impressi∣on upon a Heart, Madam, answe∣red Don Sebastian passionately, as that rencounter did upon mine, and you have acquired absolute Power over me from that moment. Don Sebastian continued this Conversa∣tion, till they were arrived at
the place that was prepared for their reception. After that Mahumet had made known to the King, the Justice of his Cause; he represented to him, the Moors being divided, it would be easie for him to vanquish them; that if the Portugez's would but descend into Africa, tho with but mean Forces, they might render themselves Mesters of all the King∣dom he had newly been stript of; how the Enterprizes the King had already made, and the Glorious Successes he had had there terrified all those People; and when they should see him, who was born their King, joyn'd to those who had already Vanquished 'em, they would come of their own accord, and range themselves under their Power. Glory and Love incited Don Sebastian much more to that War, than all the reasons Mahumet could invent: His Valour had a long time disposed him to make
some Enterprize in Africa, and Almeida's Beauty had rendered him too sensible of her Misfortunes, to neglect the attempt of revenging her. The Council of Portugal oppo∣sed his Design with all its might; Almeida knew it; she went to the King, she Employ'd all her Charms; she lamented her Dis∣grace. A sensibe Heart makes lit∣tle resistance against the Tears of a Beautiful Person; he promised to Aid her, notwithstanding these Ob∣stacles; she gave him some hopes of being beloved, and he caused Troops to be raised in all parts for the Execution of this Enterprize. How great a Comfort was this to Almeida, in her Misfortune! She saw her self Adored by the most accomplished King that was then in the World; she saw that her Beauty Triumphed over all Policy, and over all the Forces of Portugal; she was persuaded, that Don Sebastian would Sacrifice all
to her Revenge. Her Brother of∣ten told her, that she was Mistriss of his Fate, and hoped, they should suddenly be Re-established upon the Throne: But that which still Augmented the pleasingness of these hopes, was, that she found Don Sebastian as Love∣ly as he was Amorous; and that she was yet more sensible of the Affection he had for her, than in the Cares he took in her Favour: She would have been sorry that any other had rendred this Good Office to her Brother; and esteem and acknowledgment conspiring in her Heart in favour of Don Se∣bastian, gave Birth there to a Pas∣sion little different from that the King felt for her. If he spoke to her passionately, she heard him with delight; if he continually and eagerly sought her out, she never met him but with an ex∣tream joy. The most fatal Amour has ever in its beginning, a thou∣sand
Pleasures to engage us; this at first laid only Charms to view in the sight of those Lovers. All the Court was with Justice alar∣med at it: Queen Katherine used all her Efforts to destroy it: Car∣dinal Henry opposed it with all his Power; but the King was abso∣lute, these Obstacles the more en∣flamed him, and they were con∣strain'd to leave a free Course to his Passion. Don Sebastian thought it conve∣nient to take a Journey into Spain, to implore Succours of his Uncle, in Favour of Mahumet. He de∣parted, after the Ambassadour he had in that Court had agreed with Philip, that Guadalouppe should be the Place of their Interview; and gave Order at his Departure, that the Moorish King, and his Sister, whom he left at Lisbon, should be Treated and Respected as him∣self. The King of Spain came to the Rendezvous, accompanied
with one of his Daughters, and all the Lords of his Court, and re∣ceived Don Sebastian with great Testimonies of Joy and Affection: He endeavoured to dissuade him from so dangerous an Enterprize: But danger does but the more en∣flame Great Souls. He then Pray∣ed him not to go in Person to that War; but it was to no pur∣pose, being he would have expo∣sed his life a thousand times for Almeida's sake. Philip (at length being desirous to try if Pleasures would not have more Power than Reasons over the Mind of that young King) caused Turnaments, Lists of Com∣bates to be made for to Divert him. He even caused Catharina Michela, one of the Daughters he had by the Deceased Queen Elizabeth his third Wife, and whom he had brought with him to Guadelouppe, to conceive some hopes of the Crown of Portugal. And as Phi∣lip
was then Married again to Anne of Austria his Niece, and Sister to Maximilian II; the Princess Catha∣rina Michela would have been glad to have freed her self from the Power and ill humour of a Mother-in-law; she was Ambitious; and the King of Portugal being hand∣some, she took care to engage him, and even engaged her self a little: But Don Sebastian thinking of no∣thing but of Re-establishing Almei∣da's Brother upon the Throne, was not much moved with all these attempts, and would quickly have returned to that Charming African, if Philip had not staid him with the hopes of some Troops, which he promised, and perhaps would have given him, had it not been for the Obstacles that were raised by the Princess Katherina, by earnestly desiring Ruy Gomes de Silva, at that time Favourite and Minister of the King of Spain, not to hasten the Suc∣cours.
In the mean time, Don Sebastian, continually possessed with the thoughts of that War, and Almei∣da's Beauty, was not sensible of the Pleasures of that Pompous Court, nor the marks of kindness which the Princess daily gave him. Al∣meida writ a thousand kind enga∣ging things to this King, which the more augmented his impati∣ence. To little purpose it was Phi∣lip had told him, that the Duke of Alva had written to him; that this War was not reasonably to be un∣dertaken with Portugal Troops a∣lone; that besides them, it was re∣quisite to have fifteen thousand I∣talians, Spaniards and Germans. It was to little purpose, he assured him, that he would give him five thousand Spaniards, as soon as his Affairs in Italy would give him leave. Nothing could stay Don Se∣bastian; and Philip, who fancied that the Princess's Beauty, and the desire of being in his Alliance, would
perhaps be capable to persuade him from this Design; or at least, make him stay yet some time at his Court, offered him Catherina Mi∣chela in Marriage. Don Sebastian did not flye off so much as he would have done, if he had not stood in need of Philip. He made some Court to that Princess, which put her in some hopes; seemed to relish the Pleasures of that Court with less disquiet: Remained also there yet some time with little im∣patience, for the having the Suc∣cours so often promised. The Court he made to Catherina Michela in these hopes, was quick∣ly known to Almeida. All those who approached her, took delight in exaggerating things to her, which put her in despair; and as the divers Passions and Interests of par∣ticular Persons even adds some∣thing to the News that comes from afar off, the report ran in Portugal, that Don Sebastian was going to
Marry Catherina Michela. A Per∣son who loves and fears is but too credulous; Almeida Figured to her self a thousand things far more stinging than all the malice of her Enemies could have Invented up∣on that Subject: How vainly did I flatter my self with the Power of my Charms, said she sometimes, how weak are they, and how am I de∣ceived? The Princess Catherina has more than I have; she is in Prosperi∣ty and Glory, I lie under Misfor∣tune and Shame! Her Father is a Prudent and Fortunate King, whom the greatest Princes would be proud to be Alied to, and I have but one Brother, whose disgrace is capable of dispersing the most Zealous Friends. These and such other like expressi∣ons did so trouble her, that she was sometime without writing to Don Sebastian: This King reproach∣ed her with her silence; but as she was prepossessed with his infideli∣ty, she gave so ill an Interpretati∣on
to all that came from him, as she fancied he only made her these reproaches, for the having a pre∣text to quit her, and made no an∣swer to his Letters. The King not being able to sup∣port any longer the trouble he was in at Almeida's silence, and seeing the propositions and delays of the King of Spain were only vain a∣musements to retain him, he re∣solved at length to return to Por∣tugal, and desired Philip to send him with the soonest all the Troops he could. He found Al∣meida in so great a grief, that he could not see it without being much concerned. He made her his Complaints; she made him, her Reproaches, and both of them be∣ing undeceived of their suspition, were more charmed than ever, with one another. The King of Spain let Don Seba∣stian know, how the Sedition of the Rebels encreased daily in Flan∣ders,
how he was afraid that Pro∣vince would get from under his Power; how he was oblig'd to send a great many Troops thither, and this disorder hindred him from sending the Succours he had promi∣sed him. All these Obstacles did not at all cool the Ardour of Don Sebastian. And Philip being ac∣quainted he had still the same De∣sign, he sent the Duke of Medina Coeli to him, who was one of the most Eloquent and Understanding Politicians of Spain, to represent to him, that the Rebellion in Flan∣ders augmented from day to day, which putting the King his Master in great fears, he found himself ob∣liged to conclude a Truce with the Turks, in which he would cause him to be comprehended, if he thought good; and that being in Conference about that Treaty, he could not send Troops into A∣frica against Moluc, for as much as a part of that Country was Tribu∣tary
to the Port, and Moluc was a Friend and Confederate of the Grand Seignior's. Don Sebastian answered that Ambassadour, that he was very much surpriz'd, that Philip had made a Truce of three years with the Turks; that in thinking to avoid their Incursions into Ita∣ly, he gave 'em time to Fortifie themselves in Africa, and fill it with Forces, which would carry into the Heart of Spain, after that Truce, a more Cruel War than that he feared. He added, that he did not think it convenient to be Comprehended in this Treaty; that 'twas requisite for their Com∣mon Interest to leave him the Li∣berty of assisting the Spaniards a∣gainst the Irruptions of the Afri∣cans, and thus the King of Spain would assure himself of Italy by his Truce, and of Africa by the War that the Portuguezes were go∣ing to make there. The Duke of Medina Coeli returned into Spain,
but little satisfied with his Embasie. Queen Katherine, who had Gover∣ned the State with great Prudence, died at that time. All the World fancied that the trouble Don Seba∣stian's Designs gave her, occasioned her Death. And the King having put his Army in a Posture of mar∣ching, the Count de Souza went out of his solitude to accompany the King in that War. Don Sebastian followed by all his Nobility, his Guards, and a great number of Voluntiers went to the Cathedral Church of Lisbon, where having with great Cere∣mony caused the Standard to be Blessed, which he would carry in∣to Africa, he put it into the hands of Christopher de Tavora, and as all the Court fancied he was going to return to his Palace, he went to to the Port; and having met with Almeida, who was taking the Air with her Brother in a Chariot, coming up, he told them: That all
was preparing to revenge them, and in a little time he would re-establish them upon the Throne of their Fa¦thers. So many Obstacles, answer∣ed Almeida, have hitherto opposed your good Intentions, Sir, that I shall not promise my self any Succours from your Highness till you are Em∣barqued. Well, Madam, we must then Embark, reply'd the King in a Transport, I accuse, as well as you, my Love of too much slowness, and you shall not see me defer any longer: He mounted his Galley, after ha∣ving said these Words, Mahumet and his Sister accompanied him, and he Commanded the Duke de Avero to cause all his Forces to Embark. During the eight days he was Employ'd in putting them on Board, the King never went ashore. He himself caused the Seamen to labour: He examined the Built of all the Ships; he Visi∣ted the Equipages, to see if there was nothing wanting to his Fleet;
and shewing Almeida the Ardour of the Passion he had for her, by the care he took to Revenge her: This Princess answered so many Kindnesses with as much Love as the delicacy of her Sex would al∣low of. As the King never went from his Ships, and all the Lords remained there with him, the La∣dies came there to see 'em; and Don Sebastian, who seemed to have Established his Empire upon the Waters, had round about him a Floating Court, that amidst the hurry of Embarking, would how∣ever have been very agreeable, if the trouble of parting had not tra∣versed the Pleasures which those would have relished there, whom Love had united: Violanta quitted Don Lewis with all the grief that a real affection can be capable of in such an occasion. The Passion the Duke de Barcellos had for War, shared his Heart with the Love he had for Leonora; and as she gave
her self up entirely to her Inclina∣tion, she was much more troubled than her Lover at their parting. The Duke d'Avero's Ambition finding an opportunity to satisfie it self in that War, made him quit Lisbon with joy: But what Power soever Glory had over Don Henry, he had all the pains imaginable to Renounce the Pleasures he enjoy'd with Eugenia. Souza found some Comfort in thinking, that notwith∣standing the Bonds of Marriage, in a short time his Rival would be no more happy than himself. The Duke of Braganza, who was arrived at Lisbon to accompany the King in his Voyage, and had still a great deal of Vigour, and a strong Passi∣on for War, was very glad that this Occasion was offered for the instructing his Son by his Exam∣ple, and by the Advices he might give him, according to the Diver∣sity of Occurrences. And at length the King departed full of joy, and
of hopes, with the Flower of the Nobility and People of Portugal, and was accompanied by Adrias de Sylva Bishop of Porto, and Ema∣nuel de Mensis Bishop of Conimbre. The whole Fleet made Sail with a fair Wind; but as the Kings Galley took its turn to go out of the Port, it struck with so much Violence against a Flemish Ship, that its sides were broke to pieces, and a Seaman of that Galley was kill'd at the same time in his Boat, by a Canon Shot, that the City had Fired upon the Kings depar∣ture. These two accidents made the most Zealous Portugals trem∣ble, and seemed to be an ill pre∣sage to that Enterprize; even Al∣meida appeared alarmed at it, she conjured the King to put off the Voyage till a more favourable season: She told him several times, that she would rather choose to Renounce the Crown, and pass the rest of her days in all the misfor∣tunes
and obscurities possible, than to expose his life to Dangers, the sole Idea whereof made her trem∣ble; but the more kindness and a∣larms she made appear to Don Se∣bastian, the more eager was he up∣on this Voyage, and all the Fleet arrived quickly at Cadiz, where the Duke of Medina regaled the King with great Splendour and Magnificence, and made all the Court during eight days relish all the Pleasures that Island could fur∣nish. The King caused all possible Sail to be made towards Africa; this Fleet in a few days, came between Tangier and Arsilles. There he caused his Army to Disembark, and after having made Almeida ob∣serve the Place where he had seen her the first time, and having said to her the most tender things ima∣ginable upon that point; he him∣self appointed the Quartering of his Troops. With an exact care he
sought the most advantageous Posts; he Encamped one part upon the Sea Shore, and in the most Commodious Places. His Army was composed of thirteen thousand Foot, fifteen hundred Horse, or thereabouts, and thirteen pieces of Artillery. He went every Night with an indefatigable Ardour to Visit all the Quarters: He enter∣tained the bravest; he excited the most languishing, flattered some, made promises to others, and be∣ing sometimes willing to awaken their Courage by a tender pity, he shewed them Mahumet, and his Sister, cruelly driven out of their Dominions, and promised 'em all great Recompenses on his and that Princesses part. Mahumet on his side addressing himself to all the Africans he sound in his way, en∣deavoured to engage them in his Party. Some yielded to these sol∣licitations. Almeida drew the Hearts of all those who saw her;
some Officers even Charmed with her Beauty, and moved with her Brothers Misfortune, came and of∣fered themselves to serve them. Don Sebastian and Mahumet having proved their sincerity, received them with joy. Moluc well knowing that Don Sebastian was Ambitious and For∣midable, would have Treated a Peace with him, and have given him all the Chams the Portugals pretended to have Conquered, for the making good to him the Char∣ges of that War, and for those People to Cultivate in all Peace and Safety they could have in their own Country. This Proposition made Mahumet tremble, fancying, that so advantageous an Offer would make the King abandon a Party, that could not be very use∣ful to him: But Almeida pro∣mising her self all she desired from her Charms, and the Love of Don Sebastian, reassured her Brother,
and did not at all doubt, but that the Ardour which the King of Por∣tugal had to Serve her, would make him refuse more advantage∣ous Offers. He himself came pre∣sently after to assure him of the same, and made answer to Moluc, that the greatest Charges of the War being already made, he would not hearken to any Proposition of Peace, till Moluc should give him Alarache, Tituan, and the Cape de Agero, which were three places of Extream importance to the Moors, and of great advantage to the Por∣tuguezes. Moluc enraged at this demand, and seeing how small were the Forces which the King of Portugal was at the Head of, answe∣red him haughtily: That when Morocco should be Besieged, he would think of that Proposition, and he fansied he should have time enough to think of it, and it would not be necessary to make or hear such a Dis∣course. Moreover, that the King∣dom
of ez was not so easy to be Conquered; that he had got it only by main orce, and by winning three Battels; that he would defend it in the same manner, and that it was thus it was to be Attacqued. Don Sebastian in the mean time seemed to be enslamed afresh by the Eyes of Almeida. He could have wished, that all his Forces had had the same Heart, and the same Eyes as he had, for the Con∣secrating their Lives as Generously to that Princess, as he was going to Sacrifice his. Moluc being a very prudent Man, and knowing that a Battel oftentimes decides the Fate of a State, and is not to be undertaken without all possible sureties, or in the greatest extre∣mity, offered him ten Miles of Land round each Fortress he had in Asrica, if he would consent to retire; but he was resolved to fight, he only breathed Victory, and all other things seemed to him unwor∣thy
of his Valour and Love. He cau∣sed his Army to be Fortified on one side, with high Ramparts of Earth, and with Waggons; and the Sea and the City served him for Trenches on the other sides. The Moors, who Border upon the Ma∣ritime Cities, were so alarm'd by this Army, that they sled into the Mountains: The Cities of Tituan, Alarache, and some others, were all desert. Moluc, without being asto∣nished at this disorder, and equal∣ly divided between Prudence and Vallour, did all his Experience could teach him for his defence: And though he was seized with a very violent Fever, he departed from Sale, where he had given a Rendezvouz to some Troops. His Natural Brother, who was Gover∣nour of Fez, and whom he had given the Command of the Caval∣rey of that Province, joyned him near Alcazar, with twenty thou∣sand Horse, and five or six thousand Foot.
Moluc extreamly weakned by his Sickness, was constrained to put himself in a Litter to Visit the Quarters of his Troops, and to see what condition his Cavalry was in. He caused himself to be carryed through all his Army, and fearing among his Troops he should meet with several Partizans of Mahumet, and judging, that ill-intentioned Souldiers would be more dange∣rous in the day of Battel in his Party, than amongst his Enemies, he declared before all his Army, that he would permit all those who had more inclination for Ma∣humet than for him, to retire to his Enemies. And besides this De∣claration, being willing to make known to all the World, that he despised the Enemies Forces so much, as to send 'em Succours, without being in any fear, and thinking fit to upbraid the Honour of the Malecontents, and favour a Depart he could not hinder, he
chose all those whose fidelity was suspected by him, of whom he made a flying Camp of three thou∣sand Horse; he placed at their Head Mulei-Cheique, a famous Cap∣tain of that Nation, who having been infinitely in love with Al∣meida, gave reason to fear that he was for her Interests, and Com∣manded him to go view the Chri∣stian Army, to keep it ever in play by frequent Courses, and continually to Skirmish the Ene∣mies. Though Mulei-Cheique had still a great Passion for Almeida, and could ardently have wished to serve her, this Artifice produced a quite contrary effect to what was expected; and this Generous Captain, considering this Order of Moluc as an effect of the extream confidence he had in him, would not belie an Opinion that was ad∣vantageous to him, and rather re∣nouncing his Love than his Duty, he did all that the severest Honour
and greatest Courage could de∣mand on that occasion. All the others, animated with so brave an Example, joyfully followed the Vallour of so Generous a Leader, and as he had an extream desire to see Almeida, his Love and Vallour carrying him farther than his For∣ces ought to have led him, he did things that surprized and alarmed the Portugals. He knew the Quar∣ter where Almeida was; he used a thousand efforts to break through 'em, that he might go lay his Arms at her Feet, and made Don Sebaslian and Mahumet so much afraid of losing her, that they caused her to be securely conducted into one of their Galleys, that was the properest to save her in case of need. The King seeing that the Ene∣mies Skirmishes caused a dread in his Troops, and having no longer any that might retain him in the City, went out to be sooner ready to oppose the Assaults that were
made upon his Men. The day after, two thousand Horse, Command∣ed by Mulei-Cheicque advancing in good order towards the Christi∣ans, and the King having learnt how his Rival was at their Head, went to meet them only with six hundred Men. But what happy Successes does not the presence of a King produce amongst his Troops? Don Sebastian, at the Head of this handful of Men, Attacked the two thousand Moors, cut them to pieces, and pursued the Runaways with so much violence, that he found himself above ten miles from his Army, accompanied only by Ed∣ward of Menezes his Marshal de Camp, and without having near him any Troops that might relieve him from this danger. Moluc was sensibly vexed when he learnt this defeat; but did not judge it conve∣nient to go out of Alcazar, be∣ing he expected there some For∣ces that were to come from the
Sea-coasts, from the Cities of Ti∣tuan and Mechines, and was desi∣rous too, that the Enemies would come and attack him upon the main Land, which they seemed willing to do, to the end he might engage 'em very far into the Coun∣try, and afterwards cut off their Correspondence with the Sea; and he was resolved to go find them out at length, when this reinforce∣ment was come, that he might fall upon their Rear, and reduce them into a pressing necessity of all manner of Ammunition, with∣out giving Battel but with extream advantage, and at the last push. The King resolved to attack the Enemies upon the main Land, as Moluc desired it; he prepared all things towards a Battel, he Com∣manded the Count de Souza, whom he had made Admiral, and whose Prudence he had tryed, to attend him at Alarache, with his Fleet, and advance his Conquests upon
the Sea as much as the small Forces he had left in that Fleet would per∣mit; he Confided Almeida to the Cares of this Count, and quitted her with less grief than hopes, af∣ter having assured her, that he would suddainly bring Moluc to her Feet. He Commanded his Troops to quit the Sea side, and at length took the Field with all his Army, to go towards Alcazar to meet the Enemies. The End of the Second Part.
Don Sebastian, KING OF PORTUGAL. SO soon as Moluc had notice of the Christians March, he was overjoy'd to see them enga∣ged on the main Land; and though he was extreamly ill, and perceived that he could not live but a very few days, he gave order for all that was necessary, with an admirable Courage and Prudence. He regulated his Camp, caused himself to be carried in a Chair from Rank to Rank through all his Army, for the animating his Troops to sight; and seeing his
Forces were ever diminishing, and the Enemies approached, he sent for Mulei Hamet, his Natural Bro∣ther, who was still young, and of little Experience, and told him: I know the great Art of War de∣mands a thousand high Qualities, which you have not yet, and which you will likewise sind difficult to ac∣quire; however I place you now at the Head of above forty thousand men, and make you General of all the African Cavalry: But I Command you at the same time to vanquish or die. So long as I shall have one moment of life left me, I will not let you want an Example; and if you do any thing unbecoming the rank I place you in, I shall employ the little strength I have left to strangle you with my own Hands: And for the rest, Brother, I order you, if I die before the Success of this Battel, to conceal my death with great care from all the World, and to put in my Lit∣ter any one of our men, who shall
most resemble me; to the end, that feigning to give Orders, and acting my part, the Enemies may not take advantage of the Consternation that such an accident usually brings into an Army. Having ended these Words, he embraced Hamet, and caused him to be owned by all his Forces. After which he went out of Alcazar, and retired into the Plain, for to draw on the Enemies. He was persuaded, that having better Officers, more Troops, and better Disciplined, than the Portu∣gals, he ought not to fear the Issue of a Battel: But prudent as he was, he was loth to commit his Crown to the uncertainty of a fight, know∣ing that we ought not to expose our selves to the Fortune of War, till after all the efforts of Prudence have not been able to produce any advantage; he let the Enemies March, without going to meet 'em, and fancied, that by still permit∣ting them to advance into his
Territories, he had nothing more to do than to cut off their passage, to see them afterwards perish by Famine, without costing him so much as one Man. He was not able however to bring this Design to perfection, as well because his illness reduced him to extremity, as by reason he was informed the same day in the Evening, that the Enemies were very near, and the two Camps might see one another, if the obscurity of the night had not hindered it. He sent as soon as it was day, his Master of the Horse, at the Head of two or three hundred Men to observe the Coun∣tenance of the Enemies, and it hap∣pened, that some Battalians of the Portugal Army, that had passed a little River, repassed it in that moment, by order from the King, who judged it more convenient to be left between the two Armies. These Troops which Filed off, made the Morish party believe, that the
sight of them, put the Christians to flight; and they carried with all diligence this News to Moluc. The Barbarians animated by this flight, cried out aloud, that they ought to pursue them, and they might cut them to pieces: But Moluc, ever wise, and ever prudent, ap∣peased this too pert Ardor, and said he demanded no more than their retreat, and if they fled, he should vanquish according to his desires, without his Army running any danger, or losing one drop of Blood. While the Moors were delibera¦ting upon this Affair, Don Sebasti∣an caused his Council to Assemble, to know of his Chief Officers, if he should give Battel that same day. The most part of them see∣ing Moluc had three times more Forces than the King of Portugal, were unwilling to run the risque of a Battel: But the King fancying, that as at the Head of six hundred
Men, he had put to flight two thousand of the Enemies, a Chri∣stian would ever beat five or six Moors, went boldly out of his Camp, ranged his Troops in Bat∣tel array, and divided them into three Battalions: The first was Composed of Strangers, who had their Officers at the Head of them, and of five hundred Portuguez Vo∣luntiers, Commanded by Don Hen∣ry; the second and third were Composed of Portugal Troops: The Cavalry was at the two Wings in the form of a Triangle. The Duke d'Avero Commanded the Right, where Mahumet was Ran∣ged with the Troops that fol∣lowed him, the Kings Standard was at the left with the Duke de Barcellos, and the Baggage was be∣twixt the Infantry and the Ca∣valry. Though Moluc felt the pangs of Death, he had still the same Va∣lour, and the same Conduct; he
ranged his Army in Battel, with as much presence of Mind, as if he had been in perfect health. He had forty thousand Horse, eight thousand Foot, and thirty four pieces of Artillery. He kept to himself, the charge of Genera∣lissimo, and placed his Brother at the Head of the Cavalry. He cau∣sed immediately all his Infantry to March in the form of a Half∣moon, at the two points of which he placed two Bodies of Cavalry, each of ten thousand Horse; the rest of the Horsemen were divided in∣to little Squadrons, and followed in equal distance, being ordered to March still on, and surround the Portugal Army for the Engaging it on all sides. When it was in presence, it appeared so Weak to Moluc, that he thought himself sure of the Victory, and thought of nothing but rendring it Com∣pleat. He would have made a Speech to his Souldiers, but his
extream weakness would not per∣mit him to say four words. He caused himself to be put again into his Litter, and placed himself in the middle of his Troops, that he might be able to give Orders on all sides, and see all that the two Armies should do. Don Sebastian seeing the Ene∣mies make some Motion to ad∣vance, sent one of his Querries to Almeida, for the assuring her that the Battel was going to begin, that he would lose his life therein, or re-establish her in her State; and after having given some mo∣ments to the most tender reflecti∣ons a Lover was ever capable of, he set all his thoughts to the Exe∣cution of that Enterpize. Moluc on his side caused his Cavalry to March and extend in such order, that being within a Canon-shot of the Portuguez's, the two points of that Half-moon came and joyned behind the King's Arrier-Guard, and
that great Circle, filling by little and little, became still more thick as it approached the Portugals, in∣somuch as the Christian Army was environed on all parts by the Moorish Cavalry, and took from the most faint hearted all means of running away. The Portuguez's were daunted at the doleful aspect of this danger, their fears were re∣doubled at the noise of the Fire of the Moors Artillery, which making frequent shots, by degrees broke the Files of the Christians, and made great breaches in their Squa∣drons. Don Sebastian as ready as the Enemies shot, went to every rank to fill it, and also causing his Cannon to fire upon the Moors, he gave 'em Bullet for Bullet, disor∣der and fear for fear: But the Moors being stronger in Artillery than the Christians, did much more Execution, and the Portugez's were so terrified, that the King gave the Signal of the Battel, to
stop this disorder. The Moors made a vigorous attacque upon the Vangard; the Christians op∣posed them Courageously. Don Henry at the Head of his Volun∣tiers, made all bend under his blows that opposed his passage, and relieved such of the Portugez's as were most pressed, so that not∣withstanding the numbers of the Moors, which were greater than the Portugals, those Barbarians could hardly keep for some time things in Equality: But the King, who impatient to see the Victory so long in suspence, would con∣strain it to declare in his favour, quitted the left Wing, where there was not yet any danger, to run to the Vanguard, where the Ene∣mies fell on with the greatest su∣ry. He advanced at the Head of his Troops: The Kings ardour made him be every where, he Sa∣crified a thousand lives to the Beau∣ty he had Consecrated his to.
Victory durst not remain longer doubtful at the coming up of Don Sebastian; the Moors not being able to support the Valour of the Christians, animated with the Ex∣ample of their General, gave ground at the first Shock, and notwithstanding the endeavours and threatnings of their Leaders, who used their utmost endea∣vours to make them stand to it, and put incessantly new Men in the places of those who fell: These Barbarians were broken three se∣veral times, and put to flight, to the loss of all their Colours. The Duke d'Avero, who Com∣manded the Right Wing, charged the Moors Cavalry that came to At∣tacque him, and his heart greedy of Glory, made him fly to the greatest dangers, and triumph in all places. His Squadron in the form of a Triangle was so close, and At∣tacqued so vigorously the Enemies Cavalry, that he constrained it to
retreat in disorder. Mahumet, who had likewise ranged himself in in this Body, Attacqued, Fought, and Pursued his Enemies like a desperate King, who chose rather to lose his life than his Crown. The Duke d' Avero fought with a great deal of Valour, and the de∣sire of Conquering carried him ve∣ry far amongst the Barbarians. A Body of Horse coming up to Suc∣cour them, he judged it conveni∣ent not to suffer himself to be en∣vironed by those Squadrons, and to retire in good order with his ad∣vantage, hoping these Troops would divide themselves in pursu∣ing him, and he might return to the Charge with yet more vigour and success than before. Where∣upon he turned back upon those who pursued him; but he found them all so firm, and so well united, that his Squadron being weakned with its losses and wounds, could no longer bear the Enemies Assaults,
but were constrained to retire in haste, and not finding a sase place in the Army, they cast themselves amongst the Cavalry and Infantry with so much disorder, that it put those Troops into a Confusion, which the Africans made great ad∣vantage of. On the other side the Body of the Army, where the Kings Stan∣dard and the Duke de Barcellos were placed, made a horrible slaugh∣ter of the Moors, pursued them to their Canon; and those Barbarians finding the King every where, fan∣cied that all the Army was com∣posed of Hero's, or that this Hero alone composed all the Army. The Duke of Barcellos accompani∣ed the King in all places, and did a hundred things worthy of his Birth and great Courage: The Moors terrified and flying, took refuge even in the Quarters where Moluc was, who falling into an extream fury at this disorder, and
being resolved to repair it or die, he rose from his Litter, without considering that he was half dead, and caused himself to be set on Horseback with a great deal of pain, resolved to stay the flight of his Men by his Example, or to put them to Death himself. Those who were about him, used all their endeavours to retain him, and even seized the Reins of his Horses Bri∣dle; but his Courage making him forget his weakness, the Crowd of the Runnaways and Fugitives still augmenting, and the King at the Head of his Men coming pretty near that Quarter, he put his hand to his Sword to disperse those who stopped him, and this Effort quite consuming his Strength and Forces, he fainted away, and fell into the Arms of his Men, and died some moments after, putting his Finger between his Lips, whether it was for vexation that his Men run away, or to make them remember they
were to conceal his Death. And the Prudence of this Barbarous King so well compassed his Designs in the last moment of his Life, that dying it self could not ravish from him Victory; and he appear∣ed brave and prudent even in the Arms of Death. However the Renegado's, who were about Moluc, concealed his Death with a great deal of care, insomuch as the Army of the Bar∣barians weakned by this accident, was so far from flying, after ha∣ving been vigorously repulsed, it recovered Forces out of its own shame. The Moors Rallied with fresh Troops, and returned to the Charge with more Valour than be∣fore. The Vanguard, where Don Sebastian made his Courage be ad∣mired, gave ground at its turn, and though the Christians, who were in that Body, had killed above two thousand of the Moors, there came again fresh ones in so great
multitudes, that they were forced at length to yield to the numbers in that place; and all the Christi∣ans who remained there, having used all their Arms against the Ene∣mies, and being at length come to Ponyards, lost their lives, appea ring to be rather weary with Kil∣ling, than Conquered. All the Brave Voluntiers that Don Henry led there, being dead, this General was encompassed by the Moors of Andalousia, and fell at length under their numbers and their fury. The King received there a Musquet shot in his Right-Shoulder; but not ceasing to Act for this wound, tho dangerous, and seeing his Vanguard was defeated without recovery, he run to the Left-Wing where the Duke d' Avero, after ha∣ving rallied several times his Men, changed Horses, and Succoured those whom the Enemies pressed the most, was at length killed by a Musquet shot. As he was the
Soul of that Body, his fall put the Portuguez's to a rout: Mahumet en∣deavoured in vain to retain them, by his Example and his Voice. They no longer knew any Body, but the Conquerours, they fell up∣on their Knees to the Moors, instead of standing up in their own defence. The King running to this dis∣order, and being acquainted with the Dukes death, who was dear to him, revenged it upon all those he met with; he fought amongst the Souldiers, and engaged him∣self amongst the Moors; he anima∣ted the Christians with few Words and a great many Examples, and cast admiration, fear and surprize amongst his Enemies by his Valour. He had three Horses killed under him without being daunted, and though he was already wounded, he did not cease to Attacque, Strike and Relieve; but he could not vanquish the fury and number of his Enemies, nor communicate
his Courage to his Troops. At length hazard conspiring with the Moors against the Portugals, Fire seized the Christians Ammunition for the Compleating their Defeat, and put so great disorder in all their Army, that Horses, Souldi∣ers, Waggons, Ammunitions, Arms, Tents, Pavillions, and all the rest of the Baggage being confusedly heaped one upon another; some were stifled, others burnt, and o∣thers cut to pieces by the Enemies. The young Duke de Barcellos be∣ing fallen from his Horse in that Confusion, was taken Prisoner; al∣most all the Chief Officers were killed, or put out of condition to fight by reason of their wounds: The Portugals, who in their flight would have taken the way of Ar∣silla, were all killed or drowned, being deceived by the River of Mucasen, which ebbing and flow∣ing as the Ocean does, whose Wa∣ters it receives, was almost dry
when the Army passed it on their march thither, but the Tide being high at their return, the Chri∣stians did not know the places where they had all forded it. The Defeat was so General, that of thirteen or fourteen thousand Men the Portugal Army was composed of, there hardly escaped an hun∣dred from that Battel. In the mean while, the less fearful and most zealous, seeing this General Rout, they sought the King on all sides: But Christopher de Tavora, who carried his Standard, having been killed, they could not find him, and deceived by a Colours that very much resembled it, which Ed∣ward de Menezes had, they follow∣ed it instead of the other, fancying that Don Sebastian had ranged him∣self near it. Thus the King re∣maining alone among his Enemies, was notwithstanding his Valour opprest with numbers, and his For∣ces not being capable of seconding
his Courage, he was constrained to yield to the fury of the Moors. All the Christians, who returned from this Battel did affirm, that he had received only one wound in his Shoulder, which was not Mor∣tal; that he fell not among the dead, and that they had seen the Enemies take him Prisoner. In the mean time this Battel be∣came famous for the loss of three Kings. Moluc died there in per∣forming all that a Wise Conque∣rour is capable of in such an Exi∣gence. Mahumet seeing the Portu∣guezes routed, and willing to a∣void the Cruelty of his Enemies, who would not have failed to have Sacrificed him to the repose of the State, endeavouring to escape, was drowned in the River of Mucasen. Don Sebastian was lost there, and so many rare Qualities that were observed in him, made his Sub∣jects and all those who knew him, extreamly regret his loss, and lest
a great Example to all young Prin∣ces, who keep not their Courage within the bounds of Prudence, which ought to preserve Kings for the advantage of their State, and the affection of their People. While Don Sebastian was giving the Bloody Battel, which occasio∣ned his own ruine, the destruction of his Kingdom, and the death of so many famous Warriers, the Count de Souza Signalized himself as much as the few Men that were in his Ships could make him capa∣ble of doing. He made often∣times Descents upon the Land with his Troops; burnt the Bur∣roughs and Villages he met with in his way, put to flight all those who Guarded the Coast; Besieged the City of Allarache, and battered it so Vigorously, that the greatest part of the Moors a∣bandoned it, and had only left in it a weak Garrison. Almeida be∣ing nearer the Naval Army, than
the other Forces, learnt Souza's Conquests with an incredible joy, and fancied, that Don Sebastian fought with no less advantage a∣gainst Moluc. She slattered her self with the hopes of seeing her Bro∣ther within a little time again up∣on the Throne, and her Lover co∣vered with Glory: But these thoughts did not last long, Souza quickly received the News of the Kings Defeat, and the rout of all his Army; he instantly acquainted Almeida therewith, and told her, it was necessary of thinking to secure themselves. What a sad piece of News was this to that Princess! she remained as motion∣less, and lost the use of her Senses at this Discourse. After which she made reflexion upon the Valour of Don Sebastian, upon the ardour he had made appear to revenge her; and not being able to figure to her self, that he was to be Con∣quered, having so much Courage
and so much Love, she sent for him, who had brought the sad Tydings to Souza, who confirmed what Souza had told her. He rela∣ted to her all had past in that Bat∣tel; and when she saw this misfor∣tune was no longer to be doubted of, and that she had lost her Bro∣ther and her Lover, she fell into such a despair, as gave reason to fear it would cost her her life. She had ever loved Mahumet very tenderly, and often shed Tears for his death, but when she re∣membred his Interest had caused the ruine of Don Sebastian, she murmured against that Brother, and imputed to him all the mis∣fortunes of this King. It is I alone, alas, said she a moment after, who am the cause of Don Sebastians ruine; had it not been for the Love of me, he would not have succoured my Brother, nor lost his life. It is I that drew him out of the Heart of his Dominions, to Sacrifice him to
my Ambition, and the Cruelties of Moluc: He was adored by his Peo∣ple, contined she, beloved by his Allies, feared by his Enemies. Ne∣ver any Prince gave such hopes of a happy Reign as he did. He was ardent in Glory, fearless in Dangers, indefatigable in labour, and all these fine Qualities have only helped to ad∣vance the misfortunes I have plung'd him into. How fatal was the Con∣quest of Arsilla to him, it was there I saw him Victoriously Charming; he saw me, and loved me; I fancied that Victory would ever have attend∣ed him, he did not think, I was to be so fatal to him; into what an abyss of mischiefs has this interview pre∣cipitated us? While Almeida made all these Reflexions, the Count de Souza, sensibly concerned at the Kings loss, was thinking with a great deal of prudence and care of the means of repairing, or at least, hindring its fatal Consequences; he raised the Siege of Alarache, to
go Rescue the Portugals that were beaten; he reassured the Gover∣nours of those places Portugal had in Africa; he augmented the Garrisons with all the Troops he could put into the City; he gave out, that Don Sebastian was not dead, and the Christians assured he was only taken Prisoner. He promised the Colonels and Offi∣cers, who had escaped this Defeat, that the Kings Ransom should be shortly Treated for, and that he would recompence at his return the fidelity of those, who should have rendred him service during his ab∣sence. He run over all the Coasts as far as Tangier, to gather up the Remnants of the Portugal Army, which that Defeat had dispersed. He was acquainted by those, who had escaped from the Battel, that above three thousand Christians were killed upon the place, that a∣bove six thousand Portuguezes were taken Prisoners, and above
four thousand wounded; that all the Foreign Officers had lost their lives; that entire Families of Peo∣ple of Quality were extinguished there, that the Bishops of Porto and Coimbra, were likewise dead, that Don Lewis was killed, that the Dukes de Braganza and d'A∣vero had lost their lives; that the Duke de Barcellos, and Anthony Son of Don Lewis were Prisoners, and that Don Henry was dead. Souza having still a strong Passi∣on for Eugenia, and having never been able to forbear looking upon Don Henry's happiness but with Envy, was overjoy'd at first, when he heard his Rival was dead, but his Reason correcting immediately the first motions of his Passion, he deplored Don Henry's misfortune. He was extreamly concerned at the grief this piece of News would cause in Eugenia, and was more sensible of the loss the State had by this accident, than of the
particular advantage his death might be of to him in the sequel. But he could not forbear enter∣taining some hopes, and fancied that if ever Eugenia could be ca∣pable of a second engagement, all he had done for her, would move her to some acknowledgement; in the impatience he was to see her a∣gain, he suddenly Embarqued all the Portugals, who had escaped from the Battel; he thought of se∣curing Almeida, and stillre specting her the King had loved, and had committed to his care, he asked her what place she would chuse for her retreat, that he might Con∣duct her to it, even to the hazard of his life. Almeida without Brother, King, Lover, Relations, Friends and Suc∣cours; odious to all the Nations, who had interessed themselves in that Quarrel, knew not to what place to carry her misfortunes. Of all the Train she had brought into
Portugal, she had only left a Vene∣tian Maid, who came into her Ser∣vice a little before Mahumet was drove out of his Dominions. This young Person had been taken at Sea by the Moorish Pirates some time after that Almeida was re∣turned from Spain; she was given to that Princess, because she had a thousand fine Qualities, that di∣stinguished her from other Slaves, and her Relations had not yet been able to Ransome her, by reason of the troubles that were in that Kingdom, which caused Al∣meida to wander into several pla∣ces. The Princess had taken an affection for her, and treated her with a great deal of kindness. This Slave seeing her in so great a per∣plexity, told her, that in acknow∣ledgment of the favours she had re∣ceived, she offered her a Retreat at Venice, that the Bailo of that Republick was her Relation, and she was sure, if she would become a
Christian, as she had promised Don Sebastian she would, her Fami∣ly would willingly grant her a Refuge that would not be altoge∣ther unworthy of her. Almeida willingly accepted the proffer, Sou∣za caused her to be conducted to Venice, and then made Sail to∣wards Lisbon. The whole Kingdom was in an extream Consternation. The Peo∣ple knew not if Don Sebastian was dead or alive: All the World la∣mented his misfortunes, and no body knew his fate. Those who were well intentioned, maintained he was still alive, and a Prisoner in Africa. The Seditious said, that though that were true, they could not reprieve him from Captivity, because War had drained the Reve∣nues, and they could not find Mo∣ney enough in the Kingdom for his Ransome. Others caused a re∣port to run, how he was dead: The People would have a King;
the best Politicians, and those that were most honest, doubted of all, and said nothing. There was no∣thing seen but Relations, which seemed all to confirm the News of the Kings Death. Spain had seve∣ral places upon the Confines of A∣frica, that bordered Portugal: Those who were Governours of them stopped all the Pacquets that were sent into Portugal. There were dai∣ly seen new Lists of the dead; the whole Kingdom was in Mourning; each City in Tears; all Families regretted the loss of a Father, a Hsuband, a Son, or a Brother; of∣tentimes one alone deplored all these Persons together; and the Council was at length constrained to appease the Murmurs of the Peo∣ple, to cause Cardinal Henry to come out of the Abby of Calcobassa, to which place he was retired, and to proclaim him Governour Gene∣ral of the Kingdom, in the absence of Don Sebastian his Successour to the Crown.
Eugenia using all her endeavours to have certain News of her Hus∣band, was assured after several ve∣ry exact enquiries, that he had lost his life in that Battel. The grief she was in surpassed that of all other Widows; her Affliction was not confounded in the Publick Desola∣tion; she made it be distinguished by its excess. Souza was no soo∣ner arrived, than he would render the Devoirs that Decency exacts on such occasions: He was told she was returned into a Religious House, where she admitted of no Vi∣sits: He had promised to himself so much pleasure in seeing Eugenia again, and disengaged from Don Henry, that he could not without an extream trouble, find himself disappointed of that happiness. The Abbess of that Convent was his Aunt: He went to beg she would obtain of Eugenia, that he might see her for a moment; but this Widow prescribed her self too severe Rules
to consent to that interview, which she fancied would injure the fideli∣ty she owed the Memory of her Husband, and she still so firmly opposed the measures that Souza took to discourse her, that he was afraid, he should be wanting in the respect he owed her, if he still en∣deavoured to procure himself that satisfaction. While all Portugal was in Tears, Africa echoed with shouts of joy for so great a Victory. Hamet, Molucs Brother, was proclaimed King: He made an Entry into Fez, he brought thither in triumph Ma∣humets Body, with a great number of Prisoners. After which he be∣thought himself to acquire the fa∣vour of the King of Spain. He had means in his hands, that were sure to obtain it: Several Spani∣ards were among his Prisoners; he was Master of Don Sebastian, whose fate no Body knew. Philip stood in need of him: These two Kings
sent Ambassadours to one another. The King of Spain gave to the Value of a hundred thousand Du∣cates in Jewels to the King of Fez; who likewise restored to Philip, without any Ransome, all the Spa∣niards that had been taken Priso∣ners in that War. The report of Don Sebastian's death was renewed every where. New Circumstan∣ces of it were made Publick: It was said, that he had not been met withal amongst the Prisoners, and that having sought for him a∣mongst the dead, a naked Man had been found, whose Body re∣sembled his, and was known to be so by some Portugal Prisoners. Ha∣met delivered this Corps into the Spanish Governours hands of Ceuta. He likewise restored to Philip the Duke of Barcellos without Ran∣some; and the Council thought fit at length to proclaim at Lisbon, that Don Sebastian was dead, and to perform the Publick Ceremo∣nies,
that those People are used to practise on such occasions, for the appeasing the murmurs and the disorders, that were caused by the Doubtful Fate of that unhappy King. Cardinal Henry was Crowned King of Portugal. At first great hopes were conceived from his age and his probity; but besides that the Virtues of one Condition are oftentimes Vices in another, the change of our Fortune almost al∣ways changes the disposition of our Mind. Henry became Haughty, Revengeful and Jealous. Few of the late Kings Courtiers kept in favour under this new Reign. He Persecuted all those who had sha∣red in the pleasures of Don Sebasti∣an; he revenged himself on all, who had not shewn him respect enough, and had only applyed themselves to the Kings Person. The Dutchess of Braganza was the only one of the Antient Court,
whose Credit was augmented un∣der Henry. He had for her a great inclination; her Complaisance, her Eagernesses, and the Affectionate Air she made appear to those she had a mind to please, had engaged Henry. She came to Lisbon upon the first report of the loss of the Battel, to know News of her Son, and Husband; she deplored the loss of the one's Liberty, and the Life of the other; and King Hen∣ry used all his endeavours to di∣vert her Grief. Violanta was not beloved by this Cardinal, but as he had measures to keep with her, by reason of the Pretensions of Don Anthony her Son, he did not shew her any hatred: She was gone into Mourning for the Death of Don Lewis; the better part of the Court had been to Condole with her upon her loss. Henry had not seen her, because he had not consented to Don Lewis his Marrying her, for fear of being
constrained to acknowledge Don Lewis for the Legitimate Successour of the Crown. The Count de Souza was more in Favour than he had ever been: Henry knew his Prudence, esteemed his Merit, and often followed his Counsels in the Government of the State: Don Lewis had ever shared in the plea∣sures of Don Sebastian, and had ever applied himself only to the Person of that King. The hatred that Henry bore him for that reason, did not die with him; he was re∣solved to make his Widow sensible of the effects of it: He brought Suits at Law against her, that were capable of ruining her, and maintained that the better part of her Husbands Estate had been alie∣nated from the Crown, and ought to be reunited to it. Eugenia had plunged her self into such an afflicti∣on, that she neither thought of State nor of Life, and believed she ought not to manage any of those
things, after having lost what she loved. Her Relations were not favourites enough at Court to un∣dertake her defence. Souza Em∣ployed all his Credit to preserve to her the Estate they would have de∣prived her of, and did it with Suc∣cess. Henry Sacrificed his Resent∣ment to the Prayers of this Count, and took pity of Eugenia. But as the Count de Souza durst not ha∣zard seeing her, since she had sent him Word, that he would disoblige her, if he seemed to have that De∣sign; he contented himself with desiring one of that Widows Rela∣tions to acquaint her on the part of Henry, that he restored to her all her Estate, without declaring to this Relation, that Henry had on∣ly granted this Act of Grace to Eu∣genia upon his solicitation; but the noise thereof was already spread through all the City; which Eu∣genia was informed of the the same time, they acquainted her with
this News; she appeared as little sensible of the Services of Souza, as the kindnesses of Henry, so full was her Soul of Grief, and so un∣concerned was she for things of this World. The King of Spain having had Advice, that Don Sebastian's death had been Proclaimed in Portugal, and Cardinal Henry made King, resolved to joyn the powerful Mo∣tives of Religion and Justice to the secret Practices he entertained in all parts, for the maintaining the Pretensions he had upon that Crown. Conscience in Spain is an Actress, that has ever a Principal Part in all things, and had the greatest share in this Intrigue. Phi∣lip caused the most Learned and Famous Casuists to be Consulted, and Civil Layers of his Kingdom, and they unanimously declared, that Don Sebastian being dead, he might Seize on the Kindom of Por∣tugal to the prejudice of Henry:
But whether Philip having other Wars to maintain, feared that the Portuguezes would by force of Arms defend the Crown, they had newly placed upon Henry's head, or was afraid this War would give those People new remembran∣ces of Don Sebastian, whom with∣out any difficulty they had believed to be dead, because they saw a Prince of their Country Succeed him, and of whose death they should not so easily persuade them∣selves, if a stranger should Seize on the Throne; the King of Spain found the ways of Artifice, more sure than those of open Force, and thought it convenient to let Henry Reign, for the little time he had to live, rather than disgust those People by too much Precipitati∣on. As soon as the Duke of Barcel∣los was got out of Hamets Prisons, he passed the Straits to go into Portugal, and promised himself to
satisfie in a little time, the tender impatience of Leonora, who had so long sighed for his return. But Philip, fearing this Duke might occasion new obstacles to the Spa∣niards Pretensions, by reason of the Right the Quality of the Dutchess of Braganza's Heir gave him to that Crown, resolved to retard as much as he could his Ar∣rival. He employ'd all manner of Artifices to hinder the Duke from going to Lisbon: And as he knew that he was to pass by Saint Lucar, he sent Orders to the Duke of Medina Sidonia, who was Governour of that place, to detain him in that City as long as was possible for him. Some New Diversion was daily in∣vented to cause him to stay, and he ever found something New and Magnificent to invite a delay. Se∣veral Pretexts had already been found out to stop him, when the Duke not being able to resist any
longer Leonora's impatience, who desired him incessantly by tender and pressing Letters to return to Lisbon, resolved at length to de∣part from Saint Lucar, and made known with much firmness to the Duke of Medina Sidonia, that he was resolved to depart the next day. This Governour still endea∣voured to persuade him; but see∣ing the Duke was obstinate to be gone, he caused all his Equipage to be seized on with absolute Autho∣rity, and told the Duke of Bar∣cellos as gently as was possible for him, that being Governour of that place for the King of Spain, he could not suffer him to go away without Order from his Master; that he would write to him about it the next day, and that as soon as he received an answer, all the ways should be open to him. The Duke surprized at this procedure, gave notice thereof to the Dutchess his Mother. She complained of
that Violence to Henry: He assu∣red her, he would solicite her Sons Liberty with all the ardour he was capable of, and recei∣ved this occasion of obliging the Dutchess, with so much joy, and so much eagerness, that she no longer doubted, that what she had suspected of him was real. This Dutchess had already re∣marqued how the other Virtue the Cardinal had ever made professi∣on of, suffered it self to be insen∣sibly seduced by Pleasures, which attend a Crown. She was ex∣treamly Complaisant to him; she seemed young; was still Beau∣tiful, and having a Design upon the Crown of Portugal, she was willing to procure Henry's suffrage, and used all her endeavours to in∣sinuate her self into that Kings Favour. Old Men as well as Children are usually won by those who flatter them: Cardinal Henry took great delight in the Com∣plaisances
of that Dutchess, and fancying that Sixty seven Years, with a long Practice of all Virtues, were a sure Preservative against Love, he let his Eyes continually enjoy the Pleasures of seeing that Dutchess, and abandoned himself entirely to the Charms that sedu∣ced him, without foreseeing what it would come to. A Heart that never loved, is as much a Novice at Sixty years old, as in the tenderest youth; and the frequent Con∣versations of a Beautiful Person, have the Art of taming the most Savage Virtue; that of Henry be∣came susceptible by little and little: The Dutchess perceived his Love sooner than he himself, she saw it bud with joy, and applauded her self in secret for that Conquest, that might be of such advantage to her Designs. As soon as the King knew, that the inclination he had for the Dutchess, was love attended with all its disquiets,
he was extreamly concerned; he would have called his reason to his Rescue; but love had drove it a∣way; 'twas too far off to under∣stand him, or to return, and all he could do against that Passion, was to shut it up in his Heart, to conceal it with care from the Eyes of all the Court, and to declare nothing of it to her who caused it. He had the pleasure of seeing the Dutchess, and she was ever Complaisant. She seemed to know nothing of his Passion, but what he was willing to acquaint her with. He insensibly explained to her all he was sensible of after this manner. And as the kindness of Old Men is not so furious as ordi∣nary love, and that 'tis rather a sweet folly than a strong Passion, the violence he used upon himself, did not put him in too much pain, and he enjoy'd with tranquility e∣nough the Pleasure of being near what one loves.
Souza's Passion was not so Calm, what respect soever he had for Eu∣genia's Orders, it was not without an extream constraint, that he o∣beyed them: He ardently desired to see her; could not forbear ma∣king frequent Visits to his Aunt, and the other Friends he had in that Convent; took delight in being under the same Roof with his Mistriss: They talked of her often to him, and the violence he used upon himself to conceal his love from all the World, did not hinder him from taking a great deal of Pleasure in those Conver∣sations: He had a Sister whom he tenderly loved: She desired him one day to accompany her to her Aunts, whom she had a mind to Visit, which he consented to with joy. When they came to the Con∣vent, they were told, that the Abbess was in a Parlour with Eu∣genia, who could not refuse seeing one of her Relations, who was
lately arrived at Lisbon: Souza was full of joy at the News, and was going hastily into the Parlour; but the fear of displeasing her he loved immediately with-held him, and made him think sometime up∣on that Design He let the Abbess know, that her Niece asked to see her; and as there was no mention made of Souza, Eugenia stayed without thinking he was to come with his Sister; he perceived she was vexed and surprized to see him: The grief of having displea∣sed Eugenia, and the Lustre of her Beauty, which seemed to be aug∣mented since her Widowhood, cau∣sed so much trouble in that Lover, that Eugenia could not forbear ha∣ving some pity, though at the first sight of him, she resolved to with∣draw: The disorder, love, respect, and repentance that the Count made appear in his Eyes, and the remembrance of all he had done for her, staid her for some mo∣ments,
and after having thought upon what was her Devoir in that Rencounter, she judged it more convenient to remain, than make it believed by her retreat, that she took a particular care to avoid Souza. The Conversation was ge∣neral; the Count durst not speak of his Passion otherwise than by tender looks, which a respectful fear sometimes curbed, and which Eugenia's severity often refused to understand. This Interview per∣plexing her, she quickly found a pretext to withdraw: The Abbess being called away by some Duties of her profession, retired presently after: This Visit was somewhat short, and Souza parted from thence more charmed with Eugenia than he had ever been. This Widow was afterwards something concerned she had staid in a Company where Souza was present, and reproaching her self sometimes for having seen a Man,
who had loved her in her Hus∣bands life time. The Abbess ha∣ving already observed, that her Nephew had a great Passion for Eugenia, discoursed her often about Souza, and sometimes told her, that Young and Beautiful as she was she could not remain long a Widow, that the Affairs of her Fa∣mily would oblige her to Marry again some one, whose Credit and Prudence might support her Inte∣rest, that she saw in the Count de Souza all that could render her happy, and that if she found she had the least inclination for him, she ought to consent to their Mar∣riage. But Eugenia possessed with the Memory of her Husband, could not suffer any other Idea. The Niceness of her Virtue fancied it Criminal to give Ear to such propositions: She repulsed them with all the firmness that the Ci∣vility she owed the Abbess, and the esteem she had for the Count
de Souza could permit her, and made them so well know, that such Discourses were not pleasing to her, as they ceased to be im∣portunate. The Pleasure Cardinal Henry enjoy'd with the Dutchess of Bra∣ganza did not last long. Anthony, who was then in Africa, and had cunningly concealed his Quality from all the Moors, found the means of escaping, and returned to Lisbon, but was but coldly received by King Henry. All the Court immediately asked him News of Don Sebastian; but as he had been amongst the Common Prisoners, was one of the first that that had freed himself from Slave∣ry, and the Fate of this King had ever been kept very secret in Afri∣ca, he could say nothing particu∣lar thereof. He saw the Dutchess, she charmed him, and he fancied she might be useful to him in re∣gard of the Pretensions he had to
the Crown: He thought, if she joyned the right she had to that Kingdom to his, they should carry it from all others. He paid respects to the Dutchess, which met with a favourable reception; she consider'd his Pretensions in the same Design as he had done hers. Great Intrigues were formed between them; and though she kept great measures with Henry, he conceived so strong a Jealousie of that Union, that he made his Complaint to the Dut∣chess, and fell in a rage against Anthony. The one without dis∣owning his Passion, promised the King to Renounce it in his Favour, and the other denied she had any Correspondence with that Prince. Every thing Alarmed this Jea∣lous King: Anthony durst not be in any place where the Dutchess went; and as forbidding to see one another, does surnish those who have any disposition to love, with the occasion of making secret assig∣nations
which ever advances the aims of a Passion: Anthony who could not see the Dutchess in Pub∣lick, saw her in Private; he desired secret Rendezvouzes of her, which she was not able to refuse him. They had mutual Interests that concer∣ned the State; Policie served Love in that occasion, as Love serves Policie in others. The Dutchess aimed at a Crown: Anthony em∣ploy'd all his cares to make him∣self King. He was very much be∣loved by the People, he gained the Suffrages of the Principal Inhabi∣tants of the City, who went to desire Henry to name a Successour to the Throne, and to consider in that Nomination the Rights of An∣thony and the Voice of the Peo∣ple, who declared themselves in his favour. This Harangue fright∣ed Henry; he had conceived a mortal hatred to his Nephew, since he had sancied him his Rival. He resolved to deprive him at one
Cast of the Kingdom, and of the Dutchess, by Marrying that Prin∣cess. He coloured this Design with the necessity of giving a Successour to the Throne, for the preventing those Wars the pretenders to that Crown, threatned the State with∣al. He Communicated this Design to the Dutchess of Braganza: He flattered her Ambition; she con∣sented to it, notwithstanding the inclination she had for Anthony. This pretext did lure the simple; but there were two great obstacles to this Marriage. Henry was a Priest, and sixty years old. Kings never want able Men, who remove the Scruples and Difficulties that are contrary to their Designs. The Physiicans told him, he was ca∣pable of getting Successours. Some Casuists assured him, that he might easily obtain a Dispensation from the Pope for a Match so necessary to the State; and Edward of Castel Bianco was nominated Ambassadour
to his Holiness, for the obtaining that Dispensation. The King of Spain having Ad∣vice thereof, was very much a∣larmed. His Partizans talked pub∣lickly, that Henry was incapable of Marriage, and he could never have any Children, but such as were imposed upon him. Philip caused the Pope to be desired he would not grant that Dispensation, and sent to Lisbon a certain Jacobin, called Ferrand du Castilio, a very subtil Divine and Cunning Monk, who by the free and good Recep∣tion the Fathers of his Order had at Court, insinuated himself cun∣ningly into Henry's Favour, with∣out making known to any one so∣ever, that he came from the Court of Spain, and without acquainting any body with the occasion of his Journey; he laboured under the Cloak of his Monkiship Habbit, and under the appearence of Piety, to effect and bring to pass the Designs
of Philip. He coloured all his Practices with a great Zeal for the Church, and devoutly represented to Henry, that his Marrying would utterly destroy the Catho∣lick Religion; that the Heresies which then Reigned, would be more Spirited by that Action; that the Hereticks, who pretend that Marriage is not incompatible with the Service of our Altars, would cite him amongst all Christian Peo∣ple, as an Example that would au∣therise their belief, and would Scan∣dalise the Romanists, and that it would be much better to lose all the Kingdoms of the World, than to make the least breach in the Ca∣tholick Faith. But what care soever the Pre∣tenders to the Crown of Portugal had taken since the Defeat in A∣frica, to persuade the People that Don Sebastian was dead, they had not been able to establish that be∣life so well amongst them, but there
always ran some report in that Kingdom, how this King was still alive. They learnt from time to time, some News of his Captivity: One of the Principal Inhabitants of the Isles of Tercera, who had accompanied that unfortunate Prince in his Voyage, and had esca∣ped out of the Moors Prisons, had so well persuaded it to the People of those Islands, that they ever made mention of Don Sebastian, as of a King who was living, in the Publick Prayers. He went to Lisbon himself to warrant this News, and to assure it to all the Court; but Cardinal Henry would give no Credit to it, and fancied this rumour was only a New Arti∣fice for the putting by his Marriage. This Man was treated as an Im∣posture; his Person was secured without any noise, and secretly dispatched into the other World: Almeida being still at Venice, heard all these rumours, and as she de∣sired
with more Passion than any other, that they were real, she gave easier Credit to them than any Body else, and by Letters de∣sired those Friends she had left at Lisbon, to Contrive some means of Delivering Don Sebastian. But all that came from that African Prin∣cess was odious to the Portuguezes, and this News was so ill entertain∣ed at Court, that the most disin∣teressed Politicians stisled it in its Birth. Anthony was yet more alarmed at Henrys Projects, than the King of Spain was, he redoubled his Ef∣forts to become King of Portugal, and to render himself worthy of the Dutchess of Braganza. He con∣tinually endeavoured to acquire new Partizans; he sent to Solicite the Magistrates of all the Cities; he made known to the People, that it was for them to choose a King, because the Salick Law be∣ing received in that Kingdom, the
Crown wanting Heirs Males in a direct Line, the Election belong∣ed to them, and that John I, one of their Kings, on such another oc∣casion, had been chosen by the People. He supported the Male∣contents, flattered the Bold, and se∣duced the Weak: But his Love was yet more troublesome than his Ambition; he loved the Dut∣chess as much as the Throne, and was no more sure of the Possession of the one than of the Love of the other. When he had learnt that she consented to the Match which Henry Projected, he went to her privately, and told her, after having entertained her with the Progres∣ses he made upon the Peoples Minds: Heaven is my Witness, Ma∣dam, that I less esteem the Conquest of a Kingdom than that of your Heart, and if I did not believe that the Throne would one day advance me up to you, I should never think of raising my self up to it; I know you
are worthy of a Crown, I also know you cannot fail of it; but I know not whether you had not rather choose to receive it from the Hands of Henry than from mine; and if pre∣ferring a certain Possession before doubtful Hopes, you are not more incli∣ned to that King, as old and decrepit as he is, than to a young Prince, who loves you to odoration: But Madam, without particularizing the difficul∣ties that oppose the Match you have consented to—Sir, interupted the Dutchess, those would be useless, I know all that is contrary to this Ʋni∣on on the Kings part, and am willing to acquaint you with all those that opposes it on mine; I do not find that Henry is lovely; you have all that is requisite to please, I would prefer you with delight before that King, and in fine, I should love you, if I belie∣ved my Heart; but Prince, better regulated Motions are to be Consul∣ed for our Ʋnion, Love must be silent, and Reason ought alone to
speak when we aim at a Crown: My endeavours are to reign, and tho I am not vain enough to abandon my self to that fancy, I am so ambitious as not to neglect any thing that may place me upon the Throne. Ah! Madam, answered Anthony after a Passio∣nate manner, when we are sensible of Love, Ambition has not that Power over our Actions, and for my part, I call Heaven to Witness, I hardly ever dream of Reigning, but I think in∣cessantly of you. That is not the way to please me, reply'd the, the Affairs of the Kingdom are much more pressing than those of our Love. When you have employ'd your thoughts with advantage upon the Throne, you will have time to think agreeably of me: Procure, Sir, your self a Crown, and leave the Care to me of making you be beloved: If I am not as sensible as you, I am at least more sincere, and am willing to avow to you, that with a Crown you would please me more than the King; but
that the King will please me more than you as long as you are not Crow∣ned. As to the rest, if you believe these Sentiments too severe for your love, think that 'tis not to be very indifferent to hear you in private and without anger, and to declare my self in favour of your uncertain Cabals and doubtful hopes, against the sincere and sure Offers which the King makes me of his Crown. But, Madam, answered Anthony, you have continual favours for Henry. This is all I can do for you Prince, reply'd she, I will not openly fall out with the King, (nor would you Counsel me to do so) I have neither Forces nor Friends to offer you, we have both of us some Pretensions to the Crown, I am willing to joyn mine to yours: Endeavour on your fide, while I shall Act on mine, and be persuaded, that if I could be Mistriss of the Kingdom, without sharing it with Henry, I would share it with you.
These last Wards filled Anthony full of joy: He made a thousand Passionate acknowledgments to the Dutchess, they both agreed at par∣ting to use their Efforts for the procuring Father Ferrand to be of their Cabal: Anthony perceiving, that opposing as he did Henry's Marriage, he would not be contra∣ry to their Union, and the Dut∣chess, believing, that being Antho∣nies Friend, as he had declared himself he was, he would some∣times facilitate their interview. This Good Father, who did not so much fear the Marriage of the Dutchess with Anthony, as with Henry, consented to favour the Passion of those two Lovers. Af∣ter having exacted from them an authentick Declaration of the pu∣rity of their intentions, believing he should ever have means and time enough to destroy the tender Commerce he thought fit to enter∣tain, if it should once happen to
be contrary to his Masters Designs, this Religious acquitted himself worthily of that Commission An∣thony not thinking Father Ferrand to be a Pensioner of Spain, and dai∣ly receiving a thousand good Offi∣ces from him, declared to him part of his Projects, which the zea∣lous Father, immediately gave no∣tice to of Philip. He was very dili∣gent, and rendred himself necessa∣ry to the Dutchess, insomuch as she only concealed to him her most secret Designs. An occasion that offered of ser∣ving her, augmented the Confi∣dence she had in him. The King of Spain was in no haste to answer the Letters that Henry had writ to him concerning the Liberty of the Duke of Barcellos. He was still detained at St. Lucars; the Dutchess his Mother was extream∣ly vexed, the People murmured, and the Jacobin seeing that this Detension might have ill Conse∣quences,
wrote secretly to Philip, and at the same time promised the Dutchess, that the Duke of Medi∣na, whose particular Friend he said he was, would doubtless give Li∣berty to her Son, upon his desire. And indeed the Duke of Barcellos went presently after from St. Lu∣cars. 'Twas given out, that the Duke of Medina out of too much precaution had detained him with∣out any Order from Court. Fa∣ther Ferrand seemed to be principal Agent in that Affair. The Dut∣chess was full of acknowledgment, and the King of Spain by very obli∣ging Letters, desired this young Duke to pass into Spain, and come and divert himself at that Court, pretending to be very desirous of seeing him. But the Duke of Barcel∣los distrusted the Spaniards Carress, and thought not fitting to under∣take that Journey. The Dutchess his Mother not being willing, he should engage himself further with
Leonora, sent him word, that it was as unsafe for him to be at Lis∣bon, as at St. Lucar, ordered him to retire to Villa Visola, where he would be Master, and have no∣thing to fear. What Instances so∣ever Leonora had made to this Duke, he was forced to obey; War, Ambition, Absence and Plea∣sures had almost effaced her out of his Heart; and times and the cares of his Fortune, quite disen∣gaged him from that Passion which had never been very violent. After Eugenia had passed some Months in the Monastry she was retired into, the Counsels of her Relations, the Prayers of her Friends, and the necessity of her Affairs obliged her to return to Lisbon. All the Court Ladies made her their Visits. The Dut∣chess of Braganza was of this num∣ber; she made her some obliging reproaches upon the difficulties there was to see her, where she
was in that Convent. You would hardly consent to see your Relations, said that Dutchess to her smiling, and of all the Men in the World, the Count of Souza had only the happiness of Discoursing you there. Tho Eugenia had nothing to re∣proach her self for that interview, she was however out of Counte∣nance and Confused at this Dis∣course; she was afraid, they would suspect her of having some intrigue with a Man who had loved her so long a time, and defended her self as well as she could from this Reproach. But the Dutchess ha∣ving observed her Disorder and Blushing, fancyed there was some intelligence betwixt those two Per∣sons. Lewis of Granada who former¦ly justified Souza, acquainted the King, that he was in love with Eugenia: The Dutchess had been told it, and as Gallant Women are ever glad to make it believed, that the most severe are ingaged in some
Intrigue of Galantry, this Dut∣chess continued maliciously that Railery, and reported every where, that Eugenia had a long time had a kindness for Souza. This Widow was extreamly Jea∣lous of her Honour; she was ex∣treamly vexed at Souza for having brought upon her that Disgrace, tho she very well knew it was not his fault. She resolved never to see him more, and let him know every time he came to Visit her, that she was indisposed, and could not see any Body. Souza knew not by what Crime he had merited all these Cruelties: He was sure, he had never failed in his Respect to Eugenia, and had ever Sa∣crificed all things to her: he per∣ceived, that she could not be igno∣rant of what he had done for her, and knew too well the severity of her Virtue, to dare to undertake to write to her. She had left off seeing the Abbess of the Convent
she had made her retreat to, be∣cause she was ever talking to her in favour of him. The Relations of that Widow knowing what the Count had done for her, and see∣ing the Credit he had at Court, were desirous she should consent to Marry him; the Sister of Don Henry her Husband, and for whom she had ever had a great inclinati∣on, was a great Friend of Souza's Sister. They both went to see her, and Souza declared to her his love, and his despair. He desired her to know what Eugenia could accuse him of, and to procure him a mo∣ment of Discourse with her. And this Friend promised Souza and his Sister to employ all the Power she had over her, to their satisfaction. The End of the Third Part.
Don Sebastian KING OF Portugal. An Historical Novel. PART IV. Done out of French by Mr. FERRAND SPENCE. LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley and S. Mag∣nes, in Russel-street in Covent-garden, 1683.
Don Sebastian, KING OF PORTUGAL. IN the mean time, the Pope made no great haste to grant Henry the Dispensation that his Ambassadour demanded of him. The Cabals of Spain were stronger than the Solicitations of Castel Bianco. The People grew impatient, and feared the Wars, which the Pretenders to the Crown threatned Portugal with after the Death of Henry. Anthony in all places excited the murmurs; he had
gained the Peoples Favour, and the suffrages of the Court. Philip had notice of all that passed: He order∣ed Father Ferrand to seek out the means of stopping his Progresses; which the Father had Infallible ones to do, and refolved to pro∣cure his being Banished from Lis∣bon. Henry was but too much disposed to hate him; the Cabals he raised every where, and the love he had for the Dutchess, were such Crimes, in respect of that King, as could not fail of drawing down his vengeance; but Father Ferrand was not willing to be the Informer, this was too contrary to the good and devout Character he affected; he would not involve the Dutchess in this Affair, he had particular Considerations for her: The Friendship and Confidence of those two Lovers were necessary to him; wherefore he so behaved himself as to keep them both his Friends. Leonora was vexed at
the Dutchess, being she had hin∣dred her Son from corning to Lis∣bon, and fancied, that she alone was the cause of this change: The peeks that Love causes between persons of that Sex, become ir∣reconcileable aversions. Father Fer∣rand had some acquaintance with Leanora, from the time he so licited the Liberty of the Duke of Barcel∣lo: She had made several Visits to this good Father, to learn News of her Lover, and he had discove∣red the hatred she had for the Dut∣chess, when he acquainted her, that the Duke of Barcellos had Or∣der to go to Villa Visola. Chance had put into the Jaco∣bi hands a Letter that Anthony wrote to it he Dutchess, in which he let her know, that he had learnt, that his Holiness would spin out the business of the Dispen∣sation so long a time, that Henry should be dead before an answer would be given to it; that she was
too good to suffer the persecutions of so useless an Amour, as was that of the Old Cardinal, and too Cru∣el if she did not declare her self in favour of a Prince, who would infallibly put the Crown upon her head. This Letter said enough a∣gainst the Duke, and too little a∣gainst the Dutchess, to accuse her of a Formal Intrigue. There need∣ed no more than to shew it the King. Father Ferrand shewed it Leonora, as if he had found it by chance. She desired the Father to give her that Letter: He obstinate∣ly denied it, till he had made her promise, she would never declare from whom she had it; and after having given it her, he desired her not to make any noise with it, but to shew it the King with as much caution and moderation as was possible, if the good of the State obliged her so to do. As soon as she had this Letter, she bethought her self of the means to shew it to
Henry, and made choice of Phoebus Monis, who was Vereador of Lisbon, and had great access to the King, and was entirely devoted to Leo∣nora, having been one of Christo∣pher de Tavora her Fathers Officers. She sent for him, and told him, that it was important for the good of the State, and for his particular Inte∣rests, that the King were acquain∣ted with a Letter, which was come to her Hands: And after ha∣ving shew'd it him, she begged him to let Henry see it, and told him, that she found it in the Jaco∣bin's Church, which was the very place where the Dutchess had let it fall. Monis executed this Com∣mission very punctually. The King saw that Letter, and was in an ex∣tream fury against Anthony: He Banished him from Court, and sent him to his Priory of Crato. But notwithstanding all the measures the King took to hinder the Inter∣views of these two Lovers, Antho∣ny
did not fail to take his leave of the Dutchess, through the in∣dustry of the Jacobin; they took measures to write to one another, and it was this good Father, who received and convey'd the Letters from and to either party, he was their dearest Confident, and best Friend. They fancied they could not choose a more faithful Corre∣spondent in their Commerce; they imagined, that they would sooner open the Pacquets of all the Court, than those that were addressed to the Religious, who have ever had in Spain and Portugal, particular Priviledges and Prerogatives. Eugenia's Sister-in-law, often Dis∣coursed her about Count de Souza as she had promised him to do, and desired her with so much earnest∣ness to permit the Count to come and see her, that notwithstanding the repugnance her Scruples gave her to that Visit, she consented to it, yet upon Condition, that it
should be in presence of that mutu∣al Friend; she immediately sent Word to the Count de Souza to come to Eugenia's: How great was the joy of this Lover, who had sighed so long a time for this hap∣piness! He run thither with eager∣ness, but how great was the trou∣ble, when after having Saluted that Beautiful Widow, he saw more severity in her looks than she had ever shown him; he likewise fan∣cied he saw there some anger, and was extreamly surpriz'd, when Eu∣genia's Sister being willing to with∣draw a little to give them the Li∣berty of entertaining one another, she staying her, told her, Is it to abandon me, Sister, that you have engaged me to this Interview? And the violence I did to my self for your sake, does it not deserve you should be as good as your Word to me? I am very unhappy, Madam, answered the Count full of grief and respect, that the sight of me is so great a con∣straint
to you: The love I have so long had for you, the endeavours I have used, and the care I have ta∣ken to conceal it even from your Eyes, ought not they to have appeased your Anger? You have not so well concealed your Passion, said Eugenia, but that all the Court has known it, it has even since some few days caused reports to run, that are injurious to my Reputation; and notwithstanding all the pressing Solicitations of my Sister, I should not at present have consented to see you, if I had not had the Design of begging you to stifle that Passion, and to avoid carefully for the future the occasions of seeing me, far from seeking them as you do? Ah! Madam, cried the Count, could you put me to a more cruel Torture? Have you forgotten my past respects? Do you complain of my present Carriage? And do you think 'tis in my power to forbear loving you in the future? My Lord, re∣ply'd she, I remember with an ex∣tream
acknowledgment, all you have done for me; I should even see at pre∣sent your affection without displeasure, and should with joy persuade my self, that you would ever love me: But I love my Honour, and will follow my Devoir. If I approved your Passion, it would be believed, that I suffered it in my Husbands Life time. It has been already but too much talked of, and I will not give ground for those Calumnies. I loved Don Hen∣ry, and he loved me; I deplore his death; I thought ever to cherish his Memory, and never elsewhere en∣gage a Heart that I have given him. Does not Death break all manner of Engagements, Madam, reply'd Sou∣za? Don Henry's Ashes, do they ex∣act any fidelity from you? You have ever lived after such a manner, that the most bespattering Persons could not suspect your Conducts: All the World does but too well know, what an ex∣cess of kindness you had for Don Henry. 'Tis well enough known,
what a veneration I have ever had for you; and if you would render me happy, those Reproaches which you are so much afraid of, and which have only been the light suspicion of a Malicious Person, would be dissi∣pated by our Ʋnion. The Count endeavoured by these reasons and all others his Wit and Passion could inspire him with, to render Euge∣nia more favourable to his Passion, and less sensible of the Memory of Don Henry; but the austerity of her Virtue made her inflexible: And her Sister-in-law, who knew the Credit, Passion and Desert of Souza, had all the trouble imagi∣nable to obtain from her Sister, that the Count might see her sometimes; and Eugenia would not consent to it, till he had promised he would see her but seldom, not speak to her of love, nor make any Propositions of Marriage as long as her Mourning lasted. Souza obey∣ed
her, he saw her very rarely, and said not a Word to her of his Passion. But Love knows how to make it self understood without the help of Words, and Discourses the fullest of kindness are not those that are the most persuasive: Tho his Visits were very regular, his Assiduities, his Cares, and all his Actions spoke in favour of a Passi∣on, that his Mouth durst not Ex∣plain. Eugenia, who had refused to understand the ordinary Lan∣guage of Love, hearkned to these Interpreters, without being displea∣sed, and was very glad that the severity of her Devoir was decei∣ved by these little Artifices, and that the Carriage of so respectful a Lover stifled all manner of re∣proaches. Henry's Love being something reassured by the removal of Antho∣ny, he employ'd himself entirely to the Pretensions that the Dut∣chess had to the Throne, against
the Cabals of all aspiring Candi∣dates to that Crown: He made known to the Deputies of the States, that he would favour that Dutchess in all that should be possible; he Solicited the Clergy for her; he Prayed the Nobility; Flattered the Commons; promi∣sed some, threatned others, and at length made so many Cabals for the Dutchess, that part of the States declared themselves already in Favour of her Pretensions. The King of Spain caused forty thousand Men to March to the Frontiers of Portugal, to joyn Force to the Rea∣sons and Artifices he had already employ'd. And that nothing might be neglected, he sent two Persons of great knowledge to Lisbon, in the Quality of Ambas∣sadours, that they might make known the Right of his Pretensi∣ons to the King and the States of Portugal, with Order however not to make any Act, by which they
should acknowledge the Jurisdicti∣on of Henry. All these Agents made no progress with him in their Ne∣gouation: His heart had preingaged his Mind in favour of the Dutchess; they in vain made Presents and Pro∣mises to Persons of Quality, and to the People for procuring their Suf∣frages: The Voice of a King how feeble soever, has more power than the strongest Cabals, and what is most difficult to other Men, is ever easie to Lovers. None but the Jacobin was capa∣pable of warding the blow that threatned the Pretensions of the King of Spain. The Dutchess put that entire Confidence in him, as that she gave him the Letters she wrote to Anthony, for the Con∣veying them to him: And as she one day told this Good Father, she would send him one the next morning for that Prince, he ac∣quainted Leonora with it the same day, that she might cause that Letter to be taken from the Man,
who used to bring them him. Leonora seeking all occasions of in∣juring the Dutchess, went to find out Monis, and told him, that she knew an infallible means of aug∣menting his Credit with Henry, by rendring him a Signal Service; that he needed only to Way-lay one of the Dutchess of Braganza's Servants, and take from him by force or consent a Letter he was to carry the next morning to the Jacobin; and that if he let the King see it, it would procure him a Recompence above his hopes. Monis was one of those Ambitious Men, who desiring to advance themselves at Court, employ'd all manner of means to get into Fa∣vour. He accepted the propositi∣on with joy, and found it no dif∣ficult task to get that Letter out of the Mans hands, when he spoke to him in the Kings Name. It was very kind, and made appear Corre∣spondence enough with Anthny, to
reduce the King into utter despair. This Letter made a great noise at Court: Father Ferrand saw that the Sequels of it could not be safe for him. And as People of that Profession are ever ready to change place, without much noise and E∣quipage, he departed the same day to return into Spain: And all those who were acquainted with this precipitated departure, sancied the King not taking in good part the Advices that this Good Father gave him upon his Marriage, had Commanded him to retire. Henry being become desperate with what he had learnt of the Dutchess, went to her House in the violence of his Transport, and told her all that Choller can inspire a Jealous Husband with. She endeavourd at first to persuade him, that her Enemies had forg'd that Letter for the preventing the Effect of his kindnesses. She would then, not being able to deny her
own Hand Writing, make Henry believe, that she had been put upon by surprize to write that Letter, and had been perswaded it was ne∣cessary to her Interests. But the King not relishing any of her Ex∣cuses, and still loading her with reproaches, she told him very haughtily, that he could not com∣plain of her with Justice, that not having made him any promise, he had no right to ask her any thing; and that if she had had any Complaisance for him, he ought to be obliged to her for it, and not pretend it was an engagement in her. He would have represen∣ted to her, all the Cares he had taken to cause her to be preferred before the other Pretenders to the Crown; he vow'd to her the Ar∣dour of his Passion, and the Design he had taken of Marrying her; but she would not suffer him to talk long upon that Subject. I know you would Marry me, answer'd she him very firmly, I likewise dis∣posed
my self to give you my Hand; but you also know if love had begun that Ʋnion on your side, Policy en∣deavoured to Compleat it on mine, and you have too much Ʋnderstand∣ing and Experience to believe that a Blind Love made me seek for this Marriage: If I have any Inclination for Anthony, I have yet much more for my Grandeur and my Devoir: If you would have made me Queen, I would have Married you, and never have seen him. If he could have Crowned me, I would have given him my Hand, and never listned to your siighs: I have considered, that the thoughts of my Grandeur requires I should manage both; I thought I might without deceiving you, and without doing my self an injury, have some Complaisance for your Highness, and I fancied, my Devoir would permit me to have some inclination for a Prince, who shewed a great deal of love for me. Your thoughts deceived you, answered Henry
haughtily, the Bastard of a Prince, is but a meer Gentleman, Madam, and it it is to want Discretion and Respect, to place Anthony in your Heart under that Quality in paral∣lel with me. I never make Com∣parison, reply'd the Dutchess to him, nettled at this Discourse, An∣thony hath-his Merit, you have yours, and I know how to do Justice to both. Mine shall not be so fa∣vourable to that Rebel, as yours, answered the King, going away in a rage, and time will make appear, how much you are mistaken in your Projects. Cardinal Henry retir'd in the cru∣elest vexation he had ever been; he shut himself up for two hours in his Closet, without suffering any body to see him: How unhappy am I, said he, that I have not been able to defend my heart against the Dut∣chess of Braganza? Her pretended Affection only aimed at seducing me, and my Age and Experience have not
been able to defend me against her Artifices; I fancied she had some in∣clination for me; and I knew not, that she was only sensible to Ambiti∣on, and that a Man of my years, was not likely to enflame any Woman with love: Why had I the Capricious Design of Marrying? What is be∣come of the severe Virtue I ever made profession of? I formerly served for an example to all the Kingdom, and am at present the Subject of its Laughter: How fatal is my Throne to me! it costs me my Repose, Inno∣cence and Liberty. What Crimes have not Ambition: and Love made me already Commit? I have depri∣ved some of their Estates, Banished others; I persecute my Nephew with Gruelty; I frustrate the Rights of all those who pretend to the Crown, and all this in favour of an ungrateful Woman, who despises me, and Sacri∣fices me to a Rival. I must aban∣done that Perfidious Woman, see her no more, and recall into my heart
the Virtue that I have Banished thence: Alas! it rendred me happy and peaceable, and I am at present the most unfortunate of all Men. It was by these and such other like Reflexions, that Henry endeavou∣red to Exhale his Grief, and Cure his Love; he ceased seeing the Dutchess, and no longer favoured her Pretensions. He resolved to give to the Right of the King of Spain the Suffrages and Cares he had done to the Pretensions of the Dut∣chess of Braganza. He proposed to the States, to Name Philip for his Successour; but as the Portu∣guezes have ever been Enemies to the Government of Spain, that Proposition was not kindly recei∣ved, and the King of Spain con∣tinued to send Forces upon the Frontiers of Portugal. These War∣like Preparations alarmed all the Neighbouring Princes: The Pope being willing to take advantage of that occasion, to become Arbitrator
of the Christian Princes, caused his Mediation to be offered to Phi∣lip for the pacifying mutters, and reconciling those differences. But the King of Spain, who would ap∣pear as Submissive to the Pope as he was Fixed to his Interests, did not re∣fuse his Offers, he made his acknow∣ledgments to the Nuncio; he likewise accepted them in General terms; he was too much a Politician open∣ly to refuse that Mediation; but not being willing to give New Examples to Christian Princes of acknowledging the Apostolick See for the Judge of Kingdoms, he spun things out to length, with∣out giving any Positive answer to his Holinesses Nuncio; and when he could no longer excuse making Reply, he told him, that the Justice of his Pretensions were so well grounded, and so manifest, that there was no occasion for a Mediator in that Affair; that Hen∣ry was too well intentioned to∣wards
him, and the States of Por∣tugal did sufficiently acknowledge his Right: However, that if any Change happened in Affairs, and it grew necessary to choose an Ar∣bitratour of that Difference, he would not fail to have recourse to the Holy Father, as to the Refuge and Judge of all true Christians, and to make use in that occasion of his Holinesses Zeal. During all these Negotiations, Henry whom Age and Truobles had very much weakned, fell Sick, and died about four days after, al∣most in the Arms of the Dutchess of Braganza, who was reconciled to him, but had however employ'd all her Address in vain to persuade him to make her Succeed in the Kingdom of Portugal by his Will. They had not yet had time to think of the Funerals of this Car∣dinal, when four Deputies from the Isles of Terceras, came to Court to Inform that Don Sebastian was
newly Landed in their Island, and was lodged in the Convent of the Cordeliers: That he was Roy∣ally Served, and that those Reli∣gious had borrowed the most pre∣cious Moveables they could find in that Country, and a great quan∣tity of Plate for his use. These News excited New Troubles a∣mongst the People, and new A∣larms in the Minds of the Preten∣ders. Souza was sent into those Islands with two Deputies from the Governours of Lisbon, to ve∣rifie all these things; and the Count had the joy before his de∣parture, to learn from the Mouth of Eugenia her self, that he should find her less severe at his return, and she would permit him to pro∣pose their Marriage to her Rela∣tions. He departed with these hopes, his Voyage was not long; he learnt as soon as he was arriv'd at the Isles of Terceras, that Don Sebastian was gone from thence
incognito the Night before; that he would not suffer any one to attend him, nor make known to what place he designed to go. The Envoys who were with Souza, ask∣ed those Religious, who had en∣tertained the King, if they had heard no talk of Don Henry? They assured them, that he was killed in Battel. The Envoys returned to Lisbon, after having to no pur∣pose made exact enquiry after the King: They assured Eugenia and all her Relations of Don Henry's death: That Widow was out of Mourn∣ing: Her Relations and her Friends knowing the Merit and Birth of Sou∣za, pressed her with so much earnest∣ness to conclude that Match, that she suffered her self to be vanquished by the Counts Constancy, and the desires of all his acquaintance. This Marriage was accomplished with great satisfaction on both parts. And nothing had been comparable to the Count of Souza's happiness, if its continuance had been equal to its Charms.
Anthony made still new efforts to mount the Throne, and to Marry the Dutchess, and his love enflamed his Ambition. He was Elected for the Defendour of the Publick Liberty in some Cities; he caused himself to be Proclaimed King in others, and having drawn together some few Troops, he Marched towards Lisbon, where they would have refused to let him in. But the Dutchess of Braganza and her Friends, augmenting the disorder that the approach of those Forces caused in the City, Anthony entred it without much resistance, and caused himself to be Proclaim∣ed King by main Force. The Duke of Alva, who Commanded the King of Spains Forces, being entred Portugal, seized all the Cities he met with in his passage: The Pope hearing of the Conster∣nation the Portuguezes were redu∣ced to, set Cardinal Alexander Ria∣no as his Legate to Philip. This
King having notice thereof, con∣cluded, that besides the great au∣thority which the Title of Peace maker of Christendom would bring to the Apostolick See, the Pope would make a Vassal of him who should be Crowned by his Arbitrage. He resolved to take Possession of the Kingdom of Por∣tugal, before the Popes Legate could arrive in Spain: He sent to the Duke of Alva to advance his Conquests with all possible Expe∣dition: Gave Order, that in all places in his Dominions, through which the Legate was to pass, they should detain him there as long as they could, he pretended to be Sick, and sent word to the Legate, when near Badage, that his indisposition had delay∣ed the Entry he ought to make him, and he desired him to wait some time longer. The Le∣gate desired his leave to come to him incognito, which he could not
deny; but he handsomely declined the Popes Mediation, and told his Legate, that Affairs were too far advanced by Arms, that very few Cities remained for him to Con∣quer in Portugal, and all Kings would repute as weakness the re∣gard he should have for his Holi∣ness. After this Civil refusal the Legate would have had his Audience of leave to have gone into Portugal, in pursuance of his Orders from the Holy See: But Philip, fearing that Anthony and the Dutchess of Braganza, whom the Pope seemed to favour, might draw some ad∣vantage from the Legates presence, would not consent to his departure before he had made his Entry in Form. In these Publick Calamities, no body was happy but the Count de Souza; and yet it may be said, that the Zeal he had for the State hin∣dred him from relishing perfectly the delights of his Marriage. He
was not born for the Pleasures of Love, and as he was one day talk∣ing amorously with Eugenia, he was told that a Merchant who came from Africa, asked to speak with him; Souza troubled at this News, without knowing any rea∣son; all Eugenia's Blood was fro∣zen, without being able to tell why, and the Merchant being brought in told Eugenia, that he had lately seen Don Henry: She fainted away at that Name. Sou∣za, in an extream Surprize, answe∣red the Merchant, that what he said was false, that Don Henry was killed in the Battel of Don Se∣bastian, and that all the News they had received from Africa, had but too well confirmed his death. All the World believed it, my Lord, answered the Merchant, because Don Henry was not seen amongst the other Captives, and Hamet for im∣portant and secret Designs, caused Persons of the greatest Confideration,
who had been taken in that War, to be drawn out from amongst the Com∣mon Prisoners, and concealed apart in unknown Places. The Africans set on foot the rumours of their Deaths among the Portugal Priso∣ners: Don Henry was of this num∣ber, and as these secret Prisoners have at present something more Li∣berty, he found the means of seeing me the day before my departure, and desired me to go find out Euge∣nia at Lisbon, and desire her from him, to use her endeavours to free him out of so long a Captivity. Sou∣za asked the Merchant why Don Henry did not write: The Mer∣chant answered, because he wanted the means of doing it, and was only able to say to him four Words. The Count not knowing what Credit to give to the Words of this Mer∣chant, seeing on the one side great appearance of Truth, and wishing on the other that it were all False, found an expedient to get out of
that uncertainty; and after having taken care to recover Eugenia out of her Swoon, and given Order to her Maids to get her to Bed; he led that Merchant into a Gallery of his House, where Don Henry's Picture hung amongst several o∣ther Pieces which that Gallery was Adorned with. I shall not be∣lieve you, said Souza to him, except you discover amongst these Pieces, the Pourtraict of Don Henry, whom you say, you lately spoke to: The Merchant would have at first ex∣empted himself from that Tryal, and told Souza, that the Troubles Don Henry had suffered in his Cap∣tivity, might have so changed him, that he did not resemble what he was formerly: However having cast his Eyes upon his Picture, he knew him again immediately, and cryed: Ah! my Lord, there's Don Henry's Portraict, and his misfor∣tunes have not changed his Fea∣tures.
These words quite ruined Sou∣za; he had till that moment questi∣oned his unhappiness; but when he saw this Merchant knew that Portraict to be Don Henry's Picture, he had no hopes left him. He was penetrated with all the grief that a Lover can be sensible of, when his beloved Object is forced from him, and he deprived of the delights of a perfect Love: Euge∣nia's Beauties, and the Pleasures he had enjoy'd with her came crowd∣ing into his Mind. The Idea of so many Charms raising the value of the happiness he had possessed, made him know the greatness of the loss he was going to have, and made his grief excessively stinging. This Blow, and those first Reflexions rendred him at first motionless; then walking apace some moments in that Galle∣ry, he told the Merchant, after be∣ing something recovered from his disorder, That he saw a great many
Difficulties in what he now informed him of, that he would send into Africa to know the Truth of that Affair, and desired him on his side to make use of the Correspondence he had in that Country for the procuring more certain proofs of Don Henry's being still alive. The Merchant promis∣ed to use his utmost endeavours to procure those Informations; and Souza returned to Eugenia, whom they had put to Bed, and who did not remember the News that had so much surprized her, and occa∣sioned so long a Swoon. What ailes you, My Lord, said she to him, seeing him oppressed with grief, must my fainting needs make you so very sad? or has some accident hap∣pened to you, that we have reason to deplore? Ah! Madam, answered Souza, overcome with Grief, and letting himself fall into a Chair that was near him, have you for∣gotten Don Henry — No, no, I remember it very well, he is still
alive, and you are my Husband Eugenia could not resist the anguish that this Reflexion opprest her with; she fell again into a Swoon; Souza was not in a condition to relieve her, and her Women had all the pains imaginable to recover her out of it. Madam, said he to her, when she had recovered the use of her Senses, and he had sent all those out who were in the Cham∣ber, you must not abandon your self to Grief; perhaps this News is not true, the Merchant who brought it us, could give no proofs of it, and you know that a thousand such false reports ran abroad of all those who perished in that Battel. No, no, re∣ply'd she, Don Henry is living, he is living, he is my Husband, and I am Married to you. Her tears and her sighs hindred her for some moments, and repeating from time to time, Don Henry is living, and I am Married again; Don Henry is living and you are my Husband;
she abandoned her self to such a Despair as deprived her of her rea∣son. She thought it Criminal to look upon Souza; she durst not pronounce his Name; she could not think without horrour of the Engagements they had made. How unhappy am I, or rather, how guilty, my Lord, spare me the Con∣fusion of seeing you, said she to Souza, begon from hence, never see me more, I can no longer suffer your Presence. She had hardly finished these Words, than that she would have re∣called them: What she was to Souza, what he had done for her, returned into her thoughts, and fearing she had failed in the respect she owed so good a Husband, she would have repared that fault by some kindness, but the remembrance of Don Henry reproached her imme∣diately with that tender motion, as if it had been the greatest of Crimes. Yes, Madam, I must leave you, said Souza to her, being some∣thing
recovered from his amaze∣ment, the delights of love are no part of my fate. It is not the will of Heaven that I find my happiness here below; I should have believed it perfect might I have been beloved by you, and tho my grief be never so great, I must renounce it for ever. Do but form to your self all the hor∣rours that this separation gives me, Madam? My Lord, I feell their vio∣lence as much as you do, answered Eugenia, who could not forbear melt∣ing into tears. Your love is very dif∣ferent from mine, reply'd he, and I have occasion for more Constancy than you; regulate yours according to mine; let us both endeavour to free Don Henry, who is no less to be piti∣ed than we: He will comfort you for the loss of me, and nothing can com∣fort me for yours. While Eugenia and Souza deplo∣red their particular misfortunes, the Portuguezes lamented the Publick distresses. The Spanish Army was
all about Lishon: Anthony was fled under a Disguised habit, and the Dutchess of Braganza was retired to Villa Bohen. Philip went to her thither in Person; he promised her great advantages for her Son, if she would retire to Villa Visola, and recall some Forces she had fur∣nished Anthony withal. That Dut∣chess having lost all hopes of Reign∣ing, and fearing to be involved in Anthonies Ruine, and yet not be∣ing willing to abandon that Prince quite to his misfortunes, retired to Visola, upon condition of leaving her Forces with Anthony, who fled into France, after having made some useless Efforts against Philip, who shortly after entred Lisbon, was saluted King of Portugal; and they stifled with great care, the News which the Inhabitants of the Terceras spread abroad of Don Sebastian's being alive. The Spaniards were in a peace∣ablepossession of the Kingdom of
Portugal: Almeida led a private and solitary life at Venice, and would not hearken to the vows of any Lover since she had lost Don Sebastian: She often deplored the misfortunes she was the cause of, and as she was one day all alone in her Chamber, thinking of the several accidents of her life, she was told, that a Por∣tugal Gentleman asked to speak with her. She caused him to come in; but how great was her surprize at the sight of that Portu∣gueze? she gave a great shrick, and retired in a fright. How Princess, said the Portugal to her, does Don Sebastian make you afraid? Ah Heavens, is it you, said she, turn∣ing languishingly towards that Stranger, is it your Shade that comes to comfort me, or renew my Griefs? I am no Shade my Princess, interupted he, and I come once more to offer you a Life, which you shall ever be Mistress of. Almeida ha∣ving recovered the use of her Sen∣ses,
told the Maids that came to help her, that she would be alone; and when they were withdrawn, May, I assure my self, said she trem∣bling, that I see Don Sebastian once again, and his Death that I so much bewailed, and the News of which has for so long a time been spread through all the World, should it not be real? No, reply'd she immediately, Don Sebastian died in my Quarrel, Eu∣rope and Africa knew it, I am but too certain it is so, and I cannot give tears enough to his death: Impostor, leave me to deplore what you cannot restore me. No, my Princess, an∣swered he, casting himself at her Knees, and kissing her Hand a thousand times, that she had not the force to take away; I am no Im∣postor, I am that Don Sebastian, who am come to dry up the Tears you honour his loss with, and who redemands the affection that you have promised him. If you do not know again my Shape, my Voice, and
the Features of my Face; at least remember my Love, 'tis not at all changed, and you have too many testi∣monies to be mistaken. Ah! Pardon, reply'd Almeida, after having well examined him, I know you again by that Love that was so fatal to you: How many Tears have I shed for your loss, Sir, and how often have I wished to die? But tell me for Heavens sake, by what miracle you could save your Life and your Liber∣ty, from the sury of the Moors. Recover from your fright, my Prin∣cess, said the King to her, and when you shall have taken some re∣pose, I will relate to you all that has happened to me, since I left you in charge with Souza. My fright is vanished, Sir, reply'd she, and of∣fering him a Chair, and I impati∣ently long to know your adventures. Since you will not put off this recital till a more Convenient time, said Don Sebastian to her, and taking a Seat, I will give you an account
of the misfortunes that happened to me since my absence from you. You have learnt without doubt, how basely all those, who were ranged under my Standard, to fight on the day of Battel, a∣bandoned me, when Fire was set on our Amunition: I found my self alone in the midst of the Moors, who attacqued me on all sides: I fought a long time against a great number, and I resolved rather to lose my life, than be ta∣ken Prisoner; but the Wound I had received in my Right-shoul∣der, being unbound in the heat of the Fight, the Blood I lost thro that Wound, so weakned my Arm, that I could no longer lift it up to defend my self: I sought with my Left Arm, till that wearied with so many Efforts, I fell almost without life, amongst the Bodies of the Enemies I had Slain. Some Troopers of the
Regiment of Mulei Magdelec, a Prince of the Blood Royal of Mo∣rocco, having seen me fall, sur∣rounded me, to strip me of my Cloaths; and as the first, who ap∣proached me, was in my reach, I run my Sword through his Bo∣dy, and made him fall dead by me: The others irritated at their Companions death, would not have left me long alive, if they had not found it more advanta∣geous to make me their Priso∣ner, than deprive me of life. They drew me from that place into a little Wood near Tamista; that violence, and the fatigues I had suffered, making me faint a∣way, they could not recover me in a long time. I had laid aside in the danger I ran, the marks that might have discovered my Quality. But my Armour made those People judge I was a consi∣derable Person; some of them fell to Disputing with their Com∣panions
the gain they might pre∣tend to from this Prize; others pretended to have the better share in it, because they had first laid hands on me; and not being able to agree about their shares, several of them resolved to kill me, when Abdeliza, Magdelec's Sister, who being informed, that her Brother was dead, whom she tenderly lo∣ved, came all in tears at the Head of thirty Troopers, in the place where we were, and demanded of the Men that held me, whom she saw to be of her Brothers Re∣giment, what was become of him: They assured her, that he had not been so much as wound∣ed, and his Lieutenant being killed by a Musquet Bullet, and falling down at his Feet, it was believed, that it had been Magde∣lec, who had been killed by that shot. Abdeliza cast her Eyes upon me, the state I was in, raised her
pity, and after having learnt by some other particulars, that her brother was living, she asked those Troopers who I was, if I was still alive, and why they mis∣used, with so much Crnelty, a Man who could not defend himself. They told her, to animate her to my ruine, that I had kill'd above twenty of their Companions; that I was only in a Swoon: But this Discourse, far from inspiring her with any hatred to me, as those Barbarians had promised themselves, she had an admirati∣on and an esteem for my Cou∣rage, and Commanded them to treat me more gently. She Exa∣mined me more strictly: Kings ever wear certain Characters up∣on their Faces, that make them distinguished from other Men: she knew I was no Common Per∣son, and the pity she took of my Fate, being joyned to the esteem she had already conceived for
me, gave birth in her Heart to some tender Motions, that in∣teressed her in my misfortunes. She perceived that I lost all my Blood, and Commanded they should bind up my wounds, and I received help, by her Order, even from those who would have de∣prived me of life. When I recovered out of my Swoon, I was surpriz'd to meet with so charitable hands, which were zealous to give me ease, in∣stead of Enemies, who before would have destroyed me; but my surprize became much grea∣ter, when I saw in the midst of all those People, a Woman who set them at work, and who appeared by her Habit and Air, to be a Person of a high Rank. Magde∣lec happened to come into the same place, as I was attentive to all these things. He had been told the disquiets and ardour with which his Sister sought for
him. Brother, said she, after ha∣ving Embraced him, and shewn him the joy she had for his re∣turn, Brother, the state this wretch is in, has raised my Compassion: I beg you would grant me this Priso∣ner, and I will take care to re∣ward your Men for that loss. Magdelec was called away by o∣ther Cares, he did not stay to look upon me, and gave me to his Sister, who caused me to be carried to her Palace, and had a particular care of me during all the time I was constrained to keep my Bed. I got up as soon as I found I had a little Strength, I caused my self to be led to Ab∣deliza's Appartment, and made her a thousand acknowledgments for her Favours. She answered me very obligingly, and told me, that the Noble and Great Air she had observed in my Per∣son, had obliged her to Succour me; that she had conceived a
great esteem for me at first, and did not doubt, but in the se∣quel, I would answer as I ought, so many good Sentiments. She spoke these words with a great deal of goodness, but with a certain Air of Haughtiness, that made me know she knew not who I was: I answered her with all possible Submission, to keep her in her Errour. She would know who I was; I told her, that I was a Volunteer of an Illustrious Extraction, and I acted my part so well, notwithstanding all the Questions she asked me upon that point, that she did not at all suspect I was the King of Portu∣gal. I quickly perceived, that the cares she took in my Favour, surpassed ordinary kindnesses, she did not long conceal from me her Sentiments. She believed her self to be of that Rank and Merit, as I should look upon her Passion
as an honour: She made me a sincere Confession of it, and pro∣mised me a Considerable Fortune if I was not ungrateful to her kindnesses. Pardon, dear Prin∣cess, said Don Sebastian to Almei∣da, if I seem'd to have some kindness for her: The state I was in reduced to, and the desire I had of seeing you again, obliged me to that fiction: My Complai∣sances abused her; I did out of policy, all that I could have done out of Love. Ah! how afraid am I, Sir, interrupted Almeida, you loved that Princess? I know her, she is young, she is tender, she has Wit; and though of the Colour of the Ne∣groes, her Face is not without Beau∣ties. Don Sebastian vowed he had never loved her, and remov'd her suspicions. What kindness so∣ever, pursued he, that Abdaliza had for me, my Prison was not the less rigorous: That Princess did not believe that she had chain∣ed
me so fast as that she might re∣ly upon the assurance of the Fet∣ters she had given me, and the more Passion she had for me; the more afraid she was to lose me; and I was observed and kept so strict, that I could not give any notice of my Captivity. In the mean time I learnt that the Portuguezes sought for me e∣very where, that they had asked leave of Hamet to search amongst the dead and wounded, to see if they could find me. Hamet likewise fearing some surprize on my part, and being desi∣rous to be fully informed of my fate, made strict inquiries thro all the Army. Some reported I was Drowned in the River of Meucasen as I fled away; but he had seen me fight, and could not persuade himself, I could be capable of running. Some of 'em again said, that I must needs be unknown amongst the Common
Prisoners; and others assured, that they had seen some Troop∣ers seise me, and they must needs have taken away my life. Abde∣liza was at the King of Morocco's when these accounts were given: These last words filled her full of fear and joy; she could have wish∣ed her Prisoner was a King; but she feared he should be taken from her under that Title. She had of∣ten commended at Court, the Wit and Gracefulness of her Prisoner; which sometimes made them railly her; and Hamet turning towards her: Do not you detain the King of Portugal in your Chains, Ma∣dam, said he to her smiling, and is it not to that Quality you have given so high an esteem? Abdeli∣za blushed at this Discourse, and her Confusion confirmed the King in that Opinion. He was afraid I should escape him, and told that Princess, taking her by the hand: Let us go see that Illustrious Cap∣tive
Madam, whom your esteem renders worthy of a Throne, if he be not already a King. Ha∣met came to Abdeliza's Palace, I was brought before him, judge what a Confusion it was to such a heart as mine: I had never till then been sensible of the shame of my Captivity; I had only ap∣peared before a Woman, who loved me, and knew me not; but when I saw Hamet, and that he knew me, Rage and Despair seiz∣ed my Soul; and I spoke to him with so much Haughtiness, that he immediately Commanded, I should be loaded with Irons, and be dragged to the Tower of the Old Castle. 'Twas in vain that Abdeliza cast her self at his Feet, and shed tears; I was forced a∣way from that Place, and put in∣to that Tower, where no Body durst approach within a hundred Paces.
Hamet judged that the ru∣mour which had been spread a∣broad of my death, might be of advantage to his Designs, so that he would not undeceive the Peo∣ple: And as he was followed but by very few Courtiers when he went to Abdeliza's, he fancied he might easily hinder what passed there from being known. He forbade all those who attended him, to speak of my being alive, upon pain of Death, and likewise flattered that Princess to oblige her to keep silence. However when a Month was near passed since the day of my Imprison∣ment, she had leave to see me. She came thither accompanied on∣ly by one of her Women, and told me, after having drawn me aside, How little sensible are you of my kindness, Sir, and how Cruel are you to your self, to have so obstinately concealed from me your Quality? You
should have been perhaps at pre∣sent in Peace in your own Terri∣tories, and you are instead of that in cares and in troubles. I have ever been very sensible of your Favours, Madam, said I, and I was desirour to see their Effects continue, but was afraid that a Confession of what I was might have interrupted their Course: Pardon that fear, Madam, 'tis the sole Motion of my heart, that you were not Mistress of, and you see I endure a very se∣vere Penance for it. She assured me, she would think of the means to deliver me: I prayed her to make it known in Portu∣gal that I was alive; without daring to speak of you for fear of displeasing her: But these Advices were too contrary to her and Ha∣met's Designs, to employ her self for the making them known: She feared I should escape her, if I was delivered by any other than
her self. She came to see me as often as they would give her leave, and ever gave me some new hopes of recovering my Li∣berty. Magdelec perceived the love his Sister had for me; he spoke to her of it, and she did not deny it; as he tenderly loved her, and as that Passion was not unbecoming her, he endeavoured to second her Designs. He told Hamet, when he had learnt the Conquests the King of Spain made in my Territories, that he ought to op∣pose that growth of Power: That there was a great kindness be∣tween Abdeliza and me; that this Business might be of advan∣tage to his State, and that if they could make me consent to Marry that Princess, the Moorish King would be sure of me by this Match, and might make use of my Right and Power against Spain, and place me at the Head of some Troops for
the stopping his Projects. Ha∣met seemed to relish these reasons; but he had secret Engagements with Spain, that hindered him from acting openly: Then Mag∣delec, who ardently desired to place his Sister upon a Throne, told her that the King Consented to their Projects; that he would grant me both Liberty and For∣ces, if I would Marry her, and that she needed only to make me those Propositions. She came to see me, and sounded me upon the point. The Love I had for you, and the Faith I had promised you, my Princess, pursued he, addressing himself to Almeida, were too powerful over my Mind to ap∣prove of such like Propositions: My Captivity and the Complai∣sances I owed Abdeliza, did like∣wise hinder me from denying them roughly; and nor thinking fit either to reject or receive 'em, I told her that a Match made in
Chains would become neither her nor me, and the Consequences of it could not be promising; that she ought to be so well per∣suaded of my acknowledgments, as to believe I should never for∣get her, though I were at Liber∣ty; and that if she could procure me that advantage, and my return into my Dominions, she should be absolute Mistress of my King∣dom. She sometimes let her self be moved with these weak rea∣son; but Suspicion and Jealousie seizing her on a suddain, she re∣proached me as ungrateful and perfidious; that I had never loved her, and that the tenderest Motions of my heart were for her who had caused me so many misfor∣tunes: Go perish then, Cruel Man, said she, at parting, in the slavery you refule to be delivered out of. Almeida sighed at those words, and could not forbear shedding tears at at that reflexion. Cease to bewaile
misfortunes, for which I am but too well rewarded, Madam, said Don Sebastian, seeing her Tears tric∣kle down her Face, and let the since∣rity of my Relation procure me Pardon for the trouble my indis∣cretion has newly given you. Her vexation encreased the ri∣gours of my Prison, continued Don Sebastian; the more she was enraged, the worse was I Treated: I was opprest with a thousand different troubles; I suffered all the ills of the severest Imprisonment; I had all the trou∣ble and concern that a King who loves his People can be capable of, when he has caused the ruine of his State. But what lay more heavy upon my heart than all this, was the grief of being absent from you, and not to know what was become of you. I sometimes had a Design of giving some hopes to Abdeliza, that the rigours of my Prison might be abated and ob∣lige
her to endeavour the pro∣curing my Liberty. But what Resolution soever I had taken, I could not constrain my self to make her any promise, contrary to the fidelity I had vow'd to you, and all my endeavours did only serve to make her the more re∣mark how constrained and forced all my kindnesses to her was. Tho the refusals I had made of Marrying Abdeliza had ever been coloured with some reason, and attended with kindnesses; they however brought her into despair. She vow'd every time she left me, she would never see me more, and yet still returned. Sometimes she would make me the bitterest Re∣proaches, and in an instant after load me with Caresses; I some∣times flattered my self with be∣lieving, that in the different Moti∣ons which agitated her, had she been absolute Mistress of my Fate, she would have set me at Liber∣ty,
notwithstanding her vexation and my refusals; which I was sure of one day, when after having made me the highest Reproaches as her Custom was, she told me with the most passionate Air imagina∣ble, Well Cruel Man, be insensi∣ble of my Passion, since you are wil∣ling; but do not hinder me at least from loving you, and do not oppose my endeavours. Dost thou love thy Prison better than thy Throne? Can∣not you make some attempts to second my desires? Thy Kingdom and my Kindnesses are not they worth thy dissembling for some moments; pre∣tend to love me, promise to Marry me; deceive me, I consent to it, pro∣vided thou deliverest thy self out of Slavery, and flatterest but my Er∣rour. I own I was moved at this Discourse, and her so tender∣ly desiring to be deceived would have hindred me, though I could have been capable of abusing her. No, Princess, said I to her, the
pains you take in my favour, and the Tenderness you have for me, ought to be otherwise Re∣compensed than by Fiction. I cannot consent to deceive any Body, and less you than any one soever: I have for you all the tenderest acknowledgment that a heart can be capable of; I have no repugnance for the Match you propose to me; but I am born free, and I have seen my self a King; I cannot suffer to be constrained; and your forcing me to love, is enough to make me hate, set me at Liberty and promise your self all things from my Acknowledgments. Well, Sir, answered she, I must endeavour to satisfie you; I must Solicite your freedom, tho you flie from me, and make me pass the rest of my Days in the affliction of not seeing you. Having said these words, she left me, and gave me reason to believe she would do all that was possible, to procure
me my Liberty, without exacting any of the Conditions she had proposed to me. She came to tell me some days after, that she had made very pressing Solicita∣tions for my Libery; that the King had at length consented to my enlargment; and that he had only asked eight days to take measures in that Affair; that this time being expired, I should be no longer in so strict a Prison, and I might then write, and speak, and do all that was necessary for the procuring my Ransom. You shall be free as you desired, said she to me sighing, and you may leave me and forget me too, if you will, without fearing my re∣proaches or my presence, which I have so often wearied you with∣al. This News gave me all the joy I was capable of in my mis∣fortunes. I kissed Abdeliza's hands a thousand times, and assured her I should never forget her Fa∣vours: However, she told me
languishingly, you will aban∣don and quit me with all the joy a heart can be capable of. You already feell the Motions of it, and cannot deny them. You never was so kind, nor I more Charm'd, and Transported with the delight of it; and yet, alas! you never gave me so many marks of your aversion. I easily perceived, I had seem'd too much pleas'd. I was sorry, and used my endeavours to persuade her, that this joy had no other Ob∣ject than Liberty, and I was at first so transported with those hopes, that I was not able to consider the Consequences. I re∣assured her as well as I could. I wiped of the Tears which trickled from her Eyes. I desired her to send Letters into Portugal in my name, being they would neither give me leave to write, or suffer me to have either Paper or Pens, which she promised me to do, and did indeed write thither: But I
have been since informed, that all the Letters were Intercepted, and no Passage was given to any News of me into my Dominions. You may judge with what im∣patience I waited till the term was expired, when my Slavery was to end, and what a delight it was to me to fancy, I should return to you. But the eight days were not yet at an end when the Prin∣cess came to me, and told me with a great deal of Grief, that her Brother enraged at my Refu∣sals, had dissuaded the King from sending me back; that he had gi∣ven him to understand, that I had rendred my self unworthy of that Favour, by despising to Alie my my self to his Blood; and that as long as he detain'd me in his Pri∣sons, I should serve for an Ho∣stage to him against the Enterpri∣zes of the King of Spain, and against the Risings of the Portu∣gals. These Reasons, said she to me, have been too hard for my
Prayers, and the King has Com∣manded me to tell you for the last time, that our Marriage was the only means that could restore you to your Liberty. Well, Madam, if there are no other means to become free, answered I her ha∣stily, I must resolve to die in Sla∣very. That is too much, reply'd she to me in a Transport, your obstinacy proceeds even to out∣rage; do you think that what I say is only an Artifice of my Passi∣on? Can you be ignorant of what I have done for you, Cruel Man as you are? If I had not lov'd you more than my self, would I have Solicited your en∣largement? Who oblig'd me to do that violence to my self? I Re∣proached her with the little love she had for me; that she should never make me consent to our Union by that constraint; that she onght to be well enough ac∣quainted with the Delicacy of my
Virtue in that point; and that in fine, if I did not recover my Li∣berty by her means, I should e∣ver believe, she alone detained me in Prison, and this thought would quickly cause my Death. In short, I so moved and persuaded her, that she assured me at part∣ing, she would lose her life, but she would procure my Liberty, and when she saw me again, it should be to bring me News of my Delivery. And indeed I was near fifteen days without seeing her, and was astonished, that one Evening very late she came into my Chamber, accompanied with the Keeper of the Tower I was in, and bid me softly be ready the next morning very early, and follow with Con∣sidence the Person, who should shew me her Cyphers. I durst not return her thanks for fear of being heard by the Keeper, she withdrew, and I passed the Night
in such an uncertainty, that it was as tiresome as my troubles, not being able to persuade my self, that Abdeliza would favour my Escape. As soon as the day began to appear a Renegado entred my Chamber, and took off my Irons, telling me, You are free, Sir, if you will but follow me. I promised to Reward Nobly this good Office, and followed him. We went down into the Ditch of the Castle by Ladders and Ropes which were prepared for that purpose, and passing under the Port-Cullis, we entred into a little Sandy Sink, that the Sea fills when the Tyde comes in, but it having been two hours Ebb, it had left dry. This Sink brought us in less than a quarter of an hour to a great Road, where we found a Man waiting for us with two Horses. I mounted one, and my Guide another. We came in less than two hours upon the Sea∣shore,
where I found with a great deal of Grief and amazement, Ab∣deliza in a Christian Habit, gi∣ving order for the fitting of a Ship, she had prepared for us. Well, Sir, said she accosting me, will you believe that I constrain you at present, and will you have as much aversion for Abdeli∣za in a Christian Habit, as in the Dress of an African? Madam, I am so Confused, as I cannot make you an answer, reply'd I, let us think of getting from this Shore, and we will see afterwards what is to be done. I had hardly finished these Words, than Magdalec appeared upon the Sea shore at the Head of Sixty Troopers. Abdeliza cal∣led out to hoist up Soils; but the Ship was still at Anchor, and not one of the Seamen durst offer to weigh it. Hearing Magdalec's Voice they went in their Boat to bring him him on Board.
Some of them Seized Abdeliza, who would have cast her self in∣to the Sea. Others fell upon me, without knowing me, and I was hurried back to Prison, without knowing what was become of that unfortunate Princess. What sad Reflexions was I loaded withal in that Place! The hopes I had of being suddenly at Liberty en∣hanced the afflictions of my Pri∣son: I fancied, that after so dan∣gerous an attempt, I should ne∣ver have again the opportunity to escape. They kept me ever in sight: I no longer saw Abdeliza; no one Comforted me in my misfortunes, and I had no hopes left of getting out. I sometimes feared, that the Crueltie of Ha∣met might cause that Princess to to be put to Death; I repented my having so little Complaisance for her, I reproached my self in∣cessantly for being the cause of her mifortune: All these thoughts
put me into mortal Agonies, and yet it was not these that were the most sensible, when I consider'd on the horrour of being separated from my Dear Almeida, when I thought of your Charms, when I made Reflexion on the Delights we enjoy'd at the beginning of our Love, when I figured to my self the mortal disquiets you would be in, hearing no Tydings of me; when I considered, that I could not learn any thing of you, and that you were perhaps dead of Grief, Despair seized my Soul, and made me lose my Reason. However, as in the greatest misfortunes there ever remains some glimpse of hopes, which seems only to support us for the prolonging our sufferings; I re∣membred the kindnesses of Abde∣liza, the power she had over her Brother, the Credit he had at the Court of Morocco, and told my self, that while she was living, I
ought not despair of my safety. I one day ventured to ask my Keeper, what was become of that Princess: She is dead, said he to me surlily, and you'll undergo the same Fate very suddenly. Death will never afright me, an∣swered I, if it only aims at me. But I should be extreamly griev'd if I had been the cause of her Ru∣ine. Then you are never to be Comforted, reply'd he, she died for the Love of you. I Conjured this Keeper by all that I fancied had the most power over him, to make me a faithful recital of all had happened to Abdeliza. I could learn nothing, but what he had already told me, and he would no longer hear me, nor speak to me. I had an extream regret for her loss; I had all the Grief I could have been sensible of for her Death, if I had really lov'd her: Pity, Acknowledgment, my own Interest, and my Remorses
met all in my Mind to torment me, and never was Grief equal to that I groaned under in my Prison after this Information. About the same time I was told, that Mag∣delec supposing I had Seduced his Sister; and justly irritated against her Enterprize would punish me by a very rigorous sort of Death. I prepared my self for all, that the Crueltie of those Barbarians could make me suffer, and Death seemed to me, the mildest punishment that could happen to me. And in truth, I have been since acquaint∣ed, that Magdelec employ'd all the Credit he had with the King, to put me to Death, and Hamet had even consented to Sign the Bill; but that his Counsel had not judged it for his Interest to take away my life, and the posture which the Affairs of Portugal and Spain were in, they fancied I should not be unuseful to the King of Morocco.
I had been neer a Year in this despair, when they came and told me, that I had leave to return in∣to Portugal: The King of Spain had made considerable preparati∣ons for War; his Conquests in my Kingdom were very Successful and Great; there ran a Rumour every where, that he would carry the War into Africa; they likewise believed in that Country, that he had a Design of Besieging Alara∣che and Tangier. Hamet alarmed at the News, repented he had helped to persuade the World I was dead. His Counsel resolv'd to set me at Liberty, to the in∣tent, that my Person might re∣duce the Portugals to their Duty, and interrupt the Course of the Spaniards Victories. I was not sensible of the joy that my delivery ought to give me; my hopes had been so often crost, and had been so often turned into Despair, that I durst not trust them. I saw
without Emotion my Prison Doors opened; I followed my Leader without speaking; but seeing he led me to a Tower, of almost as difficult an access as that I had been Imprisoned in, I asked my Guide in a rage, if they only changed my Prison, and if they believed an alteration of sufferings would be a Comfort to me; he bid me follow him, without in∣forming me whither I went; and when I was entred a Chamber neat enough for a Prison, he left me alone, and returning, shut all the Doors. I had hardly been there a Quarter of an Hour, but I saw Abdeliza come out of a Neighbouring Chamber, leaning upon one of her Slaves, and was so changed and so dejected, that I fancied I rather saw her Ghost than her Person. What! an En∣chantment! cried I at the sight of her, and casting my self at her Feet, Princess is it possible that I see
you again? I am Comforted for all my misfortunes, seeing you are still a∣live, tho I had been told the contra∣ry, and can delare to you how sensible I am of all you have done for me. Sir, said she to me, raising me, and embracing me tenderly, I could have wished to have freed you out of Captivity even at the Expence of my life, I have suf∣fered my Prison with patience, when I considered the occasion of it, and I have been more sensible of the rigours of yours than of all I have endured in mine. I Par∣don my Brother, continued she, bathing my Face with her Tears, all that his anger could make me suffer, since he has granted me the happiness of seeing you once again. Go, begone, Sir, I will not regard your Joy nor your Li∣berty, you have been too long in our Prisons, and I ask you Par∣don for all the Cruelties you have suffered there; Pardon them for
my loves sake; 'tis violence e∣nough to renounce the happiness of seeing you, for you to make it that Sacrifice. Begone, Sir, said she to me, Embracing me, my Confinement is not so strict, but that I have given Orders for all which is necessary for your depar∣ture: You will find at your going from hence a Slave, who will Conduct you to a Ship I have caused to be prepared for you, and will furnish you with all you have occasion for in the Voyage. This Slave is faithful to me, give him leave to follow you every where, that he may send me Tydings of you, and put you in Mind of me, if you should forget me. Adieu, Sir, I am loath to detain you any longer in Prison; the pleasure I have had costs you very dear. Adieu, repeated she several times, shed∣ing a torrent of Tears; live hap∣py, and remember me. After
having said these Words she quit∣ted me, leaning upon the Maid that attended her; I saw her fall into a Swoon a moment after up∣the Cushions of her Chamber, that were nearest to the Door: I would have run to have helpt her, but my Guide forc'd me from thence, and told me he had orders not to suffer me any longer in that place. Having much more pity of the Condition I left that poor Prin∣cess in, than joy for having re∣covered my Liberty, I enquired secretly at the Port, as soon as I was arrived there, of the Place you were retreated to: No one could tell me any thing certain, and some Marriners acquainted me, they had seen you in the Isles of Terceras. I Embarqued in the Vessel the Slave Abdeliza had gi∣ven me had brought me to: We arrived at Angra, where the ru∣mour
of my return being arriv'd sooner than my self, I perceived a far off, being still at Sea, that all the People were at the Port to see us Disembarque. I did not think it convenient to make known my arrival to all that Po∣pulace, who are more Inconstant and Seditious in that Country than in any other place. I went into the long Boat, after having told the Captain of the Ship, that he should go a-shore with all his Equipage at an Island farther of, and not divulge my arrival; and I went in the Night to a Convent the Cordeliers have in that Island. I remained there eight days, cau∣sing search to be made for you in all the Neighbouring Islands; but Abdeliza's Slave venturing to go out, was of a suddain environed by a Crowd of People, who asking him where I was, taking him for King Mahumet, and re∣proaching him that he was the
cause of all the Wars, they assassi∣nated him Cruelly in that place. This Sedition made me know, there was no safety for me in those Ports; and hearing you were not there, I went from thence as unknown as I came thither. I Embarqued again in my Ship, and having at length learnt with a great deal of pain and care, that you were at Ve∣nice, preferring the pleasure of seeing you, before the Care of my re-establishment, and longing with impatience to know what share I had in your heart, I come to render you all my love, and assure you, that I shall only en∣deavour to get again upon the Throne for the placing you there with me. Almeida transported with joy, to see the Constancy and return of Don Sebastian, had all those Complaisances for him, that a tender and an acknowledg∣ing heart can be capable of. They
Deliberated together about return∣ing into his Kingdom, of making Cabals in Portugal, and procuring Troops for the re-entring it. He resolved to give notice of his re∣turn to the Ministers of his King∣dom, whom he had found the most Zealous, and sent into seve∣ral places to demand Succours of the Princes who had been his Friends. Don Henry was released out of Slavery by the Cares of Eugenia and Souza in that time. Upon his return he learnt that Eugenia was Married again; and when he was arrived at Lisbon, not daring to enter his own House, nor ask to see his Wife, he went to lodge at one of his Friends, who acquainted him with all the particulars that could Justifie her, and give him some Consolation in this misfor∣tune. She came to him as soon as she had learnt where he was; cast her self at his Feet, and wa∣tered
them with Floods of Tears. She told him all that her Affection and Innocence could Suggest in her Vindication. He was moved; but her delicacy could not rely upon all these reasons: She prayed him with all the earnestness imaginable, to permit her to pass the rest of her time in a Convent; and he could not refuse her so just a de∣mand, notwithstanding all the kind∣nesses he had for her. The Count of Souza, who, since the News of Don Henry's being alive, had passed his days in the greatest Grief ima∣ginable, and had abstained from seeing Eugenia since that time, dis∣gusted with the World, and ha∣ving no tie that could retain him, resolved to put himself into the Or∣der of S. Dominick, and was shut up the rest of his days in the Convent of Benesiges, half a League from Lisbon, where he died in the Sweets of a Holy Life, as the Gra∣vest Authors do assure, who have
written the History of Portugal. What Care soever Don Sebastian had taken to conceal his return, the reumour ran quickly at Venice, that a Stranger was arrived there, who had the Name and Resem∣blance of Don Sebastian. Even some Portugals, who were in that City having Examined his Shape, his Face, and his Voice, knew him for their King. The News of which being come to the Ears of the Re∣publick, and the Venetians fearing a Quarrel with the Spaniards, thought themselves oblig'd to seize Don Se∣bastian, and give notice to the Court of Spain of all that passed amongst them upon that account. The Spa∣niards assured the Republick, that this Don Sebastian was an Impostour, and desired he might be proceeded against as such, Commissioners were deputed before whom he maintained with firmness, that he was Don Sebastian; that he had been detained till then in the Pri∣sons
of Africa; and that he came to recover the Crown that was due to him by his Birth. The Por∣tuguezes, who were in that City maintained his asseverations: Al∣meida ascertained he had told her things that only Don Sebastian could know. He shewed upon his Body very particular Marks that Nature had Imprinted there, and which he was observ'd to have when he was King of Portugal. He appealed to his Judges, the Veneti∣ans of great Consideration, who had been Ambassadours for the Re∣publick in his Kingdom, and told them the most secret Affairs they had particularly treated of at that time with him. In fine, he so well represented all the Proofs, and all the Circumstances that might make him known to be the King, that Don Sebastians Judges could not do any thing more than Banish him from Venice. Almeida would have followed him, to help him to sup∣port
his misfortunes; but he caused her to stay in that City, till he should have settled his Affairs. He made towards Tuscany, where he thought to meet with some Friends, and some favourable Wit∣nesses who had been at the Battel. The Great Duke of Tuscany pro∣mised to furnish him with some Troops. The Dutchess of Parma was his Cousin; he went to im∣plore her Succours: She received him with all the Joy and all the Kindness that a Good Relation can be capable of; but she could nei∣ther grant him Forces nor Money: All the Favour she could do him, was to give him an Equipage becoming his Quality. He thought conveni∣ent to send to the Cortes or States of Portugal, to give them notice of the state he was in, and where he was. The Dutchess furnished him with People of great Experience in those kind of Negotiations. They went and acquainted the States of
Portugal with the Fate of their King. This Deputation caused great joy and surprize through all the King∣dom. They sent to Don Sebastian, six of the Principal Men of their Assem∣blies. They saw him; the respect which the Majesty of Kings occasi∣ons, seized them at first sight: Don Henry and Phoebus Monis were of the Number of these Envoy's, they could not mistake him, and Embra∣cing his Knees, they conjured him to deliver them from the oppression of the Spaniards. The others for fear of being mistaken by too much resemblance, asked the King several Questions, which no one but Don Sebastian could reply to. They were likewise surpriz'd to see so much presence of Mind, and so much Memory in his Answers. These Envoys returned into Portu∣gal, and reported, that it was the real Don Sebastian they had spoke to. The Partizans of Spain, whom all the Kingdom was full of, accused
these Envoys of Imposture, and mantained that they had suffered themselves to be Suborned by an Impostour. Others demanded that Don Sebastian should come in Per∣son himself to the Assembly of the States General, to be Examined there in all the Forms. He was ready to depart to be present there, but the Dutchess of Parma, and some of his Priends, who were a∣bout him, hindred him, telling him, that the States were only Compo∣sed of People Pentioners to the Spa∣niards, that the true Portugals were no longer Masters there, and that there was no safety for him. As Don Sebastian was preparing to enter Spain at the head of some Forces, the Spaniards caused him to be Seized, to prevent his doing so, he was carried to Naples, and not∣withstanding the Publick Ignomi∣nies they made him suffer, he al∣ways made appear the greatness of his Soul, and never bely'd his Cha∣racter
in the least. They drew up his Process a-new, they would have put him to death in the Forms; but notwithstanding all that the worst of Envy was capable of inventing against him, the injustice of his Judges durst not attempt the life of so great a King, and Condem∣ned him to the Gallies for to appease in some manner the rage of his E∣nemies. Almeida entred the Pri∣son just after the Sentence had been read to him. What a Desolation for her and for him! The Grief of those two Lovers is not to be ex∣pressed. But that Princess more lively resenting that Don Sebastian had all those outrages done to him, died in his Arms of Grief and Re∣gret, for having reduced so Great a King into so deplorable a Conditi∣on. He was Shaved and carried to the Gallies. The most Tragical Historians durst never offer to our Eyes, such a spectacle, as to see Chain'd, in the midst of a hundred
Malefactors of the Scum of the People, a Formidable and Powerful King, whose Mind and Body were enriched with a thousand Beautiful Qualities, and to whom no other Crime can be imputed than his misfortunes. In the mean time the Portuguezes be∣ing impatient of the Spanish Yoke, and ever bestowing some sighs to the memory of Don Sebastian, leagued together, and openly demanded their King, but it was in vain; one rarely consents to restore a Crown, and Policy abhors that effe∣minate Virtue. The Spaniards foresee∣ing the ill Consequences of these Cabals and Leagues, and fearing that Don Se∣bastian, whom they ever took for an Im∣postour, might be still capable, notwith∣standing the deplorable Condition he was reduced to, to deprive them of the Crown of Portugal, resolved to make sure of his Person. They took him from the Gallies, they caused him to be car∣ried secretly into Spain, and Impriso∣ned him in the Castle of Saint Lucar, where 'tis reported, this deplorable King was Poisoned in a short time after, and with so Tragical an End did Crown a Life that had been filled with so many Misfortunes. FINIS.
