E3115 11977982 51806
The English PRINCESS, OR THE Dutchess-Queen. A RELATION OF ENGLISH and FRENCH ADVENTURES. A NOVEL. In Two PARTS. LONDON, Printed for Will. Cademan and Simon Neale, at the Popes-Head in the Lower-Walk of the New-Exchange, and at the Three Pidgeons in Red∣ford-street in Covent-Garden, 1678.
THE English Princess, OR THE Dutchess QUEEN. The First PART. THE Monarchy of England having been long in dis∣pute betwixt the two Roses, the Red of the House of Lancaster, and the White of that of York, fell at length to the peaceable inheritance
of the former; and never appeared in greater splendour, than in the time of Henry the Eighth. This Prince being of a most sharp and piercing wit, by study and learn∣ing advanced daily more and more in knowledg; and was no sooner at the age of eighteen Crowned King, but that he seemed already to hold in his hands the Fate of all Europe. All that was to be blamed in him, was his love of pleasures, which in progress of time got the Dominion over him, and some kind of sickleness, the blemish of se∣veral of his Family: he had a deli∣cate and well-proportioned body, a countenance of singular beauty, and shewed always such an Air of Majesty and Greatness, as inspired both love and reverence in all that beheld him. At his Assumption to the Crown, when his heart was not as yet sub∣jected to the pleasures of sense, it was but a meer scruple of conscience that made him unwilling to marry Catharine of Spain, his Brothers Wi∣dow,
to whom the late King his Fa∣ther had betrothed him three years before his Death; no engagements in love with any other Mistresses at that time being any ways the cause of his aversion. But two of his chief Mini∣sters, who had been formerly private Pensioners of Isabel of Castile, having represented to him the losses that he was likely to sustain by a mis-under∣standing with Spain, easily cleared all his doubts: so that at length he made use of the dispensation, which with much difficulty had been obtained at Rome for his marriage; and the League, which at the same time King Ferdi∣nand his Brother-in-law proposed to him, with Pope Julius the Second, the Emperour Maximilian, and the Swisses, against Louis the Twelfth, King of France, filled him with so high an opinion of himself, that there hath been nothing more lovely than the first years of his marriage and Reign. And indeed he gave himself so wholly to jollity and mirth, amidst the great designs which he contrived, that his Ex∣ample
being a pattern to his Court, it became so compleatly gallant, that the Ladies themselves thought it no offence to decency, publickly to own their Votaries. The Princess Mary his younger Sister, as she excelled in Quality, so she exceeded the rest in Beauty. Mar∣garet the eldest married to the King of Scotland, had only the advantage of her in Birth; for in Beauty her share was so great, that there was ne∣ver any Princess who deserved more to be loved. The qualities of her mind, and Character of her Parts will sufficiently appear in the sequel of this discourse; and as to her body, nothing was wanting that might render it per∣fect: her complexion was fair, her soft skin enriched with that delicate whiteness, which the Climate of En∣gland bestows commonly on the Ladies of that Countrey, and the round of her face inclining near to a perfect Oval. Though her eyes were not the greatest, yet they possessed all that could be desired in the loveliest
eyes in the World. They were quick with mildness, and so full of love, that with a single glance they darted into the coldest breasts, all the flames that sparkled in themselves. Her mouth was not inferiour to her eyes, for being very little, and shut with lips of a perpetual Vermilion, in its natural frame it presented an object, not to be parallel'd for Beauty; and when again it opened, whether to laugh or speak, it always afforded thousands of new Charms. What has been said of her pretty mouth, may be likewise said of her fair hands; which by their nimbleness and dexte∣rity in the smallest actions, seemed to embellish themselves: but more might be spoken of the Soveraign Beauty of her Neck, which when age had brought it to perfection, became the master-piece of Nature. Her Stature was none of the tallest; but such as Ladies ought to have to please and delight; and her gate, address, and presence, promised so much, that it is no wonder that the Charms of
Nature, accompanied with a tender and passionate heart, gained her be∣fore the age of fifteen the Conquest of most of her Fathers Subjects. Before she was compleat twelve years of age, she was promised in marriage to Prince Charles of Austria, heir to the Kingdom of Castile, and since named Charles the Fifth. For Lowis the Twelfth of France having frustrated that young Prince of the hopes of marrying the Princess Clau∣dia, his daughter, by designing her for the Duke of Valois, his presumptive heir; notwithstanding the natural aversion that Anne of Brittanie his Queen had against him; Henry the Seventh no sooner understood that the alliance of the house of Austria with France was unlikely to succeed, but he began to think on means of contracting it with England. Richard Fox Bishop of Winchester, was there∣fore sent to Calais to negotiate in his name that marriage with the Depu∣ties of Flanders, who thereupon con∣cluded a Treaty to the satisfaction of
all Parties. But the alteration of the King changed all these measures. Henry the Eighth having in a man∣ner against his will married the Aunt of the young Arch-Duke, found not in that second Union with Spain, all the advantages which his Father seemed to foresee: and whether it was already an effect of repentance, as some termed it; or that he had in it the particular design, which men had ground to suspect since; he many times in discourse approved the ancient custom of his Kingdom, of not giving in marriage the Daughters or Sisters of the Kings out of the Island, for which he was so ap∣plauded by all, that even those of his Council, who were the least complaisant, made it by little and little, (as he did) a reason of State to forget the proposals of Calais. So that now the Princess Mary, be∣ing free from the engagement of the late King her Father, and the great Men of England eying her as a blessing to be enjoyed by the most
happy, she found her self amidst a croud of lovers, who in the peace and quiet of the Kingdom, made it their whole business to disquiet them∣selves. Amongst the most sparkling and assiduous pretenders, Edward Gray, Son to the Marquess of Dorset, and Henry Bourchier, Son to Thomas Earl of Essex, appeared the chief: Charles Son to Sir Charles Sommerset, Lord High Chamberlain, came next; and Thomas Howard, Son to Thomas Earl of Surrey, Lord High Treasurer, with William Talbot, Son to George Earl of Shrewsbury, Steward of the Kings Houshold, put in amongst the rest. These five Rivals being already very considerable by the Quality of their Fathers, all chief Ministers of State, immediately declared their pretensi∣ons with magnificence suitable to the Dignity of the fair Princess, to whom they made love: they were all alike well received, and the courteous and obliging humour of the Lady Mary, made every one of them easi∣ly
believe in a short time to become her greatest favourite. But love blind∣ed their eyes; for a sixth and more secret Rival gained the prize that all contended for: and though his Qua∣lity did not seem to capacitate him to contest with them in any thing, yet the Kings favour, and his own worth largely supplied what other∣ways he wanted. His name was Charles the preten∣ded Son of Robert Brandon, of a noble Family in Suffolk, and an unblemished life. Yet he had greater respect given him, as being the Nephew of William Brandon, and Edward Hast∣ings; the former of great Renown in the Battel of Bosworth, where carry∣ing the Standard of Henry the Se∣venth, he was killed by Richard the Usurper himself, as he endeavoured to stop his flight: and the other still alive was no less famous in the Bat∣tel of Black-heath, where the sediti∣ous Flammock, with the Rebels of Kent and Cornhil, were overthrown. To this Uncle by the Mother it
was, that he owed the greatest part of his merit, having had from him a most ingenious and liberal educa∣tion; for after the death of those that were believed to be his Parents, who died in that fatal plague, which made so great havock in England in the beginning of that Age, he was always the sole object of his care. His supposed Mother named Anne Hastings, a woman of great Parts, and sufficient Beauty to make her the subject of some slanderous and de∣tracting Tongues, had been pitched upon for Nurse to the King, not only because of the noble blood of which she was descended, but also of that to which she was allied: but at first she made some difficulty of accepting the charge, which was then only imputed to the haughti∣ness inspired into her, either by the nobility of her extraction, of which she seemed always a little vain, or by the remains of some self-love which she still retained, though she had other reasons for it. Nor would
she undertake that care, till she had assurance that the child whom she called her Son, should be bred with her at Court. And Henry the Seventh, having afterward entertained her at Court, in consideration of the services that he had received of her Brother-in-law, and did daily receive from her own Brother; and find∣ing the young Henry much more vigorous and healthy than Arthur Prince of Wales and the Princess Margaret his two first Children, which gave him reason to congratulate his having so good a Nurse; it happened luckily that six years after she ha∣ving proved with child, at the same time that the Queen was big of the Princess Mary; he would have her employed again in the bringing up of that fourth child, that was to be born to him; notwithstanding that Robert Brandon, her Husband, being at that time troubled with some peevish fits of jealousie, designed to carry her back into the Countrey. By this means Charles having known
the Princess Mary from the Cradle, had always, as being her Nurses Son, freer access unto her, than his Rivals with all their greatness could pre∣tend to. Besides this, during the ab∣sence of Edward Hastings, who a∣lone remained alive to take the eare of him; the Dutchess of Bedford, chief Governess of the Children of the Royal Family, having taken him into protection, allowed him free liberty at all hours of the day to visit her appartment: and the Lady Latimer Sub-governess, who desired still to be thought young and fair, and was not far beyond the bounds of either, entertained for her part somewhat more than esteem for the lovely Brandon. All put together, gave him great Priviledges with the young Princess; and Henry the Eighth by promoting daily the af∣fairs of Old Hastings, to whom he was to be sole heir, seemed suffici∣ently to authorise all the ambition that the young Nephew was capable of. He had already great intimacy
with the Prince, and was the Con∣fident of his most secret Pleasures; and as he daily heaped Favours and Honours upon him, he was often heard say, That he could not do too much for the handsomest Gen∣tleman in his Kingdom: besides, he was beautiful like himself, and of the same age and stature; his Meen and Presence shewed even some∣what more accomplished; and by the sweetness of his disposition, and generosity, in many rancounters he gained the very esteem of his envi∣ous competitours. The too young age and immaturity of Princess Mary of England was the reason, that du∣ring the Reign of the late King, and until the project of her marriage with the Prince of Spain, he had not discovered to her his love, but by looks and sighs, whereof in all probability she understood not as yet the secret language: but in a conjuncture so troublesom to a lover as that was, taking counsel only of his passion, that he might bewail his
destiny, he spake to her in a more in∣telligible strain. This happened at Windsor, where Henry the Seventh drawing toward his end, desired only to be attend∣ed with a small Train. The satis∣faction that the Princess might have to be one day Wife to a King of Spain, served for pretext to Bran∣don; who passionately told her, That as it was most reasonable that she should rejoyce to marry a Prince, who was to carry so many Crowns; so it was no less, that he should grieve to lose her for ever: at length lifting his eyes and hands to Heaven, he mournfully cryed, That it was very terrible and cruel for such a wretch as he, to love the Daughter of his King more than himself! Nei∣ther the vehemency of this Action, nor the boldness of the Discourse at least surprised the young Princess; for being so little accustomed to keep her distances with Brandon, she dreamt of no more but wonted familiarity, and fancied (as he might
well wish) that his expressions pro∣ceeded only from fear of being se∣parated from her: so that without diving farther into the mystery, wherein as yet she was not very skilful, and finding nothing in his discourse but what was obliging; she had the goodness to answer him, that it was possible the Propositions of Calais might not take effect; and that he ought not to be afflicted before the time. Some days after she started to him again the same discourse, and soothed him by all the ways that her age could possibly imagine, in so much as she vowed and protested against the marriage that he was in fear of; and it must indeed be granted that she omit∣ted nothing that might give con∣tent to his mind, or fewel to his passion: though it cannot be imagi∣ned that her innocent age at that time entertained any thoughts of love. Henry the Seventh in the mean time returned to spend his Winter at London, where dying in the spring,
he made place for his Son, who be∣ing Crowned by the name of Henry the Eighth, began with many fa∣vours to testifie his esteem for Bran∣don. The first instance of the confi∣dence that he shewed him (which he imparted to none, but him alone during the Ceremonies of his mar∣riage; and which appeared the more satisfactory to this favorite, that be∣ing then honoured with the office of chief Ranger of England, he found himself in a condition of making his advantage of it), was, the design he had not to marry the Princess his Sister to any out of his Kingdom. He told him, that it was one of the ancientest maxims of State, and possibly the best; and to hint to him that he himself might have some interest in that design, he added, looking on him with a favourable air, that he should en∣deavour to chuse a person whose Family was not so considerable as to become suspected: so that the
marriage projected between his young Sister, and the young Arch-Duke, should not take effect; and that, he having with much reluctancy married the Aunt of that Prince, he de∣sired him not for a Brother-in-law. But the matter beginning to be divulged, and the gene∣ral applause, wherewith it was received by all, opening the eyes of the most part of the young Court-gallants, BRANDON perceived not at length that fa∣cility in it, which appeared to him at first. Love is a great Master, and there is no vir∣tue wherein it instructs not true Lovers, when it intends to ren∣der them acceptable to the per∣son beloved. He then, so far from flattering himself with the pleasant thoughts that he had entertained, and which so ma∣ny others seemed to entertain as well as himself, laying aside
all consideration of self-love, and not reflecting on his dan∣ger, in speaking to the Prin∣cess contrary to the Sentiments of the KING; told her, that she should no more dream of the Crowns of CASTILE and ARRAGON; and that the designs as to her, were far different from that. He immediately discovered all, as a person really devoted to her Service: he protested against that State-policy, to which she was to be sacrificed: told her, that he had rather dye, than see her a Subject in England, when one of the greatest Princes of Europe desired her in marriage; and with a Resentment equal to the favour received, reflecting on the complaisance wherewith she was once pleased to conceal from him all her ambition, he subjoyned, that he was become ambitious for her; and that de∣siring,
at what rate so ever, to restore to her again, what she had so liberally bestowed on him, he disowned all that he had had the boldness to say at Windsor, against her marriage with the Prince of Spain. His sighs spake the rest with more passionateness than at that time he desired; and although Mary of England was not full Twelve years old, yet she so well un∣derstood the language of that passionate Lover, and her heart was so disposed to admit a flame, that having wiped a∣way the Tears that trickled from her lovely eyes, and done as much for BRANDON, she prayed him not to torment himself for the future: adding, with glances that sparkled good∣ness, that she had rather see him afflicted at Windsor for the project of her marriage, than in London vexed at the rupture of it.
It may be thought strange, that at such an age she was so sensible. But it may be likewise said, that she being of a soft and sweet disposition, and inclined naturally to mirth, it was but an agreeable surprize that triumphed only on her gentle and cheerful humour. The pleasure of being beloved, was the only thing that made her love, her views went no farther; and love which is in that manner communicated be∣twixt young persons, makes the delusions of sense sometimes so powerful over them, that by that means alone it betrays them before they know what it is. It is not then to be wondered at, that if the Princess Mary being by a first Lover drawn into some pleasant mistake, the other pretenders who made love
to her, after that the intention of the KING became known, appeared not in her eyes to be so deserving as they were; who with great assiduity having ser∣ved her for the space of two years, with all the gallantry and pomp that the Tranquillity of the Kingdom enabled them to employ, at length discovered the root and fountain of their mis∣fortune; and seeing love some∣times breaks off upon a slight, and is sometimes converted into fury, the wiser desisted from their suit, and the others united against their common Enemy. Of the first sort were Howard and Talbot: but Gray, Bourchier and Sommerset vowed the death of BRANDON. They con∣sidered not that such an attempt would expose the lovely Prin∣cess to publick Calumny, and themselves to inevitable disgrace, or perhaps to something worse.
Jealousie that reigned in them, suffered them not to make any such reflections; and they had never escaped the risk they ran, had not fortune by forsaking them in their enterprise, taken greater care of their lives, than they themselves were able to do. The love that the King had for Cecile Blunt, Daughter to the Lord Latimer, which be∣gan before his marriage, and grew greater daily by enjoy∣ment, possessed the chief place in his heart, notwithstanding of the distractions occasioned him by the League; into which after many delays he entred at last against the KING of FRANCE: yet whether it was for the sake of the QUEEN, whom he would not put out of humour, whilst the trouble∣som inconveniencies of an ima∣ginary
conception renewed her grief for the loss of her first Child; or because that young Lady lived in the retinue of the Princess his Sister, he gave but very few marks of it. On the contrary he seemed to make Courtship to the young Countess of Derby, and some other Beau∣ties at Court, thereby to divert the observation of the more cu∣rious; and although the Lady Latimer, more ambitious than prudent, was accessary to her Daughters slips; yet that afforded him not all the possible advanta∣ges he desired. It behoved him often to steal his opportuni∣ties by night, and to pass in disguise through a great part of his Palace in London, and House of pleasure at Greenwich, where the apartment of the Princess his Sister happened always to be cross to his designs; in which he ne∣ver trusted any but one dome∣stick
Servant, two of his Guards, and the faithful BRANDON. He made even commonly use of that favorite to conceal himself under his name; and without considering the wrong he might do to the Princess, these Night-rambles passed for the feats of BRANDON, that went to visit the Princess Mary. How∣ever, he would not that any should say so much, when his com∣pany were surprised, and could not avoid the eyes of some watch∣ful spie; and as it behoved him to colour these proceedings with some intrigue of love, because it would have been hard to have perswaded men that any thing else was in play, orders were given to insinuate, that it was the lovely BRANDON that payed his services to the Lady Latimer. But people were not always so credulous: they made a little too bold with that
Lady's reputation, and the mind of man commonly passes over things which are so easily disco∣vered, that it may pry into those that are studiously kept from its knowledg. There were se∣verals therefore that observing the obliging manner how the Princess treated BRANDON in publick, and knowing be∣sides somewhat of the secret vi∣sits, which he never rendered to her in her appartment, but in company of the KING, believed that he made them alone. The rumour of this began to spread by degrees, and though being vexed thereat, he made appear to the KING his Master the con∣sequences thereof, yet that vo∣luptuous KING was too much wedded to his pleasures to re∣nounce them; and BRAN∣DON himself began at length to taste such pleasures, as he could not have found in any
other course of life. The Lady Latimer, who was desperately in love with him, essaying by all ways of compliance to merit his affection, allowed him great li∣berty with the Princess Mary. She let him see the lovely Prin∣cess oftner than once asleep in the secret of Night; and fear∣ing nothing of the KING, who was then commonly taken up with her Daughter, because all these things seemed only to be done in attending of him, she left him many times alone in her Chamber; or at most but accompanied by a Maid privy to her intrigues, called Judith Kiffin, which was thought worse than to have left them together upon their bare word. However the matter be, the pleasure of seeing Mary of England, as he did, made him at length speak but faintly of what the KING did in prejudice of her reputation;
and though he always dreaded the consequences of those fro∣licks, yet by little and little he accustomed himself not to find fault with the occasions. Matters being in this state, and the QUEEN by degrees recovering her health, and ap∣pearing more cheerful, the Court full of Mistresses and Lovers, found their entertainment in the various emergents, that love e∣very moment occasioned amongst them; when Gray, Bourchier, and Sommerset, impatient of lo∣sing more sighs, resolved to trouble the felicity of BRAN∣DON. They had already for some days set spies to observe him, or otherways lay in wait for him themselves, upon notice given them, that he went al∣most every night to the apart∣ment of the Princess. Their own eyes had seen him, and they
knew the by-ways he used to take, though they had not dis∣covered that he was with the KING, or in the least sus∣pected it; so careful was that Prince to pass unknown. They placed themselves therefore in Ambush at a back-door in the Palace, by which BRANDON, the fifth in company, had just before entred; and fearing no impediment in their design, un∣less by the Rancounter of some Germans, who had remained at London after the conclusion of the League: (whom they had already agreed among themselves to accuse of the disorders which themselves intended to commit;) though Gray was that night in∣disposed; yet the other two be∣ing more fiery, and unwilling to let slip this occasion, they rallied together to the number of se∣ven. All things appeared to them at first in as fair a way as
they desired. No body molest∣ed them in the quarter where they had posted themselves, and the Moon being over-clouded, gave no more light but what was enough for them to distin∣guish themselves by the marks that they carried. So that the KING returning from his visit, hardly had he that kept the key opened the door, when Bourchier presented a Pistol to the two Yeo∣men of the Guard that came out first. Stand, said he, where is BRANDON? Sommerset immedi∣ately in the same manner put the question to them. But the two Guards so much the more daring, that they had the KING for a wit∣ness of their Courage, made them answer only with their Carabines; and both of them firing at the same instant that Bourchier and Som∣merset fired, as there were but two reports heard, so there were but two shot that did execu∣tion.
That of Sommerset passing under the hand of the Yeoman of the Guard that stood opposite to him, was carried too high; and Bourchiers only grazed upon the others Cassock. But as one of the Carabines missed Sommerset, who by good fortune kneeled on one knee, so the other bruised the shoulder of Bourchier; and both being loaded with several Bullets, killed three of their men that stood behind them. The KING in the mean time, who feared nothing so much as to be discovered, considering the bold∣ness of the attempt, and perceiv∣ing two of the contrary party who remained, betake themselves to flight; caused quickly the other door of the Palace, by which he was to enter, to be open∣ed. BRANDON having drawn, but finding none to fight with, came shortly after; and the two Yeomen of Guard that knew the
Kings intention as well as he, having immediately disarmed Som∣merset and Bourchier, followed him. This was the fortune of these Rivals, who found all the difficulty imaginable to get home, the one sorely wounded, and the other soundly beaten, and both in extreme despair. The KING was no sooner where he desired to be, but being furiously in∣censed against them, he resolved and vowed their ruin; yet Bran∣don interposing, stopt this first ebullition of choler, by represent∣ing to him, that in punishing the guilty according to their merit, he would discover the secret; and to that prevalent reason ad∣ding considerations that concern∣ed the Princess, he at length perswaded him that they had re∣ceived usage hard enough to make them capable of some fa∣vour. Insomuch that the whole matter past for an unlucky skuffle
that Bourchier and Sommerset had had with some drunken Ger∣mans. At least the Earl of Essex was ordered to publish as much the day following, and to make it the more credible, strangers were forbidden to walk abroad in the night upon pain of death. None but the Rivals of BRANDON whispered secretly what they knew; but by the absolute Command which the KING had given to the Earl of Essex, that he should impute the wound of his Son to those who were no ways con∣cerned in it, and by the fierce threats he made to that Earl for the suspicions that he endeavour∣ed to insinuate against the Prin∣cess his Sister, so high, as that he replied in rage, that know∣ing better than he what her car∣riage was, it was only in respect of his age that he pardoned so
insolent a Calumny. In a word, by the secret rumour that began to spread, that the King himself was a Party, they by little and little diving into his intrigue with Cecile Blunt, found all their Fortunes good, so that a private reason hindered him from taking publick revenge. Gray went a∣way with the Marquess of Dor∣set, his Father, who carried six thousand English to Fontarabie, to assist the King of Spain in in∣vading Guyenne according to an Article of the League. Howard and Talbot, though they were not (no more than he) at that fatal Rancounter, beg'd leave to serve in the same Army; and Sommerset went to Scotland upon some pretext of his own. So that there remaining none but Bourchier, whose wound kept him long from the publick; Bran∣don found himself in a few days delivered from all his Enemies.
But in their absence they did him more mischief than they had done in person; and whether it was an effect of their malice, or of the sequel of things, which being with difficulty concealed time brings to light at length, men began to speak more open∣ly than they had been accustom∣ed to do, of the Amours of the Princess and Brandon. The King was so far from being offended herewith, that he seemed rather to applaud it: some who im∣pertinently discourse of the car∣riage of Princes, wherein there is not always so great ground of reasoning as is believed, imagi∣ned that all that he did that way was a politick fetch, to break the Grandees of his King∣dom of the designs they might have for his Sister; others who are not always willing to infect the Court with false notions, kept themselves to what they
saw; and more wisely believed that it was only out of a natu∣ral complaisance that he enter∣tained for all sorts of gallan∣try. But though all that was said of the Princess and Brandon, redounded still to his Honour; yet he reaped nothing from it but vexation and grief: neither could his truly generous and no∣ble soul relish that honour which he received at the cost of what he loved. He was far more af∣fected with the reproaches that the Princess Mary might have talkt of him, though indeed she never made any of him On the contrary he having sometimes ex∣pressed himself to her concern∣ing these things in a very sor∣rowful manner, she had always the goodness to tell him, that he should follow the example, and not trouble himself with the discourse of people. But
this obliging carriage served only to encrease his pain: and as two hearts that are truly smitten are unwilling to be be∣hind in duty to one another; so he concerned himself the more in the glory of the Princess, that she seemed to slight it for the love of him. Insomuch that falling very pensive and melan∣cholick, notwithstanding the pains that she took to comfort him; and having no other thoughts but to leave the Kingdom, that he might remove the occasions of detraction, he acquainted my Lord Hastings his Uncle, to whom he told all his affairs, with his design. He being a fierce Old Soldier, took him at first up sharply for the little Courage he made shew of; afterward falling in discourse about the Earls of Surrey and Essex, he told him that the race of Howards and Bourchiers was indeed ancient,
and raised to vast Estates, and eminent Dignities by the merits of many predecessors; but that yet they were not the only no∣bles, who could brag of as great antiquity, and the glory of as many heroical Actions; nor that they had any such advantages as might give them ground to in∣sult over the Brandons and Ha∣stings; and that therefore it be∣hoved him not at all for the railery of some jealous Rivals, to abandon the Prospects which both the King and Princess did countenance. However all this made no great impression on the mind of Brandon. He adhered to his resolution, and had al∣ready taken his measures for withdrawing; when at length the good Old man Hastings be∣ing unable to retain him by his reasons, found himself obliged to discover to him what he had promised never to reveal.
The resolution was doubtless great, and cost the Old man dear: besides the weakness of old age, he had more reason than any other to be dismayed, which made him long complain of the vio∣lence that his Nephew put upon him, before he began that dan∣gerous discourse. And that he might in some manner prepare him for it, having brought out a ma∣nuscript of all Merlins Prophesies, he made him read that which was the cause of the death of the Duke of Clarence, conceived in these words, When the White Rose shall the Red subdue, G. Of that race shall change its Hue, And the Red o're it shall bloom anew. There shall remain of the White slock But one bud fallen on Hemlock: Yet too much zeal doth oft annoy, For an inn'cent maid shall it destroy.
When he had read the Pro∣phesie, the ancient Gentleman tracing matters as far back as was necessary, explained to him the beginning of the prediction according as the event had made it evident. In the first verse he let him see the Victory of Ed∣ward of York, designed by the White Rose, over HENRY the Sixt of Lancaster, who car∣ried the Red. In the second he discovered to him the deplora∣ble mistake of that Victorious Prince, who having caused his younger Brother George Duke of Clarence to be put to death in a pipe of Malmsey, because the first letter of his name was a fa∣tal G. gave his other Brother Richard Duke of Glocester, (of whom he had no suspicion) by his last will, opportunity of mur∣thering his two Sons; and in the third he shewed him th return of Prince Henry Earl of Richmont,
who in the blood of that Tyrant, made the red Roses flourish again. But having thus interpreted the three first verses, which had given matter of much discourse in that time, Hastings his countenance changed colour; and being deep∣ly affected with the importance of the secret, that he was about to reveal, concluding in a fret what with reason he had begun; he told him, that the world had indeed sufficiently understood by the event of things, the beginning of the Prophesie of Merlin, but that few understood the rest. That though the flatterers of the late King had perswaded him, that by the death of the only Son of Richard the Tyrant, which hap∣pened by a fall, the prediction was fulfilled and explicated, be∣cause that he having fallen in a place where Hemlock grew, an inconsiderate person, who came running after, thinking to wipe
and stop the blood of his wound with that herb, had hastened his death; yet that he understood somewhat more than these flat∣terers knew; and that the cruel death of the poor Earl of War∣wick, Son of the Duke of Cla∣rence, had not fulfilled the Pro∣phesie either: but that that un∣fortunate Prince having escaped from the superstitious scrupulo∣sity of one of his Uncles, and being confined to a Castle by the other, was secretly married to a Daughter of Charles Hemlock, Brother-in-law to himself, who commanded in that place; by whom he had a Son, and that, not to hold him long in suspense, he was that Son. At these words, Brandon cried out, as if he had been struck with Thunder, and the Lord Hastings his Uncle in vain endeavoured to perswade him, that though he
had reason to be surprised at the relation, yet he ought to believe it; for he still maintained that it was but a tale devised to excite in him greater Courage. At length Hastings, by reason of the sensible danger to which he ∣posed himself by discovering that secret, began to gain ground up∣on him. He made appear to him, that he must either have been a fool, or weary of life, to have invented such a fable; and more fully to convince him, he re∣counted to him the whole story of the marriage of the Earl of Warwick his Father; and that Anne Hemlock his real Mother, dy∣ing in Child-bed of him, the Lady Brandon substituted him in place of one of her Children which just then died, having been born but a few days before him: He put him in mind of what he had been told heretofore of the repug∣nance that the Lady made, whom he
believed to be his Mother, when she was invited to be Nurse to the King. And then perceiv∣ing him to be a little moved, he had no great difficulty to convince him, that he was the secret cause of that unwillingness, which was so variously discoursed of amongst people; and adding to this seve∣ral other passages of his educati∣on, which being all of the same strain and character, gave evidence enough, that there had always been some mystery in his for∣tune, he past them but slightly over, that at the same time he might insinuate, that if he loved his life, it behoved him not to remember them. He only hinted to him, that the secret of his birth should encourage him to re∣sist his Rivals, who believed them∣selves better descended than he; and that if he could keep the se∣cret as well as the Prince his Fa∣ther had done, who had seen him
a hundred times out of his prison-Windows, and who went to death, accompanied with Frier Patrick, without speaking a word of it, heaven possibly had de∣signed him for great matters. That, after all, he was the only remaining bud of the White Rose, whereof Merlin spake in his Pro∣phesie; and that his Mothers name so plainly expressed by the word Hemlock, made it past all doubt: seeing that in effect the Blood of York was fallen into that of Hem∣lock by his Birth. But that these following words of the Astro∣loger, Yet too much zeal doth oft annoy, For an inn'cent maid shall it destroy. put him in great perplexity. That though the punishment of Simo∣nel, and death of Peter Warbeck, who gave themselves out for Prin∣ces of the House of York, were
instances terrible enough to hin∣der him from bragging of his ex∣traction: yet as it was his opinion that he should continue his love to the Princess, so that passion made him very apprehensive. That he imagined already that he would discover to her, all that had been told him; and that though she might still love him, yet it might too really happen, that she should become the innocent maid that might destroy him, if he con∣cealed not from her, as well as from every body else, that impor∣tant secret. Hastings thus ending his dis∣course, fell on his knees to Bran∣don, that he might once in his life render him the respect which the interest of his safety suffered him not to pay in any other place, and that he might beseech him never to entertain thoughts that any such honours were due
to him. But what difficulty so∣ever this new Prince of York had at first to believe it, yet he found at length all things that had been told him so well circumstantiated, and so conform to the inclinati∣ons of his heart, that he had no more power to doubt of the truth of what was told him. He pro∣mised to be cautious, and to con∣ceal his birth; and the Lord Hast∣ings, who was still his great Uncle by the Mother-side, died short∣ly after, either of old age; or for fear lest the secret which he had revealed should be disco∣vered. In the mean time Brandon, whom we must for some time still name so, found his Courage by little and little raised by the knowledg of what he was. He thereby grew more brisk and agreeable with the Princess; more courte∣ous and majestick with others;
and by the prudent management of the estate left him by Hastings, became so considerable, that the King himself took pleasure to see him imploy new measures, one day to deserve all that he wished him the enjoyment of. On the other hand his Rivals, being re∣turned from the Pyrenean hills, where the designs of the King of Spain, who had fallen upon Na∣var, hindered them from atchiev∣ing any great exploits, found him again of an humour less disposed to yield to them than formerly. Sommerset after his return from Scotland, could not regain that height upon him, which he al∣ways pretended to before; and Bourchier cured of his wound, durst never on that account ex∣press to him the least discontent. They all appeared to have sub∣mitted themselves to their for∣tunes; and whilst Howard and Talbot, the one made Admiral,
and the other Master of the Horse, stifled their love by the satisfacti∣on of their ambition; Gray and the rest found it impossible for them to delight their eyes, but by living in good correspondence with Brandon. Their care there∣fore was only to out-do him in greatness of services, and obsequi∣ousness towards the Princess: he was the man that was most assidu∣ous that way, who gave demon∣stration of greatest complaisance; and there happened some days, when it seemed that that Conduct might prove successful, they ob∣tained thereby at least more access to her: and although through the favours which she was pleased sometimes to show them, they perceived too well, that they had no share in her affection; yet at what rate soever they resolved to persist in rendering her their Services. So true it is, that with small pains and little care, a love∣ly
person is able to produce great effects in the minds of those who are captivated with its beauty. In∣somuch that all these Rivals be∣gan to live together with less contention; and contributing se∣verally to the publick pomp, whilst the preparations for a War with France were vigorously car∣ried on, there was nothing to be seen at London but Plays, Horse-races, Balls and Dancing, where the Ladys in rich dresses setting off the beauty, which might pro∣cure them praise and esteem, ob∣liged likewise their Lovers to im∣ploy their greatest advantages. On these occasions, the lovely Bran∣don gained signal honour; and whether it was for his good meen, or his dexterity in all the exer∣cises of body, there was no Gen∣tleman in the Kingdom that seem∣ed not his inferiour. So that a∣mongst so many competitors, who contended with him for the favour
of the Princess, there was not a∣ny so fortunate as to gain the least of it to his prejudice; and though Edward Strafford, the young Duke of Buckingham, and the Earl of Kildare, Son to the Lord Lieu∣tenant of Ireland, both of them lovely and handsom Gentlemen, had newly declared themselves his Rivals, yet it was without either jealousie or disquiet to him: Mary of Lancaster adored by all, had no passion for any but him. But amidst the pleasures, by which the Court of England, the most gallant and pompous of that age, prepared so sumptuously for the War of France; the death of Cecile Blunt, Daughter to the Lord Latimer, occasioned there great alteration. Her Mother seeming comfortless, as women of her hu∣mour affect always to appear, re∣tired into the Countrey. The Dutchess of Bedford falling deaf,
and oppressed with many other infirmities of old age, took like∣wise the occasion to withdraw. The Countess of Pembrock was put in her place, until the Ar∣rival of Princess Margaret of York, Dutchess of Salisbury, Daughter of the unfortunate Duke of Cla∣rence, and her self as unfortunate in the sequel, as her Brother the Earl of Warwick. The King some∣time before, for reasons of state, had designed her for that charge; and the Lady Dacres was ordered to supply the place of the Lady La∣timer, until she were recovered from her grief; so that there re∣mained of the ancient servants of the Princess, hardly any but Ju∣dith Kiffen, who being the most dexterous person in the world for that service, and lying commonly at the foot of her bed, she was become too useful to her, to let her be removed: and that revolu∣tion in the Family of the Princess
Mary was a forerunner of the dis∣order which shortly appeared in the mind of the King. What care soever he had had to conceal his love for his late Mistris, he had not the power to dissemble his affliction for her death. He be∣gan to condemn the intrigues of his Court, with which he had al∣ways used to make himself mer∣ry. He went so far as to defeat the measures of several Lovers, by giving them new employments under pretext of the War of France; and though Brandon met not with so great crosses, yet he was one of the first that perceiv∣ed the King to be out of humour: when being no more the Confi∣dent of his affliction, as he had been of his pleasures, he saw a new favourite admitted into his place, one Thomas Woolsey, Bishop of Lincoln, to whom Richard Fox, Bishop of Winchester, had left vast riches at his death.
This man of low Birth, but sublime Parts, as sometimes bad men are, knew very well, that HENRY the Eight, notwith∣standing the great Qualities which rendered him formidable to his neighbours, was a restless Prince; and that being unable after the hurry of business to remain idle and unactive, he stood in need of some amusing toy, that might re∣fresh his mind by seizing his heart. In a word, he understood that re∣pose being uneasie to him with∣out pleasures and wantonness, he must needs be provided of women; and that possibly was the reason that it was said, that to comfort him for the death of the Mistris, whom he had just before lost, he made no scruple to advise him to bestow his affection with all expe∣dition on some other. It was be∣sides alledged, that he himself be∣ing smitten with the lovely eyes of the Princess Mary, and not
so foolish as to expect any enjoy∣ment of her, had wrought him to fix his eyes upon her. But I think that that is to be looked upon as a Calumny of those who reproach∣ed him with all kinds of crimes, be∣cause he had pursued them with all sorts of evils. Ambitious men, such as Woolsey, are either not very sensible of love, or would not be so tame as to give to ano∣ther what they love themselves. However it be, whether it was an effect of the counsel of that bad Minister; or that the Beauty of Mary, which daily encreased, had awakened some desire in the mind of HENRY the Eight; it is certain, that that Prince after the death of Cecile Blunt, did speak of love to the Princess his Sister. She understood him not at first, or to say better, she would not understand him: but the account that she gave of it to Brandon, had almost killed him with grief.
And although he never dreamt of any such thing, yet the in∣differency wherewith the King for some time had used him, gave sufficient evidence of the change of his fortune; and as till then he had doubted what might be the cause of that disgrace, imputing it sometime to some fault of his own, and sometime to the natu∣ral inconstancy of the King, so he believed that he had then found it out. So that to remove him∣self from trouble, and following no other counsel, but that of his jealousie or fear; he beg'd leave of the King to go to Calais with the first Troops that were then drawing out for the War of France. Though the King had not altoge∣ther the Sentiments which Bran∣don suspected, yet he well under∣stood his thoughts; and without any farther discovery, he thought it enough to answer, that it be∣hoved him to moderate that im∣patience,
seeing he intended to have him by him the first time that he drew his sword. But, notwithstanding of this obliging answer, Brandon's disturbance had no end; insomuch that some days after, finding occasion to speak a∣gain to the King, he renewed to him the same suit: adding, that if he could a little train himself in the matters of War before he undertook it, he would deserve better to follow His Majesty. Up∣on this the King, by a return of affection, for a man whom he had so much loved, being willing wholly to undeceive him; told him smiling, That he well per∣ceived what he had in his thoughts, but that sure he was not more dangerous than another; and that he should not take the allarm so hot for a little gallantry, which he used with his Sister, only to divert him from thinking on poor Cecile. Nothing certainly, in that
juncture of affairs, could have been better said, and it answered all objections. Nevertheless, dif∣fidence, which is natural to all true Lovers, made Brandon think these words the more to be suspected, the less that they appeared so. He imagined that his dangerous Ri∣val, under an affected repugnan∣cy, cloaked a real desire to see him at a distance; which he dis∣coursed of with the Princess in so prepossessed a manner, that she was constrained in reason to ap∣prove of what his weakness pro∣posed. But before he asked the third time permission from the King to depart, and took his leave of her, he resolved in an excessive fit of love to acquaint her with what he had learned concerning his Birth. The Princess Mary was no less surprised at the relation, which from his Uncle he had made to
her of that matter, than he him∣self was at first: and though the whole story of the marriage of the Earl of Warwick, with Ann Hemlock, founded on the pre∣diction of Merlin, or the report of Old Hastings lately dead, might appear suspicious in the mouth of a Lover; yet she entertained not the least thought of that nature. On the contrary, notwithstand∣ing the favourable opinion that she had of the truth of all, her sur∣prise appeared visibly in her eyes, as he was speaking; and so soon as he had made an end, being de∣sirous to have all things better cleared, she told him with a ten∣derness, which the novelty of the matter, and the emotion of her mind, rendered very extraordi∣nary; that she loved him no bet∣ter for being a Prince of York, but that she loved her self some∣what more on that account; and that being well-pleased, that she
had cause to reverence in him what till then she had but esteemed, she rejoyced that she had no rea∣son to fear those stirrings of pride in her heart; which might be sometimes troublesom to a person of her Quality, in regard of the condition she took him to be of. That all that notwithstanding was but a dangerous Idea, with which they ought never to entertain themselves. That he was dear e∣nough to her, as the Son of Bran∣don; and that he would but create her disquiet, as a Prince of the Blood of York. That so he would not do well to be jealous of the greatness of his Birth; that he ought to renounce that for her sake, and that bounding all his ambition with the favour of be∣ing beloved so tenderly as she loved him, he should never at∣tempt to make himself known for the man he was. Brandon being at the same time amazed, and
charmed to hear her speak in so obliging terms, could make her no other answer, but that she was too gracious; and that when he re∣solved to disclose to her his secret, it was not so much to engage her to more goodness towards him, as to put her in a condition of punishing him, if it ever happen∣ed that he should prove unworthy of her favours. But the fair Prin∣cess stopping him there, replied softly, That he had no reason to suspect that she should one day punish him, unless he thought that he might one day offend her. That nevertheless he needed not be afraid, though he should e∣ven become her Enemy; and that she was not the innocent maid, of whom Merlin spake afterward, without giving him time to an∣swer; and considering with more reason than she had at first thought on, the design he had projected of removing from Court
for a time, she represented to him, That he ought to have special care not to betray himself, by looking on the Dutchess of Salisbury and her Daughter, who were expected within a few days at Court, as his Aunt and Cousin. She added, that his true Birth rendered a little sus∣pected to her, the choice that the King had made of that Princess for her Conduct, having so many times testified that he loved her not. She told him that he ought on that occasion distrust him: and that though the kindnesses, where∣with he had thought fit to enter∣tain her in some Rancounters, were certainly nothing else but some exercises and frolicks of wit, see∣ing he did not persist in them; yet it was possible there might be in it some hidden mystery, which time might discover. In fine, con∣tinued she, my Knight, and Bro∣ther (these were the names that she gave him in her Child-hood,
and commonly still when they were by themselves) let us di∣strust all the world, distrust me if you please; and above all things have a care to continue still to be Brandon, leaving to me the care of the Prince of York; and you shall find that whether you be necessitated to depart, or have the liberty to abide at Court, it shall be more pleasant for you to be reputed what you are in my heart, than to appear so in the eyes of the world. Thus ended their conversation; which as it was the most impor∣tant interview that they could en∣joy, so was it also the longest that ever they had had. But the Earl of Kildare, who had three times presented himself in the Anti-Chamber of the Princess, and had been by her Maids still dis∣missed on frivolous reasons, see∣ing Brandon come forth, conceived
so great indignation thereat, that he followed him with a purpose to quarrel, and left him not till he saw him enter into the Kings A∣partment. This Earl being Son to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and buoyed up besides by the pro∣tection of Woolsey, and some con∣cerns that he had with the Lady Dacres, thought that he might have better success than the rest in the service of the Princess Mary. He had not as yet seen any impediment to his design, but Brandon; and promising himself already great advantages from the apparent disgrace whereof some began to pity his danger, he stood not upon examination of what he designed against him. He receiv∣ed moreover a new ground of jealousie, upon the Arrival of Margaret of York, Dutchess of Salisbury, which put him out of all patience; for being with him at Richmont, at the reception
which the Princess, conducted by the Queen, was there to give to that illustrious Widow, the first ceremonies being past, he unlucki∣ly observed a little, but very ob∣liging sign that she had made to his Enemy, to draw near her chair. He afterwards perceived by her eyes and actions, that she spake to him with much goodness; and in effect, the Princess Mary being taken with some features, that the Ladies of Salisbury had in com∣mon with Brandon; she could not forbear telling him at the very instant, the trouble that that sight occasioned her, so that it was sufficiently observed that she spake to him with somewhat of tender∣ness: and Brandon on the other hand, whether for joy to find her so well perswaded of the truth of what he had told her concerning his Birth; or to divert her from the officious fears that she had for his sake, answering in a composed
and contented manner, made it almost past all doubt. Insomuch that the Earl of Kildare mad of jealousie, and being no longer master of himself, went forth with a resolution to take his satisfacti∣on in what place soever he could meet him. But the King being come likewise to that visit before his going to Greenwich, to see a great match of hunting; Brandon who was to wait upon him, gave not his Enemy the occasion so soon as he expected it. And now his thoughts being wholly taken up about his de∣parture, and that which the Prin∣cess her self had immediately be∣fore told him of the resemblance that he had to the Ladies of Sa∣lisbury, his desire was only bent to withdraw himself; and he thought to find an opportunity favourable enough of speaking to the King, as he waited upon him down to
the Park, where he was to take horse; but he was deceived in that, and it happened to be a fa∣tal nick of time: for the King, (who was out of humour, because the Spaniards on the Pyrenean side did not perform on their part what they had promised for a rupture with France); answered him pretty briskly, that he thought he had been cured of that impatience: and as he was about to insist, Ha! said he, you importune me, let me alone I pray thee: you will but trouble my sport at Greenwich; and so turning his back upon him, he went away with those that used to wait on him on such occasions. So that the melancholick Brandon, thinking that himself only was or∣dered to stay behind, sought out some corner in the Park, wherein to evaporate the thoughts which at that time tormented him; and had sometime walked about in that design with a wounded heart, for
the slight that the King had given him: when the Earl of Keldare, having had confused notice of what passed, came towards him. Though he saw him at a pretty distance, yet he did not prepare to engage him, but stopped to consi∣der the fierce and threatning looks wherewith he advanced towards him. Whereupon the Irish man drawing, Brandon who was obliged to do the same, encountered him. And by a wound first in the shoul∣der, made him see his own blood: with a second pass he run him through the right arm; and the third going quite through his bo∣dy, made him fall against the pales. Never was there any quarrel sooner made, and more quickly decided. The noise of this Duel having cal∣led together those who in the de∣lightful spring came to enjoy in that Park the first verdure of the fields, and the servants of the wounded Earl being come in,
Brandon was instantly apprehend∣ed: and the matter being after∣ward reported to Woolsey, by the authority which that new Minister had already acquired, he was made prisoner in a Tower of Richmont-house, until that the Lord Mayor of London, following the King on his way to Greenwich, should re∣ceive his Orders concerning that affair. The Princess Mary had no in∣formation of all this, but from the Dutchess of Salisbury, who in that confusion, and in respect of the Prisoner, who was to be carefully guarded, was advised not to delay till next day the taking possession of her apartment with the Prin∣cess, in whom it is not easie to be represented what Impression this news made. The reflexions that she had made on the pretended resemblance betwixt Brandon and the two Ladies of Salisbury of the
house of York: and the secret ap∣prehensions that she thereupon conceived, which made her leave the Queen in her Walk, pretend∣ing her self indisposed, held her still in great perplexity. She went to bed, that she might not be ob∣liged to see any body; and there her mind being prepossessed with what she knew, and imagining that it would suddenly come to the knowledg of others, her thoughts presented to her nothing but dismal objects. Insomuch that the disaster of Brandon surprising her in this condition, all that she had before but confusedly thought on, seemed to her manifest and clear. With a great cry she let fall her head on the pillow; and to compleat her sorrow, she received a note from the King, who had given orders to the Mayor of London, to remove the Prisoner to the Tower, ac∣quainting her directly, That he not doubting but that the punish∣ment which Brandon deserved for
killing the Earl of Kildare, would put her in some disorder; he prayed her to suspend the good opinion which she might have for that ungrateful person, until that he should inform her of some strange things which he had learned. Such general and ambiguous terms, susceptible of any meaning, that an affrightned mind could give them, put the Princess Mary to the extremity of despair; and that first night, when Brandon went to the Tower of London, was a sad and terrible night to her. Judith Kiffen, who thought it fit to watch with her alone that night; (and who being ignorant of the mysterious secret that caused her grief, imputed to the love alone to which she was privy, all the incoherent expressions that seemed to escape from her without judg∣ment,) had more to do with her than she dreamt of. The vexa∣tion of her mind was followed by
an oppression of body. She fell into a Fever, but so dangerous, as put every one in fear of her life; and the Queen and Dutchess of Salisbury, who could not be al∣ways denied access into her Cham∣ber, being next day the most so∣licitous about her, to procure her ease; her fortune was certainly good, that at that time the vio∣lence of her distemper having de∣prived her of the use of speech, put her out of condition of betray∣ing her self. The King in the mean-while, whose thoughts were far different from hers, and being ignorant of the secret causes of her fear; propo∣sing to himself in this conjuncture, only his revenge, both for the in∣differency wherewith she enter∣tained his Gallantry, and the idle fear that her Lover thereupon conceived, followed his game at Greenwich: and continued it even longer than at first he intended,
that such as came from Lon∣don to beg of him, that he would change the orders given to the Lord Mayor against the Prisoner, might not find him; and that so he might have ground to say, that he was ignorant of what had passed. Insomuch that several messengers, sent either by the Queen or the Dutchess of Sa∣lisbury, to give him advice of the sickness of the Princess Mary, sought him in the Fields and Woods in vain. They were everywhere directed to find him in places where he was not: but Gray, Son to the Marquess of Dorset, who of his own head had taken horse, was more fortunate in his search. The love that he had for the Princess Mary, made him sufficiently un∣derstand what the best-informed could know of her distemper, though it was given out that it had seized her before the busi∣ness of Brandon happened: and
how jealous sover he was of the pretious testimony of affection, which at that time she gave to his happy Rival; yet his jealousie served only to prompt him with greater earnestness to attempt her relief. Insomuch that he sur∣mounted all the difficulties that had hindered the rest from find∣ing the King, and having passio∣nately given him an account of the dangerous condition that the Princess was in, he moved him in∣stantly to return to Greenwich, from whence next morning by the break of day he departed for Lon∣don. The insolence of Woolsey was at first sufficiently repressed, by the dislike which the King testi∣fied of his procedure. Having waved the discourses that they would have made to him concern∣ing the wounds of the Earl of Kildare, and having nothing in his mind but the sickness of his Sister; and knowing better than
Gray, that her cure consisted in the safety of Brandon, he asked presently how he was used, and gave order to the Lord Terell, to send him such of his servants, as he might stand in need of. So that fame, which commonly is swifter than the Marches of Kings, having carried this good news in∣to the apartment of the Princess, was without doubt the most ac∣ceptable harbinger that she could have of his Arrival. But fear having wrought great disorders in her mind; and after a new pa∣roxysm of her Fever, which did but begin to abate, her mind be∣ing weakened as well as her body, she could not show her self to him, as she desired to appear. The trembling tone of her voice, pro∣ceeding rather from the tender∣ness of her heart, than the force of her distemper, gave but too sensible a proof of the hard tryal she had been put to; and there
was nothing more easie than for him to perceive that the life of Brandon was her sole care, though she had not asked him if it was true that he intended to cause him to be put to death? So that this Prince, who on such occasions was very sensible, answer∣ing only with kisses and tears; and her Caresses expressing her de∣sire far more intelligibly than words, gave him hardly liberty to speak, that he might oppose himself to the impatience that she was in. He left her that he might with his counsel contrive a way to relieve Brandon from the Tower with pretext of justice. But for all the formality which he affected to observe in his affairs, he had no great occasion to be so scrupu∣lous in this matter. The greatest part of the Court, who perceived his design, spake openly for Bran∣don against the Earl of Kildare.
And after a formal shew of exa∣mining the tumultuary depositi∣ons, that they might give some fa∣vourable colour to their proceed∣ings, the Lords Poyning and Terell were immediately sent to the Prisoner. He came with them without a guard; and as he cast himself on his knees before the King, there appearing in his cloaths some mark of the insolent usage that he had met with: you see, said the King to him, how dange∣rous it is for you to remove from me, and that I had reason not to consent to your departure: see∣ing that in a moment that you have left me, there is a world of enemies broken loose against you. Whereupon Brandon offering to speak of the aggression of the Earl of Kildare, the King stopped him at the first word, and commanded him to rise, promising to do justice in time and place to him that de∣served it. Then drawing him a
little aside, he told him, that the Princess's health must be his chief endeavour; and that for his better succeeding in that office, he thought it not fit he should see her in the disorder that he was in. No bo∣dy heard this discourse, nor some∣what else that passed betwixt them. It was only seen that the King forced himself to appear grave in his discourse; and whilst he him∣self went to change his cloaths, as well as Brandon, (whom he had a∣gain ordered to do so); all Bran∣dons friends, whom his ill fortune had not as yet much dispersed, rallied together, and brought him from his Lodgings, where some met him, and others accom∣panied him, as in triumph to the Palace. He payed his second visit to the Queen, who had interceded for him; and whilst he was with her Majesty, the King that he might
countenance his visit to his Sister, came back to her apartment. But he suffered none of his train to come farther in, than the first Gallery: under pretext that much company was incommodious to sick persons; and so soon as he had notice that Brandon was coming, leaving none with her but Judith Kiffen, he himself withdrew to the Dutchess of Salisbury's apart∣ment, that in so delicate and much-desired an interview, she might not be under any constraint. It would be a great undertaking to endeavour to give a precise and full account of all that was done and said at that time betwixt Bran∣don and the English Princess; be∣sides, at first their hearts and eyes made all the discourse, the Prin∣cess wanting strength to speak o∣therways; and Brandon having so much to say, that he knew not well how to express any thing.
At length the Princess spake first who seeing him more afflicted at her distemper than could be imagi∣ned, strained her self to tell him, that it was nothing, and that see∣ing he was free from the danger wherein she believed him to be, she should shortly be cured of the sickness wherein he saw her. She declared to him moreover, as well as she could, that the hurt or death of the Earl of Kildare, was not that which had dismayed her: but that she feared he had been dis∣covered. He answered but very little to that, though no body could hear what they said. Nor could the Kings note which she gave him to read for the confirma∣tion of her belief and fear, engage him to enter on that discourse. He knew that the safest way was never to speak more of it; and having heard nothing to that pur∣pose in his Prison, and the manner how the King received him, having
no relation at all to that, he was well enough acquainted with his character, and stile, to guess at the truth of the matter. So that he thought it sufficient by his looks, to free her from the apprehensi∣on that she had conceived; and discoursing to her only concern∣ing her health, with mutual ex∣pressions of tender affection, they began to renew the testimonies of their real loves; when the King fearing that too long a conversa∣tion might be hurtful to a sick per∣son, returned, and separated them with as much kindness as he had brought them together. Brandon followed him, that he might render him thanks for his favours, and inform himself what was to be the issue of the Ran∣counter he had had with the Earl of Kildare, whose wounds were not mortal. But their discourse on that subject was not long.
The King who naturally concern∣ed himself in the amours of every one, wishing him only joy for the good opinion, that a fair Princess was pleased to have of him, took thereby occasion to rally with him, because he had taken him for his Rival, upon some words of Gallantry which escaped from him, (as he said) whil'st he intended only to bewail the death of Cecile. Then he up∣braided him with the small trust he gave to his word and friend∣ship, that carried him so far as to resolve to leave him; and con∣fessing at length frankly, that he had not caused him to be sent to the Tower, but to revenge him∣self of that private affront, and at the same time to discover what love could do in the heart of a young Princess; it might seem that he had no more to say for his satisfaction. But yet he stop∣ped not there; for finding in him∣self
some secret joy, which added somewhat to his natural debonai∣rity; and that it concerned the health of his Sister, that Brandon should re-assume his former jolli∣ties, that with more success he might employ himself in her Ser∣vice; he thought it not fit to dis∣miss him, before he had dissipated the smallest mists, which great affairs, how well soever concluded, leave commonly behind them. No forrain nor remote matters di∣sturbed him at that time, and he had just then received good news from the Emperour, who to be∣gin the War against France, pro∣mised to act on the Frontiers of Picardy, which the wary King of Spain deferred to do on the side of Guyenne. So that finding his mind in great liberty, he gave Brandon a review of the life they had led together; and laying be∣fore him almost all the Testimo∣nies of Friendship that he had
shewed him, he forgot not amongst the rest to take special notice of the merit of that obliging man∣ner, whereby he had countenanced his love. With that desiring a suitable return of Justice, he cryed, that it was his part to render it him: adding, that he knew not how he could (after so powerful obligations) suspect, that he would take the Earl of Kildare's part against him, and far less, how he could believe him to be in love with his own Sister; and the Ri∣val of a friend, of whose passion he himself had laid the founda∣tion; and at length concluded, that he well perceived that love was always accompanied with in∣firmities; and that lovers could not guard against them, when their friends had the art to foresee them. At these last words, which he could not pronounce without a smile, Brandon was so fully convinced of his sincerity, that he lost all
the remains of distrust and trouble, which he could possibly retain. And to confirm him in the just perswasion that he was of, the King gave him his hand as an evidence of a perfect good correspondence: then thinking it needless to intreat him to take care of the Princess recovery, knowing it to be his greatest concern, he thought it e∣nough to tell him in the most ta∣king way imaginable, that they ought both to contribute their utmost endeavours for that effect; and that he himself being guilty of much imprudence in that con∣juncture, would grant her for her comfort, without exception, what∣ever she pleased to desire. But Brandon, who understood but too well the meaning of that discourse, was so much the more affected with it, that by an excess of love and virtue, he began of himself so to be disposed, as not to be flattered with any thing. The
hopes that had dazled him in his younger days, dazled him now no more in the age that he had at∣tained to. Time and reason made him daily discover new impedi∣ments. His true birth seemed likewise to object secret hinder∣ances, which appeared invincible; and whatsoever affection the Prin∣cess was preingaged in, in his fa∣vour, and what goodness soever the King might evidence to him, yet he saw no appearance to pro∣mise himself that he would one day give her to him in marriage: nor did he find it even reasonable, that he himself should desire it. He very well knew that the Daugh∣ters and Sisters of Kings are al∣ways married for reasons of State; and that it was to much purpose indeed for him to ballance the an∣cient custom of England, and the design that the King had to esta∣blish it with that universal maxim. Neither that ancient custom, nor
the re-establishment that the King gave out he intended to make of it, appeared to him any thing, but a vain phantasm raised against the treaty of Calais: or at most but a specious reason to temporise for some years in expectation of some better alliance against the house of Austria. To that it may be added, that though it had been true that the lovely Princess had not been intended in marriage to any Forraign Prince, there were yet many other great Lords in England, Scotland, and Ireland, who might be chosen for that pur∣pose; and all those who pretended to her, as he did, be excluded. So that finding himself at that time filled with these great and hard thoughts, which sometimes had made him resolve to forsake the Kingdom, and sometimes to with∣draw out of it for a time, he thought he could never find a more favourable occasion to open
himself to the King. And there∣fore he broke his mind to him, as he had been desirous to do; and reflecting on the zeal for the Prin∣cess, which that Prince endea∣voured to inspire in him, he told him, That as to that, he had more need of a curb than a spur, and that the sentiments of his heart were but too publickly known: That he saw on all hands but too many, who were envious of a blessing, which he owed only to his Approbation, and not to the goodness of her, who was re∣proached therewith. That after so much rumour, it was very fit to raise no more; That rather than his respects should cost the greatest Princess of the world so dear, he would renounce the ho∣nour of her Presence; and that seeing he was unable to do her any service, he ought at least to be careful of her Glory. And that to succeed in that design,
there was no other expedient but flight; That though he made no difference betwixt dying, and leaving of London, yet he was fully resolved to do it, if his Ma∣jesty would give him leave. That in begging it of him, he could assure his Majesty, that he had never flattered himself with any foolish hope in reference to the Princess; That what goodness soe∣ver she might have for him, yet he never framed any disadvanta∣geous notions of her; and that if he durst ever make a wish when he saw her, it was only that he might be able to serve her so long as he lived. But that he was so far from that, that it behoved him for the future to renounce the honour of seeing her; and that the innocence of his intentions sufficed not to preserve him in the enjoyment of so precious a blessing. That to conclude, he beg'd his pardon for the disorders which he
might have occasioned in his Court; that he acknowledged himself al∣together unworthy of the favours that he had conferred upon him: but that nevertheless, he did not think he deserved the character of ungrateful; and that if he found him in the least guilty of that, he prayed him to take from him that odious name, by taking away his life. This was the substance of what the passionate Brandon expressed in no less passionate terms; and the King the more touched with his virtue, that he was sensible enough that he had not used him kindly since the death of Cecile, had no way to defend himself. His heart was wholly again inflamed for a man of so sublime a soul, and in a nice emulation, which Kings seldom condescend to with their subjects, he answered Brandon, that he perceived he was well inform∣ed
of what he had written to his Sister, and that he made great matters of it, though it deserved no such construction; for the truth was, that he being willing to try the effects of love in a case of adversity, had made use of the first word that appeared proper for his design. That there was no more in that note; and that, in fine, as to himself, it was but a trifle as well as the rest: but not so on his part, seeing his memory was so good, and he so touchy, that he could not pardon some small in∣equalities, which appeared in his humour since the death of Cecile. That he had had some doubts that Woolsey might give him some Um∣brage, but that he never thought the impression could have been so deep; and that the same appear∣ances that had deceived him be∣fore, deceived him still. That notwithstanding he could not but excuse two errors, into which he
let himself only be led by an ex∣cess of affection. That to unde∣ceive him, he would endeavour to proceed to an equal excess; and that there was nothing in his Kingdom so great, to which his heart and eyes might not aspire. And that therefore he would not have him be troubled at the fop∣peries and idle talk of people; That he should suffer his jealous Rivals to speak what their own jealousie would sufficiently hinder from be∣ing believed; That it ought to suf∣fice him, that he knew the virtue of his Sister; That he was willing he should love her, and that he pretended that whatsoever was done with his approbation, was above obloquy and censure. In a word, dear Brandon, said he, I will not that your virtue be the reason why you leave me. My honour is concerned that I retain you; and after all this, what would be said of the King of England,
if it were known that a wise and discreet man could not live with him? I shall not then comply with your desire, your virtue has revenged you on my imprudence, and my favours shall revenge me on your diffidence: and though now you see some in my Court that create you trouble, it is pos∣sible that shortly seeing none a∣bove you but my self, you shall see nothing there but what may give you content. At these words Brandon casting himself at his feet, would have answered, that he could never deserve the favours which he mentioned: but the King embracing him, no more of this, said he, we shall never make an end. Delay your thanks for what I say, until you have seen what I can do; return to me with as sin∣cere an heart, as I desire you to do it, and let nothing take up the cares of us both, but my Sisters health: I wish the time were come
that I might give you her. In this manner the illustrious Brandon escaped the shipwrack, wherein most people thought him over-whelmed. He grew greater after his disgrace, than he had been before; and the King to keep his word to him, having repealed all the proceedings of the Mayor of London against him, and given Woolsey a severe check for the vio∣lence he had used in that Ran∣counter, condemned the Earl of Kildare in the charge of maintain∣ing two Fregats in the Irish-Seas. Of all the Rivals of Brandon, there was none but the officious Gray exempted. The generosity that he had shewed for an unfor∣tunate enemy, was of no small use to settle the good opinion, which in the sequel he was held in. But Bourchier, Sommerset, young Buck∣ingham, and the rest, met with sharp Reprimands from the King; and his Majesty having exprest him∣self
with discontent against the scoffers and libellers, which spared not so much as his own Palace, men became more reserved, and spake no more of the affairs of others. In the mean while, the Princess having been in great danger of her life, gave shortly assured signs of a speedy cure. Be∣sides, her young age and good con∣stitution, that which contributed much to it, was the relation that Brandon gave her of the long dis∣course which he had had with the King, the day that he was released. Though he persisted in the design that the King had endeavoured to divert him from; yet at that time he gave no signs of it. On the contrary in the necessity of plea∣sing her, he himself was willing to seem flattered with the things that he thought no more on, but with grief; and that complaisance working its effect, the tranquillity of her mind recalled so effectually
her bodily health, that she reco∣vered from her sickness more beau∣tiful than before. But as the King had only delayed his expedition to the War of France for her sake; so he hastened his departure, so soon as he knew her to be out of danger, and used the more precipi∣tancy, because knowing better than any other the trouble that she and Brandon would have to bid adieu, he would not have them have time to prepare for it, nor to revive their passions. Few arms have marched out with a more victorious air, than that of England. The King, the Com∣manders, Soldiers, and every thing else seemed to go in triumph; and there was no appearance, as the affairs of Lowis the twelfth stood, that he could be able to withstand them. The League formed against him by the intrigues of Pope Juli∣us the Second, who had resolved
at what rate soever to be revenged of him, because that by his Am∣bassadours he had maintained the Council of Pisa, where his life had been so severely examined, raised him as many enemies as he had neighbours. His allies had already felt the cruel effects of his misfortune. And amongst others, poor John. D'albert lost the year before his Kingdom of Navar; for Ferdinand of Arragon, who desi∣red nothing more than to joyn it to Spain, failed not to lay hold on the specious pretext offered him by the Interdict of Rome: and though that Pope, a man of a fro∣ward and turbulent spirit, upon his recovery from a great fit of sickness, seemed to repent his bad designs; yet he had engaged so many other potentates, that he was now no more the Master of Peace. All Italy was in arms. The most part of the small Princes hoping to raise themselves to great∣ness
in the disorder, and running to the noise that had awakened them, joyned themselves to the party of the League, though they knew not why; so that, what secret attempts so ever Julius the Second made at that time to make an end of the War, yet the loss of the Battel of Navar (which drew after it all the Milanese) that the French then sustained, was nevertheless a chick of his hatching. The sad news of this came to Paris at the same time, that the English embarked for their passage; and many cross accidents together befel the King of France, during the joys that his Court could not refuse to the marriage of the Count of Guise with Anthonet of Bour∣bon, Sister to the Count of Ven∣dosme. Not but, that in the ap∣prehension of the storm which he foresaw from England, having al∣ready
dealt with the King of Scot∣land to make a diversion; and Pregent his Vice-admiral in the Mediterranean, who had no more to do with the Genowese, being ready to pass over the Channel with Primanget, Commander of the British-Ships, to ravage the Coasts of Ireland; he had a great many good Troops on foot, and Officers of extraordinary merit. Lowis de Halewin, Marquess of Pienne, a man of consummated Valour, who was their General, had Rendezvouzed them at Hedin. The Marquess de Potelin of a boyl∣ing hot Courage, commanded the Cavalry; and after him in several charges were, the Count de la Plaisse, a warlike man, the Cheva∣lier Bayard, characterised without fear, and without reproach. The brave Aimard de prie, Imbercourt, Clairmont, D'anjou, Bussy, D'amboise, Bonnivet, Bonne-val, Fonterailles, and a great many more all capable
to command Armies, not to reckon those who in respect of Birth were above them, as the Counts of Guise and Vendosme, and the Duke of Alencon, whom the affairs of State obliged to remain with his Person. But the loss of the Milanese put him in great Consternation; and the King of England being Landed at Calais, at the head of thirty thousand foot, and six thousand horse, with the greatest Artillery that had been seen for a hundred years, he promised himself no fa∣vourable success in his War-like preparations. The Emperour fol∣lowed by four thousand Peistres, and between five and six thousand Burgundian Faintassins, had already begun the Fight in Picardy, so that it was not difficult to the English to perfect it. Brandon and Tal∣bot, who led the Vanguard under the Conduct of Colonel Windham, whom the King had given them to moderate a little the heat of their
Courage, acted at first all that two young men, who sought nothing but honour, were capable to per∣form; and chiefly Brandon by his love animated to glory, and ren∣dering all things easiy to his guide, made the prudence of that ancient Warriour so yield to his good for∣tune, that having perswaded him to advance as far as the City of Therowenne, they invested it. Francis de Deligny, Seneschal of Rowergue, and Anthony de Crequy, Pontdormy, Commanded in that place with a Garrison of two thousand Lanskenets, and five hun∣dred Lancers; and being both vi∣gorous and stout Commanders, they made several salleys upon their enemies. It was only the wilfulness of Brandon that kept the Town blocked up, whither the King of England immediately hastening with long marches, and being as yet of no great experi∣ence,
ran great Riske in the plain of Tournehan, where he had with him but ten thousand foot. The Chevalier Bayard was already Ma∣ster of one of the twelve Culve∣rines which he carried with him, and the English were put into great terrour: but the too great pru∣dence of the Marquess de Pienne marred all the advantage which the French might have made of that occasion. Brandon, who march∣ed to meet the King his Master, had time to joyn his Army, and to change the face of affairs; and that Prince well instructed by the engagement, how useful that favo∣rite was to him, found hardly any other way to acknowledg his Va∣lour, but by praying him to husband it better. The esteem that he conceived of him, be∣came equal to his former affecti∣on; and during that War, where∣in all that belonged to him, be∣haved
themselves well, he was al∣most never heard to speak but of Brandon. It is no less true, that he daily deserved new praises; and that the siege of Therowenne being formed, there was no corner where he did not show himself a terrour to the enemies. It is not my design to give a particular account of all his acti∣ons, nor to relate the secret sen∣timents of his heart; no more than the Letters which he wrote to the English Princess, and those he received from her. Such par∣ticularities would lead me too far: besides, there is nothing more ea∣sie than to imagine, that being separated from one another, they failed not in the duties which a mutual tenderness prescribes to true lovers. In effect, absence serv∣ed only to make them know one another; they felt by experience the effects of all sorts of longings,
impatiences and fears: and as the Princess Mary heard not without trembling of the dangers to which she knew he exposed himself, on∣ly that he might merit her; in the same manner he never ran any risk, but that he had the Image of that beautiful Princess before his eyes. It was to no purpose for his friends, who saw him so resolute, to tell him, that he tempted his fortune too often, to have it always fa∣vourable. It was Brandon's de∣sign, either to prevent by a glo∣rious death all the evils that he thought himself threatned by; or to raise himself to so great a repu∣tation amongst men, that he might have no more cause of fear from them: and that thirst after glory, which Henry the Eighth under∣stood very well to be the effect of his love, was oftener than once the subject of their entertainments. But what moderation soever the King advised him to use that way;
though he told him every day, that he did precipitate himself without any reason into dangers, for a blessing which was already wholly his own, yet he remitted nothing of that Warlike heat; but endeavoured (if it may be so said) to make his King, and the King∣dom of England obliged to him for every thing. And in that he succeeded so well, that having gained as many Victories as he fought Battels, there was not so much as one, even to his most jea∣lous Rivals, who acknowledged not, that as they could not any more contend with him in any thing; so nothing likewise ought to be denied him: but the bravest of all his actions, and which in the decision of that War cost him so dear in the sequel, was the tak∣ing of the Marquess of Rotelin, who began then to be called Duke of Longueville.
The design of the French was to re-victual Therowenne; and though the Emperour and King of England streightly pressed the place, yet Teligny and Crequy, pro∣mised themselves in time to make them consume their Forces before it; provided they could have Am∣munition and Victuals, whereof they began to be in want, put in∣to the place. The King of France upon the word of these two Vali∣ant men, Commanded the Mar∣quess de Pienne to omit nothing that could be done for that end; and he wrote to him daily from A∣miens, where he lay a-bed of the Gout to that purpose. In so much, that what difficulty soever there might be in the enterprise, Pienne resolved to undertake it. The Orders were given to bold Fon∣terailles, Captain of the Albanians, who being loaded with Powder and Provisions, slipt quietly by as far as the Town-ditch. But as till
then the design had been very well carried on, so the imprudence of the Volunteers, who would not joyn with the Troops which La Palisse commanded to make good Fonterailles's retreat, was the cause that it took no effect. Most part of them entered the Town to visit their friends. Others scorched with heat, alighted from their great horses, and to refresh them∣selves, mounted their ambling Nags; and almost all of them having drunk and made merry, came in disorder, some in a huddle toge∣ther, and the rest in file one after another, to view the English Camp. Brandon being informed how mat∣ters went, and withal vexed at the victualling of the Town, which the King his Master thinking the occasion might prove too hot for him, would not suffer him to op∣pose, came to ask leave to charge those at least who had done it in their retreat. He moved the King
a little at first, by representing to him how easie a matter it was to cut them all to pieces; or at least to take them Prisoners, by the foolish confidence they were in; and speaking to that, not only as an able Captain for Conduct, but likewise as a resolute Soldier for execution, there being no time to be lost, the King at last consented to it. So that, whilst there were some detachments making against the parties of Fonterailles, and la Palisse, to beat back the one, and break the other; Brandon, with Colonel Davers marching at the head of four thousand horse, eight hundred foot, and six pieces of Cannon, passes the River Lis, near to Derlet, and lyes in wait for the Enemies at the passage of Hutin. They retreated with great assu∣rance, marching in confusion, as he had foreseen, for being pursu∣ed by none after the false allarm, which was purposely given them
was over, and missing none of their number, but the young Count D'anton, Son to the Seignior of Bouchage, and some others that could not get out of Therowenne, they dreamt not of any greater mischief: when Brandon appear∣ing of a sudden, so sharply charged them, that having no leisure to mount their great Horses again, nor to put on their head-pieces, they began to be in disorder. The brave la Palisse, notwithstanding of the stout resistance he made, was already taken; and the un∣daunted Chevalier Bayard, having almost singlely defended the bridg of Hutin, became companion in the bad fortune of Clairmont, D'anjow, and of Bussy D'amboise, to whose assistance he came. There remained none but the Duke of Longueville to head the subdued, who being mounted on a stout charging-horse, compleatly armed, it seemed no easie matter for one
man hand to hand to get the better of him: and besides a considerable body of the French Army advance∣ing in order of Battel, those that had been put to flight, began to rally. So that Brandon perceiving that the total rout of the Enemies depended on the overthrow of this Warriour, and by the riches of his arms, taking him for a French Prince, he left la Palisse in the hands of some Gentlemen, who kept him not long; and with sword in hand set upon him, whose resistance hindered his Victory. The Duke of Longueville recei∣ved him valiantly: but at length, after the interchanging of many blows, Brandon with the danger of a wound which he received in the thigh, dismounted the Duke, who disjoynted his shoulder by the fall. The French upon this turn∣ed back upon those that were com∣ing to their aid, and put their own
men in as great disorder, as the Enemy would have done; and see∣ing in this Battel their horses heels had done them better service than the points of their swords, it was called the Battel of Spurs. But it had been far better for Brandon, that the Duke of Longueville had escaped with the rest; for the in∣jury that he did him afterward was so great, that all the Glory he obtained in overcoming him, and all the praise that he gained thereby, was not enough to make amends for it. Time sensibly dis∣covering to him, that fortune by great evils can be repayed of her greatest favours. After this, there happened no more considerable action on either side. Brandon's wound kept him a fortnight a-bed; and the King of France, though he had lost but very few men, being unwilling to expose his Kingdom to the danger
of a Battel, thought it best to give Therowenne to the fortune of his Enemies. Teligny after two months siege, rendered it on composition, Victuals and Ammunition failing him before his Courage; and the King of England, and the Empe∣rour not agreeing betwixt them∣selves about the propriety of the place; the one claiming it by right of Inheritance, and the other by Conquest, it was presently demo∣lished. In the mean time Lowis the Twelfth, that he might put a stop to his bad success, by em∣ploying a General, in whose safety all his Subjects might be concerned, caused the young Duke of Valois to advance to Blangy. But neither the merit of that Prince, nor the great Forces that daily joyned him, hindered the progress of the King of England; for whilst the Duke Longueville, and the other Priso∣ners were on their way to London, he lay down before the City of
Tournay, which having no hope of relief, as lying in the midst of the Low-Countreys, made no long resistance. And having now reduced that place under his O∣bedience, and beginning to have some jarring with the Emperour, who in many things was charge∣able to him, and in others un∣faithful, he returned back into England. Never was Prince better satis∣fied; for besides his own Con∣quests of Therowenne and Tournay, the Victory which the Earl of Surrey's Lieutenant had just then obtained over the Scots, raised him to the highest pitch of for∣tune, that he could almost pre∣tend to; and though his Fleet had received some ruffle in the Bay of Brest, yet the death of the King of Scotland killed in the Battel of Floudon, which he fought only for the interest of France, though he
was his Brother-in-law, revenged him fully of that, and of the da∣mage which Pregent and Priman∣guet had done him on his Wastes: Insomuch, that he entred London in triumph; where, to reward those who had fought so valiant∣ly for his Glory, he made Bran∣don Duke of Suffolk, gave the Title of Duke of Norfolk to the Earl of Surrey, and to his Son the Admiral, that of Surrey: and Tal∣bot, Gray and Sommerset, who had behaved themselves stoutly on all occasions, were created, the one Earl of Shrewsbury in the place of his Father who desired it; the o∣ther Marquess of Dorset, his Fa∣ther being lately dead, and the last Earl of Worcester. But these are matters wide of my Subject, and I should not remark them by the by, but for avoiding confusion, in the names of those who may have some share in the sequel of this History. My business should
be to relate the joy that the English Princess conceived upon the re∣turn of Brandon, to which the title of Duke of Suffolk, (as from henceforth he must be named) added but little; for a real vir∣tue once known, needs no other Ornaments. And the affectionate rebukes she gave him for having so often exposed himself to dan∣gers, would without doubt require a more exact description than I make, were it not that the tender∣ness of these Lovers is sufficiently known; and that their pains, ra∣ther than pleasures, are to be re∣lated: since that amidst trouble and difficulties, the greatness and power of Love appears more con∣spicuous. After so fair beginnings, they wanted not crosses; and all that had befallen them before the War, from the competition of Gray, Bourchier, and Sommerset, from the Kings indifferency after the death of Cecile Blunt, or from
the aggression of the Earl of Kil∣dare, followed by an Imprisonment, which the secret Quality of a Prince of York rendered the more dangerous: All this, I say, bears no proportion with what they en∣dured afterward. Upon the return from the War of France, all people imagining that Brandon, who had acquired so much Glory there, should espouse the Princess Mary, when they saw him only made Duke of Suffolk, and nothing else talked of, they believed that his fortune was at a stand; and that in that respect there had been more policy than friendship in the Conduct of the King. There is but little cer∣tainty in the opinions of men, all is but whimsey. There was no more discourse therefore of his Intelligence with Mary of England, nor of the services he rendered her. On the contrary they began
both to be pitied, as two perfect Lovers, cruelly and unjustly dealt with. But whilst people thus fa∣voured them with their good o∣pinions, a tranquil serenity gave jealousie time to rise to a head a∣gainst them. This new Quality of Duke of Suffolk, which ren∣dered him a suitable match to the chiefest Ladies at Court, made in effect, many of them cast their thoughts that way, because it was believed that he had attained to the greatest height that he could expect. So that the lovely Lucre∣tia Tilney being of a Quality and Fortune answerable to his merit, the Princess had no sooner taken notice of the civilities which Suf∣folk rendered her to please the King only, who designed her for his Mistris, but that she immedi∣ately imagined they were the ef∣fects of Love. So that she became jealous to that extremity, into which true Lovers commonly fall
of a sudden. She spake not a word of this to her faithful Ju∣dith Kiffen, from whom she had never concealed any thing but the secret of Brandon's Birth; who not knowing what to think of the alteration that he perceived in her, essayed for some days to discover that in her eyes, which was quite contrary to what was in her heart. That extreme re∣spect might have provoked any other besides Mary of England; and there are but few Lovers, who in the fury of jealousie, would not have taken it for indifferency. But as she only loved, because she was beloved, so she made the best use of the various Sentiments that attend love. She always devised arguments to excuse the incon∣stancy that she complained of; and by strongest reason drawn from the stock of most tender affection, she sometimes perswaded her self, that the effects which she had
caused in the heart of Brandon, whilst he was but nothing, were not to be expected from the Duke of Suffolk. He loved me, said she, as the Daughter and Sister of his King. He hath used me as a pleasant appa∣ration to entertain his idle thoughts, whilst he had none that were se∣rious; and now that he is what he deserves to be, he applies him∣self to that which he may obtain. If thou wert not of the blood of Lancaster, continued she, and could he promise himself of thee, what he thinks he may expect of ano∣ther, he would love thee still, as he hath loved thee, and over-love thee. And thereupon giving way to the mild Sentiments, by which the pretended infidelity of Suffolk might be justified; Let us pardon then, said she, let us pardon him, for an injury which respect and fear only makes him commit a∣gainst our love. Let us do justice to that tender affection, whereof
we have received so great Testi∣monies; this is probably the per∣fectest instance that he could ren∣der us, and it costs him doubtless too dear, to be undervalued by unjust suspitions. But jealousie usurping again the dominion over her heart, such lofty reasonings did not at all satisfie her. She had much a-do to conceive how a Lover could renounce the thing he loves; and then concluding, that love which always slights and gets above reason and decorum, is not so tame, she found her self much disposed to judg no more in favour of Suffolk. Besides, his true extraction more and more fortifi∣ed her jealousie; and thinking that the reasons which she allowed to Brandon, or Duke of Suffolk, did not so well suit with a Prince of York: what appeared to her to be an excess of love or discretion in the one, had not the same cha∣racter in the other. And the ve∣ry
Glory which he had acquired in France, made his present Con∣duct a little suspicious to her. She saw him so well supported by his own worth, that she could not but sometimes think that he in∣tended to build his Fortune there∣on: and as the King appeared so much the less favourable to their Union, that he had seemed much inclined to it before, and that he reflected on it very seriously; so the services that the Duke of Suf∣folk rendered to the lovely Tilney, which jealousie made appear far more assiduous than they were, though all was but an effect of complaisance, made her often en∣raged against her self, and condemn all her own goodness. At length after a long conflict within her self, so great as to make her com∣pare her own marvelous and rare perfections, with the ordinary and indifferent Qualities of her pre∣tended Rival: as she loved to the
utmost extent of love, and that her jealousie was altogether gentle and sublime, and had nothing ragged nor low, she found her self re∣duced to a necessity of speaking. But she did it with so expressive and sensible an air, that she had hardly opened her mouth, when Suffolk by her first word discover∣ing the cause of that discontent which he could not guess at, need∣ed no more but a single sigh to al∣lay her trouble. Their Sentiments as well as looks were soon agreed, and they expressed themselves so intelligibly in that manner, and un∣derstood one another so well, that being both fully satisfied, and fix∣ing their eyes on one another for some time, they needed no other language to speak their thoughts. Suffolk being ravished to see him∣self so dear to the Princess, as to inspire into her jealousie, seemed by silence and other signs of sub∣mission, to thank her for such a
new favour, which he never be∣lieved himself able to deserve. But at length he broke that so eloquent silence, to complain of her too much reservedness; and the Prin∣cess perceiving that his complaint was just, and she in kindness ob∣liged to suffer it; made appear by a most engaging blush, that she desired he should not persist there∣in. So that love which lays hold on all occasions, to make Lovers speak, raising an officious contest betwixt them on that subject, was the cause that the Princess Mary came insensibly to discover all that she had concealed in her thoughts. At this time it was, that the Duke of Suffolk found himself raised to the top of felicity. He confessed himself very far short of the dis∣cretion she allowed him, and by transports of gratitude, which could never with good grace be employed but on that occasion, considering the state of his fortune,
showing himself as ambitious as she desired he should be, he obliged her twice to tell him, that if he were not, it behoved him to become so. The good thoughts of the King her Brother, whereof he had given her an account in her sickness, and the reflexions that since that time she had made thereon, which very seasonably she called to mind, were of great advantage to her modesty in an entertainment of that nature. She easily thought, that having the approbation of her Brother and King, on whom she solely depend∣ed, she had no distances to stand on. She intreated him to make his advantage of that, and Brandon made no difficulty to obey her. But fortune allowed them only this calm of hope and joy, that she might more cruelly expose them to the fury of the storm she prepared for them. The End of the first Part.
THE English Princess, OR THE Dutchess QUEEN. The Second PART. THE DUKE of Longueville, with some o∣ther French, be∣ing at Lon∣don, Prisoner at large, under no other Confinement but his word, lived at Court in Princely
Magnificence; and having occasion daily to see the beautiful Princess Mary, though his arm which he carried in a scarf since his hurt, still pained him, had nevertheless but too many easie minutes to con∣sider all the charms of her Beauty. For nine or ten Months time he had endeavoured by all probable arguments to resist the vanity of such thoughts: the Quality of Daughter and Sister to a King, promised already in marriage to the heir of the Crown of Spain, and the open War betwixt France and England, allowed him no great hopes. But he became at length passionately in love, by frequent representing to himself the reasons that should have hindered it. He thought it no error to take plea∣sure in beholding the fairest Prin∣cess in the world. He looked up∣on the frequent occasions that he sought of entertaining her, to be but the amusement of a Prisoner;
and thinking to secure his heart from love by the many impossibi∣lities of enjoyment, he fancied there was no great danger in de∣siring to please her. In the mean time it befel him, as he would have foretold to any other in the like disposition. He came even to forget that he was a Prisoner; and as love delights in mystery and intrigues, entering into confidence with Mary of England, he gave her a full discovery of the secret of his King and Masters Court. The aversion that the late Queen of France had against the Duke of Valois, and the fear that she was in, lest the Dutchy of Bre∣tannie should be for ever united to the Crown of France, afforded him ample subjects of discourse. He told her all the attempts which that implacable Queen had made to hinder that Union from taking effect by the marriage of her eldest Daughter, to a Prince whom she
could not endure. She added, that though the matter was ac∣complished, yet the Duke of Valois seemed not much satisfied there∣with; and that having no Chil∣dren by Madam, and most people doubting whether ever he should have any, he was already, perhaps, projecting to do with her, as the King his Father-in-law had done with Jane of France; so that the Daughter was very like to under∣go the same fortune and usage which her Mothers beauty had occa∣sioned to the Sister of CHARLES the Eight; that the King was ve∣ry infirm, and gave no hopes of long life; and by the instance of the Princess her self, to whom he was speaking, who had been in∣effectually engaged to the heir of Spain, making no account of the Marriage of Claudia of France, with the presumptive heir of LOWIS the Twelfth, he easily concluded, that if she would accept of his
service in that negotiation, with∣out any long expectation, she might see it successfully brought to a period. And thereupon; giving way to his own thoughts; he cryed, That his greatest happi∣ness would be to see her Queen of France; and though to say the truth, his intentions were neither the most sincere nor discreet that might be imagined, yet it was not so easie for the young Princess to penetrate into the folly of them. What vivacity and briskness so e∣ver she had, mischief and disorder were far from her thoughts. Her tender and passionate air, was sometimes injurious to her virtue; and as she was every way obliging, so it was most commonly imagined by all that had the honour to see her, that the Conquest of her was not very difficult. In this then the Duke of Longueville, as well as many others, found himself de∣ceived; who in stead of a lawful
hope, feeding his love with the vain expectations, which his de∣sires and appearances shaped for him, by making Mary of England Queen of France; he entertained hardly any thought for her, which he expressed not under so fair a pretext. Though the Princess was not affected by his Discourses in the manner that he could have wished; she was nevertheless well-pleased to hear them. His truely French humour, and gallantry, had so great a resemblance to her own, that she still entertained the Duke of Suffolk with all that he said to her; and he who had received no disquiet from his former Rivals, was but at first slightly moved with this last. He imputed this new correspondence to the natu∣ral freedom of the Princess, and did not condemn her jollity. But jealousie that began to work in him, began likewise to shake his confidence, and the disquiet of
mind by little and little following the emotions of his heart, he took the allarm at last, and grew so jealous, that he became uneasie to himself. The care and means that the Princess essayed to reassure and compose him, wrought no great effects; and his grief en∣creased so much, that he having refused all the gentle remedies, which with greatest sincerity she offered to him, she resolved with∣out speaking a word, at length to employ the strongest. For that end she denied the Duke of Lon∣gueville any more access to her; and because he continued obsti∣nate to the contrary, she was a∣bout to have spoken to the King, that he might send him back in∣to France upon his word, or con∣fine him to some of his houses in the Countrey. The noise of that would have been great without doubt, and
the King who could not prevail on the mind of Suffolk by other means, would not have spared that way of curing him, had she but in the least proposed it. The repose of that favorite was now become as dear to the King as his own; and if the Princess had not been promised to the young Arch-Duke by a solemn treaty, the breach whereof had not as yet been approved by the two Houses of Parliament; it is certain that he would have bestowed her on him, upon his return from France, when he made him Duke of Suf∣folk. But he had measures to ob∣serve in that affair, by reason of the King of Spain, who would not have failed to have complain∣ed of such a marriage to the con∣tempt of his Grandson. He had the like to observe with his Queen, who was Aunt to that Prince; and being divided betwixt so im∣portant considerations, he found
it one of those thorny affairs, wherein Kings are in some manner afraid to make use of their abso∣lute power. And that was the reason that he spake no more of it: which at first troubled all the Court, and gave grounds of be∣lieving that he entertained other thoughts. But the removal of the Duke of Longueville would have cost him nothing; so that Suf∣folk no sooner understood that the Princess intended to propose it, but he prevented her, and re∣solving to over-come himself, or to dye, rather than to admit of such a remedy, the interest of the person whom he loved wrought on his heart, what he was unable to perform for his own repose. Matters then reassumed almost their former face; and the Duke of Longueville, who knew nothing of the disorder which he caused, nor of the evil wherewith he had been threatned, continued his
Gallantries, but with this differ∣ence, that the Princess concerned at the troubles of Suffolk, seemed not to him to have the same free∣dom of humour as formerly. He judged of that sometimes in her favour, and sometimes to her pre∣judice: according to the freakish∣ness of Lovers, who for one and the same thing are many times both glad and sorrowful; and as he had a good conceit of himself, so he enclined rather to the one side than the other. But hardly was that disorder appeased, when it broke out again more cruelly than before; for some Letters by a strange fatality, being come to London, which gave advice that the King of France designed a new marriage with an Italian Princess; that bad rumour, which seemed not in the least to have any re∣lation to the fortune of Suffolk, was the utter overthrow of all his hopes.
The Duke of Longueville, who found no fairer pretext to Colour his Love for the English Princess, but that of seeing her Queen of France, and considering that all that he had said in respect of the Duke of Valois heir of the Crown, was but a dull notion, wherewith he was not himself much flattered; seeing that he knew several things of the marriage of that Prince, with the Princess Claudia, that were far different from what the pleasure of discourse and his pas∣sion had made him say on that subject; so soon as he was inform∣ed of the news from Paris, with∣out examining whether it was false or true, he conceived a more sen∣sible and specious notion; and the interest of the Kingdom joyn∣ed to that pretended desire of a new marriage, which was pub∣lished of his King, perfected in his mind that Image. The age of LOWIS the Twelfth afforded
him new delights, whensoever he reflected thereon; and if it be free once to declare what he had always in his thoughts, he imagi∣ned that the lovely Princess in the embraces of an old Husband, op∣pressed with the Gout, and many other infirmities, might be very well allowed some liberty. This idle fancy then made his flame sparkle; so that having rendered her a visit upon occasion of the report that went of the King of France, with eyes glanceing with the joy that he desired to raise in her, having premised such circumstances as he judged proper for his design, he expressed himself with so pre∣possessed and contented an air, that he left her hardly the liberty to say any thing against his overture. The Princess only seemed not at all surprised, and as if she had thought on nothing less, giving him a cold answer, that he design∣ed her for every body, she allowed
him no opportunity of insisting in his discourse. The jealousie of Suffolk created her too much trou∣ble, to entertain him on such a subject; and she was so far from giving the least check to the hopes which she desired him to continue in, by so vain a consideration, that for all the Crowns of the World, she would not have di∣sturbed the quiet of his heart. So that the Duke of Longueville, finding her not so easie to be per∣swaded in respect of LOWIS the Twelfth, as he believed she might have been in favour of the Duke of Valois; and imagining that the old age of the former, caused in her that aversion, and as he was not much concerned, whether she was satisfied, or not to be Queen of France, provided she were so; he thought it best in that conjuncture, to make a matter of state of it. But the King with whom he was to nego∣tiate,
being prepossessed to the contrary, as well as the Princess, gave him no more satisfaction than she had done; and when he was pressed to speak his mind, he an∣swered him, That a proposition wherein all Europe was concerned, sounded not well from the mouth of a Prisoner. Yet for all this the Duke was not discouraged. He wrote to the King his Master, and with his Letter sent the Picture of Mary of England; and being a more successful negotiator at di∣stance, than in presence; the af∣fairs of Italy being now somewhat composed by the death of Pope Julius, to whom LEO the Tenth succeeded, and the Ministers of France finding their advantages in an alliance with England, he re∣ceived an answer according to his desire. Then it was that poor Suffolk perceived his ruin manifest. The
Duke of Longueville was the first that drew his blood at the Battel of Spurs: he was the first that in∣fected his mind with the sullen poyson of jealousie, which trou∣bled all his delights at London; and as a fatal enemy was now to disquiet the rest of his days. And indeed, he strove no more to re∣sist the matter; nor did he so much as seek ease by complaining, lest that by flattering so his grief, it might break out against his will; and that his virtue whereof he then stood so much in need, should be weakened thereby. It was to no purpose for the Prin∣cess to discourse him about that subject. It was to no purpose for her to employ all her Charms with him; and to upbraid him with the sharpest cuts of Love, that she found he loved her no more, since that he yielded her to another; for he had not only the power to be silent before her, but he main∣tained
to the last, that rigorous conflict wherein nothing but the love o her made him resist; and the King his Master, with all his dexterity and goodness, produced but still less effects on him. Ne∣ver was there so much constancy in so tender and afflicted a soul. He entertained the Princess Mary no more, but with the Grandure and Beauties of France. He urged to her by solid reasons, that the most glorious passion was, the de∣sire to reign over the most illustri∣ous people of the Universe. He went farther to encourage her, by pretending that his own interest was therein concerned; and as if he had been the most covetous of all men, who was indeed the most liberal, he seemed only then pos∣sessed with the hopes of the great riches that he expected from her Crown. The soul must without doubt be great, which can love in that strain; and ordinary passions are
unable to renounce themselves in that manner. But the fair Prin∣cess, to whom he rendered so rare an instance of a perfect love, repay∣ed it by another no less wonder∣ful on her part. The Crown of France seemed nothing to her in respect of Suffolks heart, and be∣ing sensible to the utmost of the unspeakable pleasure that is found in being loved as one loves, that was to her so Soveraign a blessing, that no other earthly advantage could equal it. She disputed there∣fore with him the possession of his heart, which she desired still to enjoy, as he contended for the loss of hers, which he was willing she should deprive him of; and her lovely eyes bore already the marks of the wrong which the tears she shed, did them. The King, be∣tween whose arms she had cast her self to bewail, and to over∣come the virtue of Suffolk, knew no more how to govern sometime
the one, sometime the other. As she had been accustomed to con∣ceal from him nothing of her pas∣sion, and as it may be said that he was the sole confident of her Love; so neither had he been want∣ing to her in any comfort or re∣medy. He made her the Mistris of her self; and being ready to re∣pass into France at the head of an Army, under divers pretexts to re∣new the War there, he desired no better than to trouble all Europe, that he might re-establish Tran∣quillity in her heart. But it was not enough for these great Reme∣dies to produce their effect, that they were prepared by the hand of the King, and accepted by the Princess; Suffolk must likewise ap∣prove and make use of them. If they were good for her, they seemed of no value to him. He condemned them already, and found fault with them every way. He designed to arm against them,
protesting at what rate soever to oppose them; and the Amorous Princess had to do with a Lover that desired nothing more, than to triumph over himself, that he might Crown her. This violent state of affairs lasted two full Months, and no body un∣derstood the secret. The melan∣choly of the Princess was imputed to a dispute that she had had with the Queen concerning the Dutchess of Salisbury. The Court was di∣vided betwixt them upon that ac∣count; and the King fomented their division, that he might the better conceal the Amorous my∣stery whereof he was the Guar∣dian: when that the proposals of the Duke of Longueville were a∣gain renewed with such formali∣ties, as suffered them not to be rejected. The Pope wrote to that purpose. The Venetians concern∣ed themselves therein▪ John Duke
of Albany, Regent of Scotland, during the Minority of the King his Nephew, interested himself in the affair with all the earnestness that the concerns of his Pupil re∣quired; and these so distant Po∣tentates in this manner formed an Union in opinions, to make a most cruel War against the Resolutions of the Princess Mary; but what deference soever the King of En∣gland was obliged to have for so considerable solicitations; though besides that, the alliance of LOWIS the Twelfth was of such moment, that it could not be rejected by a sober Prince: nevertheless, the compassion that he had for his Sister, the high esteem that he made of Suffolk; and his natural pro∣pensity to all intrigues of Love, would have made him find out ways enough to elude the suit of the one, and the importunities of the rest; if the continual perfidies of the King of Spain his Father-in-law,
had not in a manner forced him to comply. That cunning Prince, having drawn the late Pope Julius into the League, whereof the English were at all the charge, and the Spaniards reaped all the profit, began to de∣ceive him in the first Pyrenean War. He seized on the Kingdom of Navar, not minding the English Forces, which he had perswaded to Land at Bayonne; and who finding themselves disappointed of their hopes of being able to gain the places which he promised them in Guyenne, were constrained to return. Since that, he had broken his word to him at the Sieges of Therowenne and Tournay, where he neither assisted him with men nor money; and had of late a∣gain made a truce with LOWIS the Twelfth, without his advice. So that, to all these injuries joyning the aversion that he had
to Queen Catherine, the daughter of that crafty Prince; and pro∣jecting already the divorce which he made from her since, he found that occasion so favourable, that his proper interest prevailed with him more than the consideration of his Sister. Some have said, that it was only an effect of his incon∣stancy; and it is certain, that he was none of the firmest in his re∣solutions. But it is no less true, that the displeasure which he con∣ceived against his Father-in-law, and against his Queen, had no small share in that change, that broke the Ice at first; and the alli∣ance of France made his satisfa∣ction appear afterwards more speedy and easie: had it not been for these considerations, he might have possibly persisted in his for∣mer design; and a more steady mind than his, by so many rea∣sons could not but have too many temptations to change.
The proposals therefore of the King of France were accepted. Suffolk was one of the first that assented to them; and as at that time the Princess Mary abandoned her self wholly to grief, so that generous Lover, upon the refusal of the King, who could not any longer comfort her but by false hopes, undertook to do it. That charge was, without doubt, the sum of his afflictions. There is no violence like to that, when a man inflamed with Love, forces himself by an excess of affection, to perswade the person whom he loves, that she ought no more to love him. But that same love which he strove to hide, being the principle that set all the move∣ments of his heart to work, did hourly betray his design. What garb soever he put on, what shape soever he borrowed, all was still love, it would not be disguised; and where it was most under con∣straint,
there it broke forth with greatest lustre. So that, the Prin∣cess who felt her self touched, even with the hardest things that Suf∣folk durst tell her, melting with compassion for the cruel tryals that he put himself to for her sake, observed no measures on her part, to make him lay aside that forced Mask. But he having one day, when they were by themselves, urged her so far, that she was at length pierced with that greatness of Soul, that could not be made to stoop by the tenderness of hers; and finding nothing to upbraid her inexorable Lover with, but his secret Quality of Prince of York; she told him, that since he had been informed of that, he entertained not the same senti∣ments for her as before. And grief afterward transporting her with a vehemency beyond her nature, she fell to exaggerate the hereditary hatred that the House
of York bore against that of Lan∣caster: Adding, that she knew better what he was by his rigour, than by the prophesie of Merlin; and in fine, terming the reasons which he had heretofore alledged for his withdrawing from London, so soon as he had discovered his Birth, but artifices. She told him at length, that it was not she alone that was become odious to him, and that at that time he only desi∣red a specious pretext to leave her, that he might go seek in France an occasion to head a Party against the King her Brother. This terrrible discourse was even some∣what longer than impetuous dis∣courses use to be; and the Duke of Suffolk, who knew very well that love in anger has sudden e∣ruptions, to which nothing must be exposed, did not so much as by the least gesture or look, dream of interrupting her. He suffered her therefore to speak as long as
she pleased; and even affected to put her in some kind of impatience for an answer: and when he thought that she had expected it long enough, he gently replyed; That not having foreseen the re∣proach she made to him, it was not in his power to justifie him∣self on the sudden; and that see∣ing his Crime was discovered, she had no more to do, but to punish him. And then beholding her with so much the more calmness, that she had spoken in passion: but, Madam, continued he, let mo be delivered into the hands of the executioner, and let me dye, you shall be Queen of France, and it shall be to me a delightful comfort, when I mount the scaffold, to know that I am no more an hinderance to you to mount the Throne. About a year ago you knew not what reason might make you be∣come mine enemy; now you have found it out: I am desirous
you should be a Queen. Ah! Madam, cryed he, I cannot be guilty of a lovelier Crime! With these words he would have de∣parted, but the Princess stopped him; and being more out of coun∣tenance, and more afflicted for the unjust reproach that she had cast upon him, than for that she had drawn from him, bursting forth in Tears at the door of the Clo∣set, she gave but too evident signs of her trouble and repentance. Suffolk on the other hand being deeply smitten with that new ex∣pression of grief, which com∣pleated his own, had no thoughts of insulting over it. He stood with his eyes fixed on the floor, directing thither his sighs, as well as looks; and very far from tell∣ing her, that she should let him go to the death to which she had con∣demned him, which another, per∣haps, might have done, in a pro∣found
silence he considered how he might mollifie the deplorable condition which he saw her in, though he did not endeavour it for fear of reducing her to ano∣ther as bad. He well perceived that his love disguised it self under all kinds of shapes; and that when it should glance forth under the colour of respect and pity, that would but revive in her the flames which he desired to smother, by making it appear. But as he clear∣ly saw into the heart of the Prin∣cess, so she likewise penetrated in∣to his. So that retracting of a sudden the unjust reproach which vexation had made her charge him with: Why do ye force me, said she, to speak what I do not think? And why must I be constrained, seeing I cannot bend you by a real tenderness, which you know so well to be rooted in my heart, to attempt to terrifie you by an ima∣ginary hatred which I affect as well
as I can? What is become of us, Suffolk, continued she, that your virtue makes me despair, and my affection oppresses you? At these words animated by throbs, sighs, and tears, which love being re∣duced to the utmost extremity, forced from the loveliest mouth, and fairest eyes in the world, it was not in the power of poor Suffolk any longer to resist: his strength failed him, and he fell down upon a Couch. The Princess affrighted to see him look pale and faint, began to be in the same fears for him, that he was daily in for her. And as he had omitted nothing that might perswade and over∣come her, so then it fell to her turn to spare no means that could satisfie and bring him again to himself. She told him that she yielded, promised to do whatso∣ever he would have her; and what could she indeed deny him in that sad condition? And what was she
not obliged to do to relieve him? However, their conversation could last no longer: the Duke of Suf∣folk must withdraw; and having with much ado crawled out of the apartment of the Princess, the Marquess of Dorset who met him, was obliged to Conduct him home. The disorder nevertheless that appeared in his countenance, was neither so considerable nor dange∣rous, as that which no body saw. But the one suspended the other. The oppression of the mind, hin∣dered the distemper of body; and though he had had a Fever all night long, yet the Earl of Shrews∣bury, who went next morning in the Kings name to visit him, found him up. He went himself likewise to Court, the better to cloak all appearances; and having dis∣coursed on several things with the King, Suffolk finding his virtue supported by secret advantages,
which his master promised himself from the marriage of his Sister with the King of France, they a∣greed between themselves on the means to bring her to comply. But it was now no more necessary to come to extremities. She be∣gan of her self to resolve on it; and the death, or flight of the Duke of Suffolk, which she found to be otherways unavoidable, won by little and little from her fears a condescension to the negotiation of the Duke of Longueville, to which her Love could never have consented. So that, that worthy Lover, but the most unfortunate of all Lovers, seeing he was too well beloved, being come to her apartment, after that the King and he had agreed what could not be in any other way concluded, found her still in the same disquiet for his health, that he had left her in the day before. But she spake no more to him of any thing which
she knew might put him in trou∣ble. She fell rather into a kind of Lethargy; and whilst she used violence with her self to conceal it, for fear of stirring up his com∣passion, he fell softly to entertain her with those wild and chimeri∣cal hopes, which the worst of fortunes cannot take from the un∣fortunate, when they have a mind to imagine them. She made a shew of being flattered therewith, as well as he. She began to spare him, as he spared her; and whilst with a hard curb she checked her more tender passions, giving the reins to the most violent that she was capable of, the Duke of Lon∣gueville became the object of them. She did nothing but detest the day of his Captivity, and with so much the more violence that he revenged himself so cruelly on him, that had taken him. In a word, she could not look on him, but as a mortal enemy, whose sight she protested
she could never endure; and it may be said of that French Prince, that desiring by indirect ways to gain all, he lost all; and that as there was never any Lover, whose notions were more foolish, so like∣wise was there never any who took falser measures. However his negotiation succeeded accord∣ing to the orders which he had received: and the General of Nor∣mandy, extraordinary Ambassadour of France, came to London to con∣clude the marriage and peace; in the treaty of which the young King of Scotland was comprehended, with excommunication against the breakers, because it was authorised by the Pope. After this, the King of England, and Duke of Suffolk, made it all their care to recover the cheerful humour of the Princess, which seemed to be banished from her soul for the rest of her days. The
Marquess of Dorset, the Earls of Surrey, Shrewsbury, Worcester, young Buckingham, and all her former Lovers, who now desisted from their pretensions, employed them∣selves in that with all their might. The Queen her self willing to con∣tribute thereto, made the first of∣fers of being reconciled to her; and the Dutchess of Salisbury, the Countesses of Derby and Pembrook, did in emulation of one another all that they could to please her. But her distemper was of another nature, than to yield to such weak remedies; and there was none in the world but Suffolk able to mi∣tigate it, if he could have wholly concealed his own. Whatever ap∣parent satisfaction he made shew of, she perceived but too well what an extreme love, with ex∣treme generosity made him suffer. So that after he had kept himself on his legs beyond humane strength he fell sick, which over∣whelmed
her with new troubles, that brought her shortly into a con∣dition not much different from his own. There was much ado to conceal the real cause of it from the Duke of Longueville, who began shrewdly to suspect the mat∣ter. But in fine, the secret was not discovered. The preparatives for the marriage were thereby on∣ly a little retarded, and Suffolk at three weeks end, by the health∣fulness of his constitution sur∣mounting the bad humours, which the vexations of mind had stirred in him, at length re-established all matters by his recovery of health. He was very desirous not to have accompanied the Princess unto France, and he had but too ma∣ny reasons to decline it. But as she demanding of him that last complaisance, could not forbear to tell him, that her resolution was not as yet very firm; and that even he had not prevailed
with her but upon that conditi∣on, he was obliged to condescend. It is true also, that having bound him to that hard necessity, and well foreseeing what he might thereby suffer in the sequel, she omitted to tell him nothing that might render it supportable to him. The hopes wherewith he had flat∣tered her, were the same with which she flattered him. She made seriously the same predicti∣ons to him, which he had only made to her out of pity, and to amuse her thoughts; she grounded both the one and other on reasons, to give them greater authority, and representing to him always, that he ought not to forsake her in the Precipice, into which he did cast her, and at that time especially, when nothing but his Presence could help her to en∣dure the sight of it; it may be said, that as she received from him so singular a proof of affection, so
though she gave her self to ano∣ther, yet she still retained the in∣tire possession of her heart for him. In the mean time the English Fleet was richly equipped for the passage of the Princess. The King her Brother having brought her to Dover, conducted her above two Leagues out at Sea: he could not, no more than she, refrain tears at parting; and notwithstand∣ing of the advantage that he pro∣mised himself from the alliance of LOWIS the Twelfth, yet he found that separation so grievous, that he had sometimes a design to have renounced it. Then did he repent, that he had altogether pre∣ferred his own interests to the satisfaction of his dear Sister; and he reproached himself rigorously with it, as he comforted the un∣fortunate suffolk, who to com∣pleat his afflictions, had also the unprofitable grief of that Prince
to listen to. But though it was unprofitable, and out of season, yet it was sincere; and he had re∣mained long comfortless for the absence of Mary, had he not by presaging the future, grounded on his own wishes a strong hope of seeing her again shortly. The Dutchess of Salisbury, and Coun∣tess of Pembrook, as being her Governesses, passed the Sea with her, with several other Ladies, and Women for her service in France; particularly her four Maids of ho∣nour, Rene Winfield, Susanna Dabenay, Martha Sellinger, and the young Ann of Wolen. She was attended by a vast number of men, but who were all again to return with the Dutchess of Sa∣lisbury, and other Ladies after the Ceremonies of the marriage were over; except the Duke of Suf∣folk, the Marquess of Dorset, and young Gray his Brother, whose Presence the Queen had desired for
six Months; these last two, that she might a little disguise the in∣clination that she had for the o∣ther. They had a most favoura∣ble passage, though it being about the end of October, they could not have promised themselves so fair weather; and that lovely Fleet having come to an Anchor before Bologne, with a salute from all the Guns of the City, and Ships in the Harbour, the Duke of Valois, with the Dukes of Alencon and Bourbon, the Counts of S. Poll, and Guise, and a great croud of Courtiers and Gentlemen in Magnificent pomp, came to wait on her at her dis∣embarking. Next day the Duke of Valois, in name of his Father-in-law, espoused the Princess: and the day following conducted her to Abbeville, where the King in Person compleated the Ceremony; and from thence passing by St. Den∣nis, where she was Crowned, the King arrived at Paris, with the
acclamations of all his People, who spared nothing for the solemni∣zation of his Nuptials and Return. The Lists and Scaffolds for the Carrousel, which he had appoint∣ed, were already finished in the place Des Tournelles. The stru∣cture and ornaments thereof re∣presented the Conquest of the Mi∣lanois, for the which he prepared himself under the Auspices of the Queen; and the Cartels and Defies, which in the name of the Defen∣dants were two days after affixed to five Shields, fastened on five Pillars, which supported the tri∣umphal Arch, through which they entered the field, received shortly after their answers in name of the Assailants. It was free, as it is always on such occasions, to pro∣pose or contradict such Propositi∣ons as any one judged fit; and the Shields, or Argent, Sable, and Gules, were only to distinguish
what Combats were to be on foot, what on horseback, what at lance, and what at sword. And the fifth of Azure, in the middle of the other four denounced the de∣fence of the triumphal Arch, which was contrived by way of a For∣tress, where twenty Champions were to defend the Assault against sixty. There was no difficulty in ordering the Courses and Com∣bats; for they were not to enter the Lists, but in Squadrons, where they had placed themselves accord∣ing to their inclination; and the Duke of Valois, the Counts of Vendosm, S. Poll, and Guise, that led the four first, having their march regulated by their Birth, the Duke of Suffolk, and Marquess of Dorset, who conducted the other two under the devices of the Queen, easily ordered theirs. There was no contest, but about the chusing of the Defendants and As∣sailants of the Fortress, by which
the Carrousel was to conclude: because every one desired to be first, as in the place where there was greatest honour to be acqui∣red. But at length, the Duke of Valois, who must have had the place had he still persisted in the dispute, having taken upon him the part to attack, by order of the King, that he might the bet∣ter represent the Siege of Milan, which he had in his head, the mat∣ter was referred to Lot amongst the other Competitours; and it fell upon the Count of Guise, and the Duke of Suffolk: of whom the latter in the sequel, amidst the troubles that oppressed him, had some particular reasons to be better satisfied than another. The new Conquests that the young Queen made so soon as she ap∣peared in France, occasioned him quickly new vexations; and though in seeing him suffer, And she suffering perhaps as much as
he, a part of his cares were sus∣pended: yet that admirable Beau∣ty, which had so soveraingly tri∣umphed over the subjects of the King her Brother, to his conti∣nual disquiet, had no less efficacy on those of the King her husband. It would be too great an enterprise to speak of all those who were smitten by her. Many sighed, and few durst complain so loud as they would willingly have done; for besides that Kings cannot en∣dure the declared Lovers of their Queens, the Duke of Valois, who was one of the first, was not of an humour to suffer Rivals. This young Prince, of an he∣roical stature, and of a constitu∣tion as amorous as his age and eyes testified him to be, returned not from Boulogne in the same tran∣quillity that he went. Mary of England at first sight, made a powerful impression on his heart;
and after he had entertained her some time, he was no sooner re∣tired with the Seigneur de Chabot, one of his favorites, but that re∣penting his marriage with Claudia of France, he told him, that he came from the sight of one who would have been far more accep∣table to his heart; and that con∣sidering the age and infirmity of the King, it was cruelty to give him so young and beautiful a wife. Acquaintance and conver∣sation smothered not these first Sentiments. The tender and pas∣sionate air of the young Queen, which promised that which she never bestowed, daily quickened them: and as she thereby diverted her self, that she might have occa∣sion by such a confidence to di∣vert the pensive Suffolk; so the Duke of Valois mistaken by an outside, which deceived all people, gave many times the reins to de∣sires, that led him farther than
was fitting for his repose. To this may be added, that the Duke of Longueville provoked by the aversion, which the Queen ex∣pressed to him after the treaty of her marriage, instigated that young Prince, by the pretended facility of the Conquest. The foolish thoughts which he enter∣tained at London, turned into de∣spight at Paris, where by means of a ransom payable within a cer∣tain time, he found himself at liberty; and whilst his arm which he carried still in a scarf, since his fall at Therowenne, suffered him not to be of the Carrousel, all his thoughts were how to create her trouble. So that having procured to be admitted into the confidence of the Duke of Valois, as a per∣son who could instruct him better than any other, in the ways of satisfying his passion, he was the boutefeau, that incessantly pushed him forward to the utmost en∣terprises.
In fine, he inflamed the heart of that Prince, who was na∣turally very susceptible of such flames, to that pass, that the young Queen could no longer doubt but that he was in love with her; and as she was neither fierce nor ungentle, so she appeared neither surprised nor offended thereat. There was none possibly in all the Court but the King, who per∣ceived it not; and Madam being already accustomed to palliate the youthful disorders of her husband, never spake of it, but to enjoyn silence to others. But the Proto∣notary Du prat, who governed all the house of Angoulesm, was not so easie. He was astonished at that which charmed the Duke of Valois his Master; and judging as rashly of the virtie of Mary of England, as the Duke of Longue∣ville had done, he sensibly repre∣sented to him, that he having the greatest interest in the world not
to solicite her to incontinence, she had the like not to be chaste; so that, as if no body but he could have hazarded with the Queen what Du prat feared, he himself began likewise to dread it. Be∣sides, he would not have gone to Boulogne to espouse her for the King his Father-in-law, but upon the word of Francieres, his chief Physician, who had assured him that he would have no Issue by that marriage, so that the matter was of highest consequence. The passion that LOWIS the Twelfth had always to have a Son, would have hindered him from prying into any mystery. It is possible, he would have been glad to have been deceived, as he smiling told the General of Normandy, upon the first proposals that were made to him of marrying so young a Princess; and besides he had a pretty good opinion of himself still, to think that he could not
be mistaken that way. Moreover, considering the zeal that the French have for the blood of their Kings, and the joy that they would have to see a Dolphin, there were none in France who could not take all that could be said on such an oc∣casion for a meer Calumny. In∣somuch that these important con∣siderations having slackned the pursuit of the Duke of Valois, and being unwilling to lose a Crown for a Song, he only retain∣ed the delightful notion of a good fortune, which he thought very easie to be attained, and which was perhaps in the highest de∣gree of impossibility. But though he left-off speaking of Love, yet he ceased not to be amorous. His flame encreased by the desire he had to quench it. And he became even so much the more jealous of his desired bless, that not daring himself to pretend to it, it con∣tinually ran in his head, that ano∣ther,
who might not have the rea∣sons that he had to refuse the same, would upon the least attempt be sure to obtain the enjoyment thereof: and in this manner the fear of losing a Kingdom foment∣ing his jealousie, whilst during The Carrousel, he carefully avoided the occasions which would have at length undeceived him as to his thoughts concerning the Queen, he fell so strictly to examine all things, that within a few days he discovered the inclinations that she had for the Duke of Suffolk. He perceived the distinction that she put betwixt him, the Marquess of Dorset, and young Gray; not∣withstanding of the dexterity she had, always to joyn these two last in the favours which she showed the other; and the troublesom Duke of Longueville, joyning to these things, what he had heard, (though but confusedly at Lon∣don) failed not to confirm all his suspicions.
Thus then you see the Duke of Valois in great perplexity. It is not now jealousie that torments him. The fear of losing a Crown seems to have destroyed his love, and his thoughts tending only to prevent the consequences where∣with Du prat had threatned him, the Queen and Suffolk appeared to him every moment, as two sprights coming to dethrone him. But be∣ing of an open and frank soul, he quickly discovered his pain to him that was the cause of it. My Lord Suffolk, said he, (drawing him aside one evening in the King Anti-Chamber) you love the Queen, and the Queen does not hate you: but I would desire your love might not cost me a Crown. Suffolk amazed at this discourse, however dissembled his surprise. He asked with a great deal of respect what the matter was, and by questions wide of the purpose, endeavoured to hide the
emotions of his heart. But the Prince, who desired to sift him by his discourse, resolved not to ramble, and returning to his design: Yes, my Lord Duke of Suffolk, replyed he, you love the Queen, and the Queen loves you; and though I be no enemy to La∣dies and their Gallants, yet cer∣tainly I shall be one to the Queen and you, if your Gallantry take the liberty that I suspect. Where∣fore, continued he, oblige me not to become so. The King cannot live long; and when the Queen is a Widow, I promise not to op∣pose your desires. So smart an expression, such peremptory words, and the discomposed air that the Duke of Valois spoke them in, permitted not Suffolk longer to dissemble the Queens Honour, which he saw so openly struck at, but obliged him to take measures by himself. So that, to do the best that possibly he could, in the se∣cret
disturbance he found himself in, he began immediately to com∣plain of those who raised so inju∣rious reports of the best and most discreet Princess in the world. He would not say, that he spake on∣ly so to her disadvantage, because he found that her virtue disap∣pointed the hopes which he might have conceived against it. That would have shewed him to have been more acquainted, than he ought to have been with the af∣fairs of her whom he intended to justifie. To praise her, he thought was enough, by affirming still that she was not well known; and that he having the honour to have served her from the Cra∣dle, had known worthy persons in England over-shoot themselves, as well as some in France mistake the meaning of her condescending behaviour. And finding himself afterward sufficiently re-assured to venture on a piece of railery,
upon the account that the Duke himself raised his honour, by his fear of losing a Crown, he con∣cluded; that for the future he should take care not to give him any Umbrage; and that for that effect, and to give him full satjs∣faction, he would take the first occasion to pray the King his Ma∣ster to recal him. To this the Duke of Valois, a Prince of a close disposition, and sometimes a little too credulous, adswered, That he desired not so much; but that his jealousie was pardonable, that he was handsom, that he had al∣ready occasioned some discourse at London, and that he would take it very ill, if he made it worse at Paris; that he had rea∣son to suspect, after the freedom that he had used with him, that he would urge matters too far, but that to repeat what he had already said, he gave him his pro∣mise not to cross his happiness,
when the fit time was come. Suf∣folk, that he might not put a new edg on the jealousie of the Duke of Valois, let him speak as much as he thought fit, without seeming concerned at what he said. He made it his business rather to un∣deceive him by an indifferency, which in so delicate a juncture himself ought to observe as well as he; and if he affected it not, so well as he desired, at least he had that influence upon him, as to make him sometimes doubt of what he had believed before. But though he left him sufficiently sa∣tisfied, yet he found no reason to be so himself; for the reputation of the Queen was so dear to him, that he would have rather banish∣ed himself from her Presence, than have occasioned the least stain to her honour. Insomuch that ha∣ving no body but her to complain to, of the discourse of the Duke of Valois; and having measures to
take in regard thereof, which he judged convenient to agree upon with her, he rendred her an ac∣count of all, exact enough to create her much affliction, notwithstand∣ing of his care to soften what was hard and injurious in the terms. But that which touched her near∣est, was the resolution that he had taken of returning to England, that he might prevent the detraction which he saw ready to break out. Her Glory was not so dear to her, as the Presence of Suffolk; and relying on the great stock of her virtue, she cared not much to lose a little of its Odour, provided she might retain him. But being in∣terrupted before they could con∣clude any thing, and separated, with great impatience to meet a∣gain, the means of that became daily so difficult, that they found themselves in a short time reduced to great perplexities.
Though the Queen entertained a grudg against the Duke of Va∣lois, yet she thought less of do∣ing him any ill office with the King, than to secure her self from the Spies that he employed about her. She seemed even afraid to provoke him; so circumspect did Love make her, that she might en∣joy the Presence of her dear Suf∣folk: and as she went to bed e∣very night, much dejected in the apprehension, that she should hear of his departure; so there was easi∣ly to be observed in her some little glimpse of joy, when she saw him again next morning. To that continual tossing, were joyned likewise other agitations that en∣creased her pain. Then it was that she rendered full justice to the merit of Suffolk: the Quality of Queen of France had not at all changed her. She continually lamented that she was not his Wife, and all the advantages of
her Crown, all the complaisance of a Husband that adored her, be∣ing unable to comfort her for the loss of a man who deserved so much to be loved, did not sweeten the bitterness that was mingled with the affectionate com∣passion she had for him. Suffolk on his part, as much ashamed as afflicted at the disquiet which he occasioned to the Queen, upbraid∣ed himself always with weakness, for having followed her into France. He wondered at himself, how he could have remained there after her marriage; and with in∣dignation putting the question to himself every minute, what it was that he could expect at her Court, but dishonour by his Pre∣sence, he would have willingly given his life for the reparation which he thought he owed her. But whilst in this manner they afflicted each other, without being
able to speak together, but by their eyes, nor to complain, but by some Pillets which they en∣trusted to the faithful Kiffen, their enemies not satisfied to hold them thus on the Rack, thought to add terrour to it, that they might ob∣lige them to perform by fear, what they perceived them not disposed to do by reason. Besides the Duke of Longueville, there were also the Seigneurs of Montmorency, Chatillon, and Chalbot, who being jealous of the advantages that Suffolk had won at the Barier, from the bravest Champions of the Court, conspired together to slan∣der the Queen and him. The Duke of Valois, already prepossessed by some, and incited by others, could suspect none but him to have put that inscription on the Shield Azure, which bore, That the modest blush of the Roses of England, was as inviolable as the Candour of the Lillies of France.
He perceived very well that that was a mysterious answer, to what he had said to him; and not da∣ring to dispute that truth, though he much doubted it, he contented himself to write underneath, That it belonged not to Defendants to maintain that; and that none but the Conquerours of the Fortress deserved such honour. In the mean while being checked by his own conscience, he began to fear that the King might come to un∣derstand the reason why they dis∣puted such a matter: though the proposition being mingled with the interest of the Lillies, seemed not to bear any private meaning in a Tournoy, only designed to so∣lemnize their Union with the Roses of England. So that some of his Confidents having taken upon them to free him from his trou∣ble, bethought themselves of a stratagem; which was, that at the end of the Ball, which was danced
every evening after the Carrousel, at the same time that the Queen did find on her Toylet a Paper containing these words, If within three days the Duke of Suffolk de∣part not out of France, he is a dead man. Suffolk undressing him∣self, found such another in his pocket: but the same cause pro∣duced not in both of them the same effects; for though the Queen terrified, and ready to go and a∣waken the King, who lay alone two nights before, passed the night in mortal trances; yet Suffolk ex∣asperated to see matters driven to such an excess, resolved before his departure, to tell the Duke of Valois manfully, that murtherers were not able to daunt him. He was fully resolved on this, when an English Monk brought him a Billet from the Queen, wherein was inclosed, that threatning Pa∣per which she had received in the evening. She adjured him to be
upon his Guard; and above all things to forbear the defence of the Forts, and all other Combats. But Suffolk unwilling to confirm her disquiet, and suppressing the Billet which he had received to the same purpose, made her an∣swer in two words, That it was a false allarm, whereof he prayed her not to be affraid, nor take any notice. He was about a mi∣nutes time with the King, to tell him the same; and afterward con∣tinued his exercises in coursing and fighting that day, as he was ac∣customed before; and behaved himself no worse against Chatillon, Bayard and Crequy, than he had done the days before against Moüy, Bonneval, and several others. In the mean time, the disturbed Queen, at what rate soever desired to speak with him. The bad weather which had put a stop to the Tour∣noy, seemed favourable enough for her design. And the atacking of
the Fort, being by the King de∣layed for two days, that the De∣fendants and Assailants might have no cause to alledg precipitation and haste, if they failed in their duties, invited her besides thereto, as a time too precious to be lost; and though all these reasons had been wanting, yet the extremity of her own desire was one so pre∣valent, that she could no longer resist it. So that as she went to the Ball which was hastened, be∣cause their other pleasures had ended too soon, having met him again in the Kings Chamber, who was not very well, she bid him not dance so long as he was ac∣customed, but that he should with∣draw into a place which she show∣ed him: from whence the faithful Kiffen should guide him into a pri∣vate Chamber, where the young Ann of Bolen, who for some days had been sick, was lodged.
It was a nice enterprize, what circumspection soever might be used; and the Duke of Suffolk having imparted it to the Marquess of Dorset, who of a Rival was become his intimate friend, Dor∣set found it to be so. Neverthe∣less they concluded together, that the Queen, who without doubt had given all necessary orders, Must not be refused; and the ra∣ther that she had perhaps such important matters to speak of, as she durst not commit to the un∣certainty of a Billet. So that notwithstanding of the reluctancy that Suffolk had against that In∣terview, yet having taken his mea∣sures with the Marquess of Dorset, who took upon him the charge of watching without, he obeyed; and the intrigueing Kiffen, who stayed for him in the appointed place, led him into the Chamber of Ann of Bolen, without being observed by any. Afterward the
Queen wearied by so many shows, but more by her own cares, ha∣ving left the company, came to her appartment, conducted by the Duke of Valois, and Duke of Alen∣con. She caused her head to be undressed before them, as being very desirous of sleep, which ob∣liged them to withdraw; and her Chamber-door being immediately shut, Judith Kiffen, who lay in her Wardrobe, by a back-door dis∣missed the Maids that attended her. Shortly after she went to bed, more impatient than afraid to execute what she designed. She kept her self close a-bed, until an universal silence had assured her that all people had withdrawn; and so soon as she heard no more noise, she arose to go meet the Duke of Suffolk. The passage was pretty long. It behoved her first to enter a Closet, pass a Gallery that adjoyned to a Chappel, and from thence by an entry half
ruined, which heretofore served for a passage unto her appartment, go to the private Chamber, where the young Ann of Bolen was at that time attended only by one person in her sickness. All things went at first as well as the Queen could desire. She found Suffolk in the place appointed; and whilst Judith Kiffen returned to watch her Chamber, which was not so secure on the other side, where the Maids of honour lodged, they began their Conversation. The Presence of Ann of Bolen laid no constraint on them, for she was one of their Confidents. So that giving full scope to their affections, they fell immediately to complain to one another; like Lovers, who desired no more but the freedom of complaint, and who could not when they would complain. But after these common expressions of mutual love, the Queen terri∣fied at the Billet which she had
sent him, desired to know from whence it came; and upon what ground he reckoned a threatning of that nature to be but a false alarm. The answer of Suffolk, though prepared before-hand, did not at all satisfie her; and they so perfectly understood one ano∣ther, that it was very hard for them to take it for good Coyn. So that the Queen making ano∣ther use of that constrained assu∣rance which he affected, broke forth in rage against the Duke of Valois. It was to no purpose for Suffolk to tell her, that that Prince being vexed at the Cartel, which he had affixed on the Shield Azure, had no other design, but to hin∣der him from maintaining of it by the way that came first into his thoughts; she made no account of such a weak conjecture: and though the young Ann of Bolen joyning in opinion with Suffolk, endeavoured to convince her, both
of what he said, and of the ne∣cessity that there was to yield for some time to the persecution; yet was there no appearance of pre∣vailing with her: when Judith Kiffen out of breath came run∣ning to acquaint her, that Moun∣sieur and Madam, were in the ap∣partment of her Maids. This ad∣vice was a clap of thunder, and the Queen, who contested so strong∣ly with Suffolk, had no more strength, but to follow Kiffen, who led her back to her bed sha∣king for fear. The thing that was most troublesom, was, that a retreat in so great haste, and so full of fear, could not be made without noise. Some body pas∣sing along the Gallery, and the shutting of the door were heard. Sighs and Lamentations were di∣stinguished, during the tumult; and there needed no more to con∣firm Monsieur and Madam in the suspicions, which had as great ap∣pearance
as reality. In effect the Duke of Longueville having ob∣served some disturbance in the Queen, during the Courses at the Barrier; having seen her earnestness to speak to the Duke of Suffolk in the Kings Chamber, and by seve∣ral actions afterwards remarked her impatience to leave the Ball, which she did almost as soon as he, the Duke of Valois could not in reason slight such advertise∣ments: besides, Bonneval having by his order gone to Suffolks lodg∣ing, and not finding him within, that seemed to him an evident proof of all that he apprehended. There remained but one way to make a clear discovery; so that having discoursed concerning that with Madam, that he might carry on his design with more civility, and less noise, he brought her▪ with him to the Queens appartment by the stairs of the Maids of honour; under pretext of playing with her
at some small games, and that they had retired before the ordinary time. Sellinger, Winfield, and Dabenay told him but in vain, that the Queen was asleep. In vain the Lady D'aurigny their Governant; for all she was a French woman, prayed them that they would not awake her; for Madam, pretending still the more to be in a merry humour, con∣tinued the noise that was begun, whilst that du Terail, and du Trot, two Gentlemen belonging to the Duke of Valois, laid their ears to the Gallery, where there were many chinks. So that the spies had given an account of what they heard, when the Queen was upon her returning; and the Duke of Valois being out of all patience, Madam ventured to scratch the door, that she might essay to discover somewhat more by the answer that should be made to her. At that very nick of
time the Queen was got a bed a∣gain; and Judith Kiffen being surprised, as people commonly are on such occasions, not being able to forbear to ask (who is there) left no possibility for the Queen to be ignorant, that it was Ma∣dam, who must not be denied en∣try. But to make amends for that fault, she had the present wit to tell her, that she should counter∣feit her self affighted by some Vision; and that having there∣upon risen again, they had gone together into the Closet, and as far as the Gallery, to see what the matter could be. Insomuch that the door being opened to Ma∣dam, who seemed more and more impatient to be let in, the Queen who had nothing to say better, and who without doubt spoke more truth than was thought, failed not to complain that she had been put into a great fright. The Duke of Valois, who came
after, demanded how, and for what? And the air of his counte∣nance betraying the pretended cheerful humour, wherewith he said he was come, the Queen looking pale, and in confusion, had not much ado on her part, to make appear, that in effect fear hindered her to answer: but Ju∣dith Kiffen more resolute and cunning, finding in the disorder that she saw her in, not only means to conceal the trouble which she expressed not; but al∣so to endeavour to deliver her from those that importuned her, cast her self betwixt them. And so staring and casting about her eyes, as if she had been still terri∣fied by the Spright, which she said she had seen all in white, she began to relate to them, how that it had appeared first in the Wardrobe, where by fearful gestures and mo∣tions it had obliged her to rise out of bed; that the Queen up∣on
the noise she had made, being very timerous, could not remain in hers; that she had chosen ra∣ther to follow her naked as far as the Gallery, into which the Spright entered; and that whether it was fear, or cold that had seized her, if it was no real Spirit, but some apparition made out of an humour, they that played such tricks, had no great regard to her health. That intelligible reproach, though delivered in bad French, checked a little the false mirth of those to whom it was directed. But the Lady D'aumont, to cover their disorder, taking up Judith Kiffen, replyed, that Monsieur and Madam could not be accused of any thing, since they were but just come, and that in all proba∣bility the Queen had received the fright before their visit. The dextrous Judith, who knew well how to make use of every thing to serve her ends, seemed not to
disagree. She did as those who suffer, and reckon the continuance of their pains by ages, when they have lasted but minutes; and she played her-part so well, that the Duke of Valois, who could hear her no longer, because she said nothing of what he desired to know, took a Torch himself, en∣tred into the Closet, and opened the door of the Gallery, as if he intended to see what she had seen. Kiffen was not in the least dis∣composed at that, though the danger seemed to encrease. She continued the rehearsal of her Vision in her own language. She followed the Prince, to show him where the Spright had disappeared. She led him even as far as the pas∣sage by the Chappel, being fully prepared to pray him to make no noise in that place, because of Ann of Bolen, whose sickness she said was very dangerous; but finding the door that she intended to open,
(contrary to her expectation) well shut, she changed her design, and ended her story; saying, that if it was no apparition made of purpose, it must needs be then some soul departed, that desired the assistance of prayers. There was however no hole nor cor∣ner, either in the Gallery or Closet, which the Duke of Valois searched not. He entred even Kiffens Wardrobe. He looked under her bed, and into the Presses. He made the Lady D'aumont do as much under the Queens; and in fine, seeing he could no longer bear out the matter handsomly, but by showing an officious care, he went into the Anti-Chamber, Hall, and as far as the great Stair∣case. After which, being of a good nature, and finding his di∣strust condemned by his ill success, he returned to the Queen with a more composed meen, than he had at his first coming: where em∣ploying
himself in good earnest to re-assure her after her fear, as he himself appeared to be bet∣ter satisfied, so she began to come to her self again. They fell all a-laughing at the adventure, where∣of the imbecillity of Judith Kiffen, to whom the vapours of her first sleep had made a Spright appear, was only accused; and matters being thus restored, the amorous Duke of Valois, who on the foot of the Queens bed, where he was almost laid along, found her so much the more charming, as she had reasons that night to spare it, seemed (if it may be so said) to devour her with his looks. Ma∣dam who knew it, made it not her business to take him off from that transport. On the contrary she beheld him with some pitty, burn himself at a fire which flamed not. But being free from the di∣stractions that he had, and being by nature neither so easie to be
mistaken, nor so ready to be un∣deceived, she persisted in the sus∣picion that he had wrought in her. So that drolling with the Queen, she took occasion to tell her, that seeing she was timorous, she would lye by her that night. Though the Duke of Valois was quite transported with other thoughts, yet he well understood what that meant, and that he might suffer Madam to do so; and being be∣sides unable to abide longer with the Queen, he withdrew with some of the friends of his plea∣sures. Bonneval, who was one of that number, came to meet him; and what he told him of a second search that he had made of the Duke of Suffolk, and Marquess of Dorset, to as little purpose as the first, did not a little contribute to perswade him that the Duke of Longueville was out in his con∣jectures;
for after all, the Mar∣quess of Dorset was no more to be found than the Duke of Suffolk. He caused himself to be denyed at home, that according as things happened, he might have occasion to say that they were both toge∣ther; and this plot agreed upon betwixt them, might have made the most cunning easily believe, that these two English seeking their adventures at Paris, as all stran∣gers do, had been together in some secret place of divertisement. In the mean time, the Queen being a-bed with Madam, notwith∣standing the resistance she made; and Judith Kiffen besieged by the Lady D'aumont, who made her pass the night upon Chairs, Suf∣folk was not a little troubled that he heard no news from them. He judged so much the worse that he knew not what to judg; and to be alone in the secret of the
night with Ann of Bolen, without any probability of getting out of the Palace, whereof he knew nei∣ther the by-ways nor issues, was possibly the greatest perplexity that could happen to a man of his humour. He saw nothing on all hands, but grounds of despair. He had heard the Duke of Valois in the Gallery speak to Kiffen in a tone, which gave but too evident signs of what he had in his mind. The attempt that was made to o∣pen the door of the entry, which Bolen thought fit to shut, had reached his ears; and if he had no reason to think that it was certainly known where he was, yet he found ground enough to presume that there was something at least doubted. By this means, seeing the faculties of the soul are very quick in the first emotions of the heart, he imagined the evil almost as great, as if he had been discovered; and in that violent
state, to which so many offensive imaginations reduced him, he would have made no difficulty to have thrown himself out of the win∣dow, had he been sure to have been lost in a bottomless pit, and never found again. In fine, length of time, and the profound silence of the night dissipated these first terrours. He began to hope that the Queen was come off well, be∣cause no body came to him; and reasoning discreetly about what he had to do, he well perceived that she left all the care of that to him. But that was a difficulty which he could not tell how to resolve. If it was dangerous to remain with Ann of Bolen, it was far more to attempt an escape. The Palace might be invested by order of his enemies. There was no probability of avoiding the Guards; and if he should wander in the dark, he was almost sure to fall in the way of those whom
he feared most. Besides, Ann of Bolen, who jealous of her repu∣tation, pretended that with so much Beauty and Virtue, there was no Crowned head of whom she might not make Conquest, would have him by all means to withdraw: and though Suffolk was very far from thinking his fortune good, that he had the oc∣casion to spend a night with her in her Chamber; yet with his cares and fears, he had the scruples and discontents of that maid to struggle with. It behoved them both however to have patience, notwithstanding of the reasons they had to be impatient; and young Bolen submitting to the ne∣cessity wherein Suffolk was, they concluded at length, that he should send a note to one of his servants, on which she should write the di∣rection; and that the English Maid that served her should carry it to his lodgings so soon as it was day.
After that, they reasoned no more. Suffolk prayed Bolen to take her rest, as if he had not been in her Chamber; and she fell asleep, or seemed to do so, whilst his thoughts were taken up about his misfor∣tunes: but so soon as day began to appear, she went into the next Chamber to awaken the Maid that served her. The orders that▪ Suf∣folk gave, were, that one of his servants with some bundles of Stuffs and Ribban that he had by him, should bring him another suit of Cloaths, that he might not be in the habit of one going to a Ball, as he was at that time; and that the note which he wrote to the Marquess of Dorset, should be delivered to him. The Chamber-maid did her duty, without dis∣covering any thing of the myste∣ry. And he to whom she was directed, taking one of his com∣panions with him, did likewise his. Ann of Bolen having received
them both as men, that brought her Stuffs from England, entred into the next Chamber, under pretext that there was more light there to chuse them by. Suffolk that lay hid in her Chamber, was immediately travested; and his servants carried away the Cloaths that he had put off, leaving part of their Stuffs, in the chusing of which Bolen counterfeited her self still busied; and having met them, he was but a little way got out of that Ladies Chamber, that he might return thither again, like one that came from abroad, when the Marquess of Dorset arrived. So that all things succeeding ac∣cording to his wishes, and he and his friend having nothing to fear, they made a serious visit to the lovely sick Lady, the better to countenance their coming out of her appartment. In the mean time Judith Kiffen informed them of all that had passed with the Queen,
and this was all that the distrust of the Duke of Valois produced; and the so just and exact measures of the Duke of Longueville, being disappointed by the invention of that woman with her foolish vi∣sion, a real affair that was able to have ruined the Queen, was made only a piece of railery. They that saw the Duke of Suffolk, and Marquess of Dorset come out of the appartment of Ann of Bolen, were not at all surprised; for be∣sides that they did it ordinarily, most people believed the last to be in love with her. From thence they went according to their custom, to wait on the King; where they found all the discourse to be concerning the pleasantness of Madam, who had put the Queen in a fright; every one according to his fancy, relating what the Duke of Valois had been pleased to make known; and all that was said on that subject, looking but
like a jest, it was almost forgotten by dinner-time. And a new Co∣medy was the afternoons divertise∣ment of the Court. But the Queen and Duke of Suffolk, in the just Resentment that they conceived against the Duke of Valois, taking the more pleasure to insult over the injuri∣ous suspicions of that Prince, that all his cunning had succeeded so ill with him, resolved for the fu∣ture not to lye under such con∣straints as they had done the time past. They found it even conve∣nient to carry themselves in ano∣ther manner after so vain an essay. They made no longer any scruple to talk together, whether it was in the Kings appartment, or during the play; and to go on as far that way as they could, Suffolk having found an occasion to give the Queen his hand, when she was a∣bout to retire, made no scruple to
lay hold on it, and to wait upon her to her appartment: that was all the time they had to entertain themselves, the courteous Mar∣quess of Dorset favouring their design. But though their conver∣sation was altogether free, yet it ran not in a very pleasing strain; for the retreat to which the Duke of Suffolk prepared, was a cruel blow which the Queen could not endure. Not but that she was sufficiently perswaded of the ne∣cessity that he had to resolve on it; for the power of the Duke of Valois encreased daily, as the health and strength of the King diminished; and that Prince en∣tertaining thoughts of her, from which perhaps she was farther removed than any woman living, could not fail to disturb the inno∣cent joy that she took at the sight of Suffolk. But setting aside what she had to manage upon her own account, that unfortunate Lover
began to work more compassion in her, than he was wont to do. She could not now reward him, as she desired; and all her grati∣tude being limited by suffering for him, what he suffered for her, permitted her not to refuse that last occasion of imitating his vir∣tue. So that consenting only to his departure, because it would produce▪ in her the same afflicti∣ons, which her marriage had cau∣sed in him; as by an excess of love, he spoke no more to her of his troubles, so she was willing to conceal from him the cares to which she prepared her self. She only engaged him to return upon the first orders that he should re∣ceive from her, and he made no difficulty to promise it. It was but a false joy drawn from the stock of his grief, that he made appear at parting. His heart suf∣ficiently struggled against it, and under the terrible apprehensions
wherewith absence threatned him already, he would have perhaps confessed that he designed to re∣turn, if he durst have spoken the truth. But at that time, neither the Queen, nor he, expressed what they thought. They both feared too much to soften one anothers heart, in a time when it behoved them to look on one another with some kind of obdurateness; and Suffolk who could endure no lon∣ger, was upon the point to give the Queen the good-night, when she being reduced to the same ex∣tremity, squeezing his hand be∣tween hers, dismissed him. The night that followed that sad evening, proved to them one of those tedious nights, which are not known but by the distressed Lovers. Next morning they need∣ed all their invention, to hinder their affliction from being ob∣served. The Queen masked her
trouble with the grief she pretend∣ed to have for the Kings droop∣ing condition; and Suffolk being taken up with the business he had to do the day following at the triumphal Arch, wherewith the Count of Guise he was to defend, acquitted himself so well of his duty, that no body took notice of the disorder of his mind. In effect, there was never any thing more gallant or better or∣dered than the Squadron that he led. The English Champions were all, as himself was, cloathed in green Velvet, edged with Cloth of Gold, with crosses wrought with Roses of red Velvet, crown∣ed with Garlands of Lillies in sil∣ver embroidery. That device, be∣sides that it had a very opposite relation to the proposition which he had affixed on the Shield Azure, agreed likewise very well with the principal ground of the so∣lemnity.
Neither did that of the Duke of Valois, on a blew ground, for all its Magnificence; nor the rest who came in order with most rich and splendid▪ Liveries, so much attract the eyes of the Be∣holders, as it did; and the King who was better by day than by night, being come to the Carrou∣sel, approved it not only with his looks, but his applause also. The attack of the triumphal Arch be∣gan with the sound of Trumpets, and the noise of Cannon fired from the Towers of Bastille. It lasted almost two hours, each Party, and every Champion omitting nothing of the finest and most regular practices of War; and as the As∣sailants made inconceivable ef∣forts, so the Defendants maintain∣ed it with so much vigour, that the Queen who was always in fear for Suffolk, representing to the King, that Courage incited by emulation, might sometimes be
exasperated in a matter of pleasure and recreation, he sent the Judges of the Field to put an end to the Combat, by declaring that the Glory was equal on both sides. The health of the Prince which was thought somewhat restored, invited all the Gallants to begin some new feats afresh. But see∣ing the Queen, although she strove against her humour, seemed not at all taken with such kind of Divertisements, he was glad, being desirous to oblige her more and more, by resigning himself wholly to her pleasure, to delay the pro∣posed solemnities of rejoycing un∣til the month of January. This offered a reason to the Duke of Suffolk, to speak to him of his departure; and though that good King, who loved to see him, made some difficulty to let him go; yet the matter went off exceeding well under the common
pretext, that every one took to withdraw from Court, in a time when there was nothing to be done there. He pretended some affairs that called him back into En∣gland. He promised to be back before the Carnaval, and two days after that his equipage was gone, having taken his leave of the King, and Duke of Valois, to whom he thought it not conveni∣ent to express himself any more, and having no occasion to take leave more particularly of the Queen, he took horse accompa∣nied with young Gray, Brother to the Marquess of Dorset, and six in train. Not that he desired his company: On the contrary it would have rejoyced him to have been alone; and though he was abundantly satisfied that his fair Queen loved him with all her heart; yet he looked upon himself but as a wretch, who de∣sired to be abandoned of all the
world, seeing he was forsaken by himself. He never thought more of seeing Mary▪ of Lancaster a∣gain. He was already plodding into what Countrey remote from her, he should go end the misera∣ble remainder of his days; and as the vehemency of his affliction prompted him to that design, so the imperious idea of his secret extraction presenting it self to his imagination, to encrease his pain, began likewise to tempt him there∣to. All the little displeasures which he had effaced at the Court of England, took place again in his memory. He could not ex∣cuse himself for having carried the name of Brandon there so long, when he had one so illustrious to bear. The favours of HENRY the Eighth appeared to him but ignominious trifles. In fine, ha∣ving no mind to return into En∣gland, but that he might declare what he was; and like a sick per∣son,
who turns and tumbles every way to find a more easie posture, which he meets with no-where, giving way to (I know not what) piece of vanity, that seemed to mitigate his grief, because it was an effect thereof, he imployed, in thoughts as vain as ambitious, that severe reprieve, which he owed only to the Greatness of his misfortune. O! Mary of England, what kind of love is this, that does in such a manner oppress! your Empire over the Duke of Suffolk was never so great, as when he durst think that you had none; and the revolt of that lovely soul gave you greater proofs of its subjection, than all the testimonies of love and re∣spect, which he had given you heretofore. True it is also, that that revolt lasted not long enough to be thought of any consequence. Fortune that preserved to you so worthy a Conquest, was upon the
dawning to Crown its merit. But as she never bestows any favours, and chiefly such as may be called Soveraign and Supreme, without the price of an extreme affliction, which seems to compleat all her other crosses; so she resolved to reduce the Duke of Suffolk to the utmost extremity, before she put you in a condition of being his. Having departed from Court in a disorder of mind, that cannot be well expressed, he continued by very easie journeys his way to Calais, wherein a design of wan∣dring over the world, desiring to retain but two of his servants, he was thinking with himself al∣ready of means to give young Gray the slip; when at the Towns-end of Ardres, entring in∣to a little Cops, which leads to Guines, ten men well mounted broke forth upon him and his train. At the first charge they
gave, his horse having received a Carbine-shot in the head, after some bounds, fell into a kind of Lake, which the Winter-rains be∣gan to make on the side of the high-way; and he was so engaged under his horse, that that fall would have determined all his for∣tune, if three other Gentlemen coming from Guines, and joyning young Gray, had not given Bokal his Valet de Chamber time to come to his assistance. Seeing he was not at all hurt, he got quickly out of the water, and mounted another horse; and despair or an∣ger encreasing his natural strength, though the match was then petty equal, the engagement lasted not long. Two of the most despe∣rate, who thought to overthrow him, were themselves knocked down by the weight of his blows. Young Gray, and the three un∣known Gentlemen, whom for∣tune had guided into that place,
did as much to those that bore head against them; and of the remaining four, who bethought themselves only of flight, one be∣ing fallen, about a hundred paces off, the faithful Bokal, who sus∣pected that the Duke of Longue∣ville had suborned these Assassines against his Master, thought best to make him Prisoner. That wretch gave them sufficient in∣formation of the truth of the matter, that they were some of the Emperours Reistres, who came from their Garrison of Dunkerk, as far as that Countrey, to com∣mit Pillage and Robberies. Ne∣vertheless the unjust supicion of Bokal produced very troublesom consequences for the Duke of Longueville, who was in no way capable of a bad action. It was the cause that he was very rigo∣rously dealt with about the ran∣som which he owed still; and as he thought to have payed it by
the ransom of Peter de Navar taken Prisoner at the Battel of Ravenna, which LOWIS the Twelfth had given him; so these dispositions altering under the Reign of FRANCIS the First, who received that Spaniard into his service, the King of England pressed the Duke of Longueville the more, that knowing him to be in a necessity of ransoming himself, he would have him pu∣nished for that pretended Riot, and for every thing else that he had done against the Duke of Suffolk. But▪ though this bad Rancoun∣ter had nothing extraordinary in appearance, since it happens very frequently that Robbers set upon Passengers on the High-ways, who are succoured by others; yet in this their befel one of the oddest adventures, that perhaps can be imagined: when the Duke of
Suffolk having discovered that the chief of the three that had aided him, was the Earl of Kil∣dare, that fierce enemy knowing him likewise, told him, That all his business in France was to fight him once more. Without doubt no accident more surprising could have happened to either of them; and as the one desperately mad with himself, seemed by casting up his eyes to heaven, to ask the stars, what fatality had brought him to save the life of a man, who he only sought to kill; so the other fixing his on the ground, knew no more than he wherefore it was, that he should be indebted to him. In fine, the Irish Earl complained and huffed, as he was accustomed to do in any other occasion. He demand∣ed instantly satisfaction for the wounds he had received in Rich∣mont Park, and the disgrace he had fallen into after that unlucky
duel; and it was to no purpose for Suffolk, who began to listen to him, and excuse himself for all that had passed, to protest that he would never fight against one that had defended his life, for rage rendred Kildare either deaf or implacable. So that the other, to satisfie him, drawing again the sword which he had just put up, and throwing it into the wood, approached thus disarmed to the point of his. But that was a day that produced strange adven∣tures; for the fury of the Earl of Kildare ceased of a sudden, and that fiery man was so affected with Suffolks action, that throw∣ing his sword into the same place of the Wood, as he had done, he came running towards him with open arms, crying with tears, That he would never be any more his enemy. After which, there was no kind of friendship which they showed not to one another; and
this days adventure having inter∣rupted the design which Suffolk had to wander over the world, he yielded to go to Calais with the Earl of Kildare; saying some∣times within himself, by a tender∣ness of heart, which makes true Lovers know the force of their love, that he went only to Lon∣don to endeavour the re-establish∣ment of his defender. And in effect the procedure of that ge∣nerous enemy was the first thing he told the King his Master; and that Prince who loved rare and singular adventures, the more ad∣mired that action of the Irish Earl, that he thought him not capable of such generosity. So that he gave him a very favour∣able reception; and restoring him again into favour, by that means united these two Rivals into so strict a bond of friend∣ship, that nothing could afterward dissolve it.
In the mean while, as the re∣turn of the Duke of Suffolk was in agitation; and that upon the complaints which the Queen made by her Letters, the King of England intended to stand on his points with the Court of France; hardly had he projected the measures he was to take in that conjuncture, when the Mar∣quess of Dorset wrote an ac∣count of the Death of LOWIS the Twelfth. It would be hard to give an exact relation of what the Duke of Suffolk conceived upon this great news. It wrought a new change in him not to be expressed; only after he had done all that could be done for Mary of England, after that he had sa∣crificed her to her self by an excess of Virtue, by sacrificing himself for her in an excess of Love, nothing else can be said, but that the reward which so high and extraordinary an action
deserved, began to shine in his eyes. There was nothing able to moderate his joy, but a false report that was spread abroad of the Queens being with Child. For besides that this would have left him no hopes, it be∣ing unlikely that the Mother of a Dolphin of France could leave her Sons Kingdom, or enter into a second marriage with a person, such as he was taken to be; he dreaded likewise that the Duke of Valois, whom she would there∣by disappoint of a Crown, might not revolt against her. He like∣wise feared the Calumnies which the Favourites of that Prince would not fail to publish, after that they had already slandered her; and that fatal conception, at length seemed to rob him of all that he thought was left him by the Death of LOWIS the Twelfth. But it happened to be a mistake. And the Queen
having her self declared the con∣trary, that the Proclamation of the Duke of Valois might not be held in suspense; it was quickly perceived that she was the first who acknowledg'd him King of France, by the name of FRANCIS the First; and the Marquess de Sanferre, who in the name of that Prince arrived shortly at London, to renew the Treaty of Peace, which the King his Father-in-law had concluded the year before, put an end to the troubles of the Duke of Suffolk. So that his heart being filled with joy, HENRY the Eighth, whose care it was also to render him happy, would no longer delay his bliss. He condescended to all that was proposed to him for the continuation of the Treaty; and because with the interests of the two Crowns, it behoved him like∣wise to regulate the concerns of the Queen his Sister in Quality
of Dowager, he took that pre∣text to send Suffolk into France with the title of Ambassadour Plenipotentiary, which he discharg∣ed with so great splendour, that Prince Henry Count of Nassaw, who came to Paris at the same time in name of the Arch-Duke, about the affairs of the Low-Countries, was somewhat troubled to see a subject of England so high∣ly out-do him. But as there was nothing in France that could equal the Mag∣nificence of the English, and all the Court of FRANCIS the First, were envious at it, as well as the Flemings; so there was nothing in the same King∣dom at that time comparable to the Beauty of the Queen. The air wherewith she received the Duke of Suffolk at the Palace des Tournelles; made the wits at Court say, That she needed not
too much virtue to comfort her for the death of a husband; and it must be acknowledged, that under her mourning Veil and Peak, which by the light of a vast number of Torches, set more advantageously off the delicate whiteness of her skin, nothing was to be seen in her that day, which might occasion melancholy or grief. That raillery was car∣ried as far as possibly it could be, whilst the necessity of the affairs which they had to regulate with the King of France and his Mi∣nisters, obliged them often to speak together, and to be by themselves. But whatever hath been said of them, and whatso∣ever reports have been raised of their mutual complaisances, or the joy that they had to meet again; yet it is still true, that they ne∣ver gave any ground for Ca∣lumny and Reproach. If they were so near to make a slip, as
men imagined; yet they were cautious; and in dangerous occa∣sions, when they might have done otherways, they virtuously resist∣ed temptation. The new King of France was not of that temper; for that Prince naturally very free with women, would have made no Ce∣remony to have perswaded the Queen, had she been in the least inclined to hear him. He had many times much ado to leave her, when the affairs of his King∣dom required it; and for all the Grandure and Magnanimity which hath appeared in the course of his life, yet being at that time too weak for his passion, he ap∣peared sometimes so peevish, and out of humour, that the same detracting tongues which have endeavoured to sully the reputa∣tion of Mary of England, have given it out, that his amorous
fever made him so light-headed, as to detest his marriage with the Daughter of LOWIS the Twelfth: and to protest more than once, that he had rather have enjoyed his Widow than his Kingdom. Whether it was an effect of the Queens sweet dispo∣sition; or that she was pleased to revenge her self for the trou∣bles that he caused her, before he was King, she appeared not altogether inexorable. Yet she was still the same at the heart, and never what he took her to be. So that one day, when her beauty so surprised him, that he forgot some of his measures, think∣ing to take her on the right side, he told her, That since he him∣self could not expect to be hap∣py, it behoved him at least to endeavour to make her so, that therefore he would marry her to the Duke of Suffolk whensoever she pleased, that he▪ feared no
consequences of that marriage; that he would be Guarrantee of it to all men; and that he would take upon him to perswade the King her Brother to consent there∣to. To this proposition he added many marks of affection, and dextrously insinuated how much it had cost him before he could bring himself to that resolution; so that the fair Queen perceiving him in appearance exceedingly moved, and suffering him to speak all that he pleased, by gestures and looks affected several times not to be altogether insensible. But having done so, and judging that he thought her sufficiently touched, she rose from the chair, and looking on him with an air, which might at first falsifie all the applause that she had given to his discourse; she answered, That he had never well known her, and that he knew her not as yet. That in France she was taken
for a strange person: but that the French themselves were a strange-humoured people; and that she well perceived that a∣mongst them a young Queen, who would be thought virtuous and discreet, though she were na∣turally affable and courteous, must not show her self to be so. That as to the Duke of Suffolk, she saw very well that it was known that she had an esteem for so worthy a Gentleman, and that she was willing he should be so far in her secrets, as to tell him somewhat more particular; that she had sometimes wished he had been born a King. But that that being but a vain wish, Suffolk must be satisfied with her esteem; and for the rest, that there were So∣verains that demanded her, and Kings who having demanded her from her Child-hood, might still demand her. This brisk answer not being understood, did the
more vex the King, that he thought he had found a sure way to ren∣der the Queen pliable. Yet for all that he gave not over. He believed her to have been sur∣prised, or that she made it strange to be free with him; and from time to time renewing the dis∣course of the marriage with the Duke of Suffolk, though it was uneasie to him to speak good of a Rival; yet as at that time he showed himself a moft passionate Lover, so he had at least the ad∣vantage of a favourable hearing. In the mean while he got no ground upon her; and the affairs of the Queen being now con∣cluded, she made it her business to prepare for her return into England. Then was the time that the Love of FRANCIS the First, which before was always but a gentle heat in his heart, became
a furious passion. Many hours he restlesly spent, a thousand violent thoughts he hatched; and if he had not had as tractable and pliable a mind, as he had a high and generous Courage, pro∣bably he had run upon strange extremities. But at length he took counsel of the wise, in whom he confided; and his love and despair changeing into pure Gal∣lantry, all his intentions were to give signal proofs of the com∣mand he had over himself. But all the advances that he had al∣ready made in that laudable de∣sign; and all the pomp and mag∣nificence wherewith he had or∣dered the lovely Queen (whom he was so loth to quit) to be conducted out of his Territories, were nothing so obliging to her, nor so great for himself, as the Letter, which (after the signing of all the Treaties that had been concluded by the Ministers on ei∣ther
side), he wrote with his own hand to the King of England, to this effect; That there being few Kings, who in personal worth excelled the Duke of Suffolk, he ought to bestow on him so much of the Grandure of his Kingdom, as might put him in a capacity to marry the Queen his Sister. That if there were nothing on his part, that might hinder such a lovely union, for his own part he free∣ly consented to it; and that having besides proposed to the Arch-Duke the marriage of the Count of Nassaw, with the Princess of Orange, he should much rejoyce to hear, that the two Ambassadours, who had procured him the friendship of his illustrious neighbours, had received in recompense, the one the most beautiful Queen in the world, and the other the richest Princess of the Low-Countries.
Thus did FRANCIS the First Crown his Love by a truely heroical action, whereof another King slighted in his Love, as he was, would hardly have been ca∣pable. It was the first action, but not the least laudable of his Reign, though that might afford matter for a continued Elogy. There is nothing so great as for a man to conquer his own passions. There are few that desire, much less atchieve it. And Kings especially, when they are amorous and young, are not accustomed to put their virtue to such a tryal. The Queen found her self in∣finitely obliged to the sincere pro∣cedure, which followed so gene∣rous an effort; but durst not pro∣fess so much, for fear of exposing her self to new troubles. She thought it enough to correspond with it by all the civilities which might evidence her acknowledg∣ment,
without reviving smo∣thered flames; and that Conduct of the most charming Princess of the world, gaining intirely the esteem of a King, who craved no more from her, but friendship, so fully re-placed her in the re∣spect of all the Court, notwith∣standing of envy and detraction, that there was not so much as one that belonged to it, who seemed not troubled at her ap∣proaching departure. The less polished Gallants lamented it; and the others having understood the merit of the Duke of Suffolk, during the time of his Embassie, were almost all of opinion, fol∣lowing the example of the King, that the Queen had reason to love him. All the discourse therefore at Court of their mutual affecti∣on, was with respect, and even with some kind of admiration; and in fine, every one conform∣ing their Sentiments to theirs,
their true joy became the greater by approbation. The lovely Queen was con∣ducted by all the Court as far as Compiegne, from whence the King still transported with Love▪ re∣solved in person to convey her to Boulogne, where he had first received her. The Duke of Suf∣folk, who kept purposely by the Queens Consort all the way from Paris to Compiegne, where she lived, that he might give the King the greater liberty, did the same from Compiegne, till they arrived at Boulogne; and was al∣ways in company with the Dukes of Alencon and Bourbon, from whom he received all sorts of civility. The Duke of Longueville frustra∣ted of his idle thoughts, and reflecting on the ransom which he owed in England, used all his
endeavours, but in vain, to pro∣cure his protection. The Queen had often declared against him, and Suffolk durst promise nothing without her Approbation. Though there be great antipa∣thy betwixt the two Nations, yet in all appearance their Adieus were friendly; and that of FRANCIS the First to the Queen, was so tender and passionate, that she could not forbear to condole the affliction that he lamented. That unseasonable and fruitless sensibleness, rendred him some∣what more afflicted than he was. He regrated the loss of her the more, that judging of her heart by some Sentiments, which on that last occasion she scrupled not to discover to him, he found her more and more worthy to be be∣loved. But at length they must part; and the grief that there∣upon he conceived, so deeply af∣fected
him, that it would have lasted much longer than it did, if he had not soon after met with great affairs that first sus∣pended, and by degrees removed it at length. In the mean time the fair Queen arrived in England after a passage as fortunate, as carried her from thence; and the King her Brother received her at Lon∣don with a countenance full of the kindness that he had always had for her, resolving immedi∣ately to compleat Suffolks bliss; but finding that the decorum of the Widow-hood of a Queen of France, would not for some time allow it, that he might of a sud∣den cut off that, and all other difficulties which might be raised by his subjects; he caused them to be privately married, reser∣ving the publication thereof, un∣til he thought it time to celebrate
the Solemnity. They were mar∣ried by the old Cardinal of York, and few were present; there be∣ing none on the part of the Duke of Suffolk, but the Marquess of Dorset, and Earl of Kildare. It would be now time to speak of their great and mutual satis∣faction, were it not very easie to be conceived, that the pos∣session of a desired happiness is so much the more pleasant, that it hath cost dear in the purchase. Never was Queen so satisfied to strip her self of Royalty, nor man so pleased with a Queen. To conclude, they deserved, as they en∣joyed, a Soveraign felicity on earth. They were from their infancy the sole delight of one another. They loved to the utmost extent of love; and their humours and inclinations suited so perfectly in all things, that notwithstanding the difference of their fortunes,
their souls had all the Qualities that might contract an indissolu∣ble Union. And therefore have they deserved the glorious name of true Lovers, and in my judg∣ment there are but few that can aspire to the Honour of such a Character. FINIS.
Postscript. THE design that I pro∣posed to my self in Writing of the En∣glish Princess, and Duke of Suffolk, suf∣fers me not to proceed any farther. Yet if any desire to know the rest of their Lives, I shall endeavour to satisfie them. About the time that they were married, HENRY the Eighth giving way to the bad counsels of Bishop Woolsey, the most part of the Grandees of England conspired against that Minister. The Duke of Suffolk was one of the first; and Woolsey declared against him with the greater heat, that looking on him as the most considerable of his Ene∣mies, he found occasion to charge
him with the restitution of certain sums of money that had been fur∣nished him out of the Treasury for his Embassy in France. It was a Largess of the Kings: but that Mi∣nister, who then had all the power in his hands, alledged it was but lent. Insomuch that the young Queen Dowager having offered for Suffolk a part of her Jewels, where∣of Woolsey immediately made use to procure a Cardinalship; their marriage came thereby to be de∣clared in an unseasonable time, which obliged them both to retire into the Countrey, to the shame of the So∣veraign that suffered it without taking notice thereof. There for the space of three years, they led a most happy life; notwithstanding the little rubs which sometimes they met with from Court; and with regret they left their solitude, when the King of England recalled them to accompany him at that famous Interview which he had with the
King of France, betwixt Ardres and Guines in the year One thou∣sand five hundred and twenty. The King of France had a great de∣sire once more to see the lovely Queen, with whom he had been so much in love; and the King of England, who in the inconstancy of mind wherewith he is charged, repented that he had consented to her re∣tirement, omitted not that occasion to put an end to it. Ʋpon his return they began at London to call her the Dutchess-Queen, in oppo∣sition to the French, who at Ardres and Guines, called her always the Queen-Dutchess. The King of France, seeing her at that time in a Beauty to which nothing could be added, though she had already had two Children, felt his old flames revive again. The action which one morning he did, when he went almost alone to visit the King of England, and which some Histori∣ans have taxed with imprudence,
was an effect of his love. His de∣sign was not to see the Brother, the Sister was his object; though he had no ground to promise him∣self success, and though he had not so much as any intelligence about her. But so soon as he was known, the Seigneur de Chalbot, and a∣nother that waited on him, advised him to come off as well as he could, which he did; and the matter past for a frolick of FRANCIS the First, who intended to give the King of England a clean shirt: and the King of England himself was thereby so deceived, that two days after, without any other de∣sign, he rendred him the like fro∣lick. If I had continued the Histo∣ry so far, it would have been pleasant to have enlarged upon that adventure, and upon all the Gal∣lantries that then passed between the two Nations, where by prodi∣gious expences, they displayed all their Glories. The King of
France, for love of the fair Queen, made at that time the Duke of Suffolk a Knight of his Order; and that illustrious Husband, was so far from taking that for a sub∣ject of jealousie, that being so well perswaded of the virtue of his Wife, he wore always the Chain and Me∣dal; even at that time when be∣ing General of the English Army, he took from the French the Towns of Mont-didier and de Roy. Brandon Duke of Suffolk, as he was one of the greatest Captains of his age, so was he likewise one of the wisest Councellors of his King; and whether in the affairs which that Prince had at the Court of Rome, and with the Emperour CHARLES the Fifth, when he intended his di∣vorce with Catherine of Spain; or otherways, when the business was to ruin Cardinal Woolsey; or in the domestick disorders, which ob∣liged
him to put to death Ann of Bolen, his second Wife; in all these he received from him very considera∣ble services: though on that last occasion, when there was a necessity of condemning a beautiful Criminal, for whom he had always entertained a great esteem, the generous Suffolk was very loth to engage. And the truth is, after that time he never enjoyed himself more. Queen Ca∣therine dying a little before that cruel execution, which would have but too much revenged her on her Ri∣val, if it had been performed in her life-time: the Dutchess-Queen died shortly after, to wit, in the twenti∣eth year of her marriage with the Duke of Suffolk. This bereft him of all comfort for the rest of his days; and being unable to abide longer at Court, as well because of that loss, as of the disorders of his King, which encreased with age, he choose rather to command the Army against the Rebels in Yorkshire, where he
fully crowned his Glory. He had five Children by the Queen, whereof the two Males dyed both in one day, of the distemper which is called the English Sweating-sickness; and of his three Daughters, who were all married to the greatest Lords of the Kingdom, the eldest named Frances, married to Henry Gray, Son to the Marquess of Dorset, his intimate friend, was the cause of his death, She falling sick in one of her Countrey-houses, and he loving that dear Daughter the more, because she per∣fectly resembled his deceased Queen, used so great diligence to come to her, that he thereby dyed. Thus the Pro∣phesie of Merlin may be seen fulfilled in his person, supposing that he had been the Grand-child of the Duke of Clarence. Since that, how innocent soever that daughter was of his Death, yet the too great zeal that he had for her, was that which destroyed him. At least to judg by the event, the words of that Astrologer seem
pretty just. The only thing that can make me doubt of it, is the little care that I see in him, during his life, to make known his secret Qua∣lity of a Prince of York. What tyranny soever may oblige a Prince to conceal himself for a time, yet if he have a great and generous soul, as Suffolk had, it is hard for him to continue always obscure; and truely royal blood soon or late becomes con∣spicuous in Heroes. Ʋnless it may be said of him, that the possession of what he loved having fulfilled all his desires, he feared either to disturb his own felicity, by discovering him∣self, or to wrong his Children, who according to the custom of England, would have certainly been put to death upon the least suspicion of the truth. FINIS.
Some Books Printed and are to be Sold by W. Cademan, at the Popes-head in the New-Ex∣change. PHaramond, or the History of France a fam'd Romance in 12 Parts; the whole work never before in English, written by the Author of Cassandra and Cleopatra. Fol. Parthanissa, that most fam'd Romance in 6 Parts, written by the Right Ho∣nourable the Earl of Orrery, in Fol. Books 4to. Protestant Religion is a sure Founda∣tion and Principle of a true Christian: written by Charles Earl of Derby. Historical Relations of the first disco∣very of the Island of Madera. A Warning to the Unruly in two Visitation-Sermons, Preached before the Arch-Bishop of York, by Seth Bushell, D. D.
The great Efficacy of the Clergy, a Visitation-Sermon by Tho. Duncomb, D. D. Mr. Barn's Sermon Preached before the King. Mr. Pigol's Sermon Preached before the Judges at Lancaster. Books 8vo. Philosophical Essays, or the History of Petrificatio, by Thomas Sherley, Dr. in Physick. The History of Scurvey-Grass, being an exact and careful description of the Nature and Medicinal vertues of that Plant, teaching how to prepare out of it plain and approved Remedies for the Scurvey, and most other Diseases, as well Galenical as Chymical, which are to be had of Scurvey-grass-Ale, con∣firmed by Reason, Experience, and Au∣thority. The Spanish History, or a Relation of the Differences that happened in the Court of Spain, between Don John of Austria and Cardinal Nitard, with other Transactions of that Kingdom; toge∣ther with all the Letters that past be∣tween Persons of the highest Quality, relating to those affairs.
PLAYS. Rival, a Comedy. Island-Princes, Co∣medy. Flora's Vagaries, Comedy. Town-shifts, a Co∣medy. Citizen turn'd Gen∣tleman, Comedy. Morning-Ramble, Comedy. Careless Lovers, Comedy. Reformation, Co∣medy. Mall or Modish Lo∣vers, Comedy. Rehersal, a Come∣dy. Mock-Tempest, a Comedy. Dumb Lady, a Co∣medy. Dutch-Lovers, a Comedy. Setle against Dryden. Herod and Mariam∣ne. Love and Revenge. Conquest of China. Constant Nimph. Pastor Fide. Tom Essence, a Co∣medy. Wandring Lovers. Catalius Conspira∣cy, Tragedy. Fatal Jealousie. Mackbeth. English-Princess. Marcelia. Spanish-Rogue. Piso's Conspiracy. Alcibiades. Siege of Memphis. Camby. Empress of Mo∣rocco.
