E3595 99825987 30379
An Exact and Faithful Account BROUGHT To a Person of Quality Of the Raising of the SIEGE of LONDONDERRY By the PROTESTANTS in Garison. With the Particulars of the Cannon and Mortars taken, and Number Slain. Licensed, June 12th. 1689. A Letter came yesterday to a Member of the Honourable House of Com∣mons, by the way of Scotland, relating to the Affairs of Londonderry, being sent directly from that Town by an Advice-Boat to Kintire, which gives such a satisfactory Account of the great and glorious Success the Pro∣testants of Derry, Bellishanon, and Iniskilling, have obtained over the Irish Army, that they have now caused them intirely to Raise the Siege, whereby they are now full Masters of the Field for 20 Miles in Circuit: Those of Derry having on the 2d of this Instant June made such a successful Sally with about 5000 Men, that in less than two hours they drove them from their Post, and had the persuit of them for Three Miles in length, having, as it is modestly computed, killed above 1500 upon the Spot, and have seized all their Cannon, Baggage, and Ammunition, being Two Brass Culverings for Battery, Five Field-Pieces, and Two Mortars. And had some days before, by the assistance of a Vessel which brought them Meal out of Scotland, attacked and became Masters of Kilmore Fort, some 3 Miles distant in the Lough from the City. And adds, That so soon as they shall have Assistance from Eng∣land, especially some Troops of Horse, they will make further progress into the Country, and already have advanced above Ten Miles, and brought into the Town a considerable Supply of Provision. The Prisoners inform, That the late King James design'd, if the Protestants had not drove them off, to call them from before it, in order to make Three Encampments, upon the Advice received from England, of the Intention of Duke Schombergh to be in person among them, who they very much dread, even the French Bravadoes themselves; and add, That whenever he arrives, he will be doubly increased in Number as well by some of the Irish, who be∣gin to be weary of the French Yoke, and think thereby to save their Estates, as by the Protestants themselves. The same Letters say, That Colonel Kirk was the 5th Instant in Ramsey Bay in the Isle of Man, having several times attempted to Sail forwards, but impeded by contrary Winds. But on the Friday following, the Wind being N. W. and by W. He, with all his Fleet, being 24 in Number, set Sail, and was out of sight, and 'tis not to be doubted but he is arrived there before this, whose coming is impatiently expected. And we hear that Capt Pettwell in the Jerusalem, with two other Ships in his Company, sailed some time be∣fore from Bristol, with intent to get into Derry, and 'tis verily believed that they have been some time since arrived, and were those Vessels that assisted in reducing the Fort of Kilmore. LONDON, Printed for J. C. near Fleet-Bridge, 1689.
