F1811 R43174 26952850 109878
AN EPISTLE TO FRIENDS For Them to Read. My Dear Friends; THE Peaceable Truth live in, which you have received from Jesus your Saviour, and that by the Grace and Truth that is come by him into your Hearts, you may all abide in Christ, and grow up in him, from whence it comes: For, as Christ saith, Except you abide in me, you can∣not bring forth Fruit. And there is none that abide in Christ, but who abide in his Light, Grace and Truth. And Christ saith, Without me ye can do nothing; who is the Heavenly and spiritual Man, the Second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, who hath all Power in Heaven and Earth given to him. So without this Truth and Grace, and the Light, and Power, and Spirit of Christ Jesus, which you receive from him, you cannot abide in him; this brings you to abide in him, and to have his Presence to strengthen you, so that through him you may do all things which he commands and requires of you. And now, Dear Friends, to the Light, and Grace, and Truth
in your Hearts you were turned at the first, and now as you do all walk in the Light, and are established in the Grace and Truth, your Hearts, Minds and Souls, it brings you to Christ, the heavenly spiritual Rock and Foundation, and to build upon him, with the Light, Grace and Truth, that comes from him; and then you will see such as Christ speaks of, that did profess him and preach him, but did not abide in his Light, Grace and Truth, so not in Christ Jesus; and such Christ will not know, that do not a∣bide in him, with his Light, Grace & Truth, from whence it comes. For the Grace, Truth and Light that cometh by Jesus, this makes Inward Christians, and Jews Inward, who have the Praise of God, though not of Men. For the Apostles in their dayes, they had to do with several sorts of People, some that preached Christ of Envy, and some of Contention, and some of Good Will, notwithstanding the Apostles rejoyced that Christ was preached. But then after a time, when many had gotten the Form of Christianity and Godliness, and denyed the Power thereof, he exhorted the Faithful, that kept their Habitation in Christ Jesus, to turn away from such. And yet such went under the Name of Christians, else they could not have the Form of Godliness. And likewise, such as got the good Words and fair Speeches, with which they deceived the Hearts of the Simple, these were got to be Preachers among the Christians. And the Heady, High-minded and Fierce Despisers, these had the Form of Godliness, though they denyed the Power of it, which they were turned from. So they that lived in the Light, Grace and Truth, and the Power and Spirit of Christ, were to turn away from such, that had the Form of Godliness, and denyed the Power. And such as these, that had the Form of Godliness and denyed the Power, were come farther than such as taught for Doctrine the Rudiments and Precepts of the World and Doctrines of Men; or the professing Jews and Gentiles, that stood against the Name of Christ, which were altogether Unbelievers of the very Form of Godliness of the New Covenant.
And likewise such, that were doting about Questions, and Strifes about Words, Vain Janglers and Disputers, Men of Corrupt Minds, and those that were Unruly, and Vain Talkers; many of these were Teachers, which were Troublers of the Churches in the Apostles dayes. And those that Peter and Jude cryed against, that were come so far as Balaam to prophesie, and Cain to hear the Voice of God, and a Corah, which came out of Aegypt; many of these got up to be Teachers, having high swelling Words, which the Apostle judged them amongst the fallen Angels, and the old World, and Sodom, who were turned to be Mockers. And such like as these were they, that separated themselves, being sensual, having not the Spirit. And so it seems these did set up Separations from the Apostles and Saints in their dayes. And the Apostle declareth, how the Lord saved his People out of the Land of Egypt, and afterward destroyed them that belie∣ved not; and the Angels that kept not their first State, but left their own Habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting Chains under Dark∣ness, unto the Judgment of the great Day. And so these, which went under the Name of Christians, that had been convinced, and had got a Form of Godliness and Christianity, that kept not their first state, in the Light, and Grace and Truth, and by it, their Habitation in Christ Jesus, they came under the Chain of Darkness. And therefore, Friends, you see how the Apostle was trou∣bled with the False Apostles and Satan's Messengers, that got a∣mong the Corinthians, and how they despised the Apostle. And likewise what was got up among the Romans and Galathi∣ans, and in the dayes of John, as he manifests in his Epistles. And therefore, how Careful were the true Apostles of the Saints in their watching over them! For John said, If ye walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, then have we Fellowship one with another. And that ye also may have Fellowship with us; for truly our Fellowship is with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ. And these things write we unto you, that your Joy may be full. For many may talk of the Light, and preach the Light; but
to walk in the Light; that is it which grafts into Christ Jesus, and brings to live in him, which talking of him doth not. And as the Apostle said, As every one hath received Christ Jesus, so walk in him. And the Sayers of the Word, and not the Doers, deceived their own Souls. So there may be many Sayers of the Word, Deceivers of their own Souls and others, and Preachers of Christ Jesus. But the Doers of the Word, and the Walkers in Christ Jesus, are they that are Accepted of the Lord. And again, as the Apostle saith, The Word of Faith was nigh them, in their Hearts and Mouthes, to obey it and do it, and that was the Word of Faith which they preached. And the Light shined in their Hearts, to give them the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Christ Jesus. And the Anointing which you have received of him, abideth in you; and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same A∣nointing teacheth you of all things, that is true, and is no Lye; and even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in him. And these things I have written unto you, saith the Apostle, concerning them that seduce you. So here may all the inward Christians in the Grace, Light, Truth, Power and Spirit of Christ Jesus, see what the Apostles exhorted the Saints unto, that they might be preserved in their day, and so by the same now, from them that deceived their own Souls and others. And so by this Light, this Word, the Anointing, Grace, Truth, Power and Spirit of Jesus Christ in the Heart, Mind and Soul, must all the Saints be guided now, by which they may me to be inward Christians, and have a Habitation in Christ Jesus, and so built upon him the living Rock and Foundation, as the Saints were in the Apostles dayes; and so to have Salt in your selves, and the Leaven in your own Meal, and the Pearl in your own Field, and your Lamps lighted in your own Tabernacles, and nourished with the Heavenly Oyl. So that you may put a Dif∣ference betwixt the Clean and the Unclean, and what you are to touch, and what you are not. And that no Man or Woman may
look below Heaven for their Bread, to nourish their Souls and inward Man, and below God and Christ for their Springs, which by continuing in the Light, which is the Life in Christ, the Word, by which all things were made and created, they shall have a Spring from him the Fountain, springing up in them to Eternal Life; so they shall have both the upper & nether Springs to nourish the Plant that God hath planted. And such as came out of Aegypt with Moses, and after re∣belled against the Lord, and Moses, and the Law and the Pro∣phets, which were a greater Grief to Moses and the Prophets than the Heathen. And likewise, those that came to be Christians called, and had got the Form of Godliness, came to be a greater Grief to the Apostles than the World; for their Work was to seek to destroy that which the Apostles had begotten, and them that they had turned to Christ. And therefore well might the Apostle exhort the Saints, to turn away from such, that had the Form of Godli∣ness, and denyed the Power; and therefore he told the Saints, The Kingdom of Heaven stands not in Words, but in Power; and there∣fore they were to know one another in the Spirit and Power, and that is the eternal Knowledge: And their Fellowship was to be in the Holy Ghost, and their Unity in the Spirit, which was the Bond of Peace: And their Fellowship was to be in the Go∣spel, which was the Power of God. So an Everlasting Fellow∣ship in the Everlasting Power of God, that will out-last the pow∣er of Darkness; for it was before it was. And also, their Uni∣ty was to be in the precious Divine Faith, which Christ was the Author and Finisher of, the Mystery of which was held in the pure Conscience; and their Worship was in the Spirit of God, and in the Truth. So you may see what a Heavenly Unity and Fel∣lowship and a Worship Christ and the Apostles set up. And the Saints in the Light, Grace, Truth, Spirit and the Power of God the Gospel, lived in it, and walked in it. So with the Light, Grace, Truth, Power, Spirit and Word of Life in the Heart, all hold Christ the Head, who is the Head of all things, by whom all things were made, who is the Treasure of the heavenly saving Wisdom and Knowledge, who is called the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven.
And therefore all are to have their Knowledge and their Wis∣dom from him the Treasure, by the Light, Grace, Truth, Power and Spirit that comes from him, it leads you to him your Trea∣sure of heavenly Wisdom and Knowledge, by which Know∣ledge you know God, and Jesus Christ whom he hath sent, which is Life Eternal to know. And now, my Dear Friends, concerning TRUE LIBERTY. THE True Liberty is in the Gospel, the Power of God, which the Devil and his Instruments, with his False Liber∣ty, cannot get into. And in this Gospel is the Saints Fellowship, which the Devil with all his false fellowships cannot get into, nor find it; for it is a Mystery. Likewise true Liberty is in the Faith, which Jesus Christ is the Author and Finisher of, which gives Victory over that which separated man and Woman from God, and by which they have access to God again. And in this holy, pure, divine, precious Faith, that is held in the pure Conscience, which pure Conscience hath its pure, holy, divine, precious Liberty, in this holy, divine, precious Faith, which works by Love (and not as the dead Faith doth, which works by Enmity) which is the Fruit of this holy, pure, divine Faith: and in it is the divine, pure, holy, precious Liberty and Freedom. So here is the divine, holy, pure and precious Liberty in this Faith, which works by Love, that is the Victory over that which brought Man and Wo∣man into Bondage, and Slavery, and False Liberty. So this living Faith is the Victory over all dead Faiths and false Freedoms and Liberties; which holy, divine, pure and precious Faith, the Saints were and are to contend for, which Christ the Holy One is the Author and Finisher of: So in this holy, divine, pure and pre∣cious Faith, they have a holy, divine, pure and precious Unity and Liberty, which is the Victory over the Enmity & the Adversary,
the Destroyer, and all his Instruments; and they cannot come within this holy, divine, pure and precious Unity and Liberty, which is in the Faith; for it is a Mystery: and gives Victory over him, and is the Access to the pure God, and to Christ the Au∣thor of it; which all are to stand fast in that Liberty wherewith Christ hath made them free, who is the heavenly and spiritual Man, the second Adam. For the Bondage, Captivity and Thraldom, False Freedom and False Liberty was and is in old Adam, in Transgression; & the true Liberty is that, which Christ the pure & holy One makes free in; and this is a pure holy Liberty, which Christ makes, and sets his People free in; in which they are all to stand fast over all the false Liberties and Freedoms, which are Bondage. Also, the true Liberty is in the Truth, which if the Truth hath made you free, then are you free indeed, from him that abode not in the Truth. in whom there is no Truth. So then there is no true Freedom nor Liberty in him; and he in whom there is no Truth, cannot come into this Freedom and Liberty, which is in the Truth, but remains in the False. For the Jews in the dayes of Christ, boasted of their Liberty and Freedom, though they were in Bondage both inwardly and outwardly; and that they were of Abraham their Father; but Christ told them, The Devil was their Father, & his lusts ye will do. And also, in the dayes of the Apostles, many of the False Christians boasted of their Liberty; but who was overcome by them, was brought into Bondage. And the Apostle was so careful of his Liberty in Christ Jesus, that such as came to spye it out, & were somewhat in Conference; but they added nothing to him; and unto such he would not give place by Subjection, but rather reproved them; and directed every one to walk according to the measure of the Rule which God had distributed to them. And also, True Liberty is in the Light and Grace, and the Spirit which comes by Jesus, which by believing in the Light, they are grafted into Christ, and so into true Liberty and Free∣dom, and so are entred into the Rest, out of the Toil of old Adam; for they are grafted into him who was before old Adam was.
For Unbelievers in the Light, are grafted into old Adam, in Transgression. And the Believers in the Light, which is the Life in Christ, are grafted into Christ the Word, by which all things were made and Created. So here is perfect true Freedom and Liberty. And likewise, the true Liberty and Freedom is in the Grace, which brings Salvation, and not Destruction; and teaches to live Godly, not Ungodly; and Soberly, not Unsoberly; and Righ∣teously, not Unrighteously: and teaches to deny the World, and not to cleave to it and to follow it. This Grace stablishes the Heart, and seasons the Words; the Fruits of its Liberty and Freedom will manifest it self. And also, the True Liberty in the pure holy Spirit of God and Christ doth baptize and plunge down that which is gotten up by Transgression in Man and Woman, and Circumcises and cuts off the Body of Death and Sin in the Flesh, that is gotten up in Man and Woman by Transgression, and mortifies and kills that which would grieve, vex or quench the Motions of the pure Spirit of God, so that in this holy pure Spirit of this pure God and Christ, is the holy pure Freedom and Liberty over all Bondage and false Liberties and Freedoms. And the Fruits of this pure Spirit is pure Love, Righteousness and Godliness, Patience, Temperance and Humility; by which Spirit all are made to drink into one Spirit; so that all are the li∣ving Wells, that have their living Water from God and Christ, their true and living Fountain; and in which Spirit they have a holy and spiritual Fellowship, in this Baptizing, Mortifying, Cir∣cumcising Spirit, yea, one with another, and with the Son and the Father also, through which the Love of God warms every one; Heart. But when the Love of many waxes cold, as Christ saith, then they go from this Grace, Light, Truth, Power and Spirit, and the Anointing, and the Word of God in their own Hearts; then such turn to be Betrayers, and not Saviours upon Mount Sion: And against such God's swift Judgment turns, and suddainly falls, though they may cry for a time, Liberty, Freedom and Peace, Peace; but a Day of Trouble will overtake them ere they are aware. And therefore all ye Friends of Christ Jesus, stand fast in that
Liberty wherewith Christ Jesus hath made you free, by his Light Grace, Truth, Spirit, Faith and Everlasting Gospel, the Everla∣sting Power of God, which is an Everlasting Freedom and Li∣berty above all Bondage and false fallen Liberties and Freedoms; in this glorious Gospel and glorious joyful Liberty, where all may exercise God and Christ's holy Gifts in his holy supernatural Light, Grace, Truth, Spirit, and divine Faith, & Word of Life, and the Gospel; which Word cannot be bound with all the World's Cords or Chains; for it is a Fire to burn, and a Hammer to break, and a Sword to cut in pieces: and therefore Love the Word, and keep the Word of Patience, and the Lord will keep you (for it is a tryed Word, and it will keep you) in all Tryals, which shall come upon all the World to try them: for the Word was before the World was, and will be when the World is gone, which all the new born Babes of the incorruptible Seed of the Milk of the Word, grow by it up into an immortal Life, and Kingdom that is without End; Glory and Praises to the Lord God forever. And now ye Babes of Christ, If the World do hate you, it hated Christ your Lord and Master also; if they do meek, and reproach, and defame, and buffet you; they did so to your Lord and Master also, who was and is the Green Tree, that gives Nourishment to all his Branches his Followers. Now, if the World do persecute you, and take away your Goods or Clothes, was not your Lord and Master so served? did not they cast Lots for his Garments? was not he haled from the Priests to Herod, and before Pontius Pilate, and spit upon? and if they hate thee, and spit upon thee, he was hated and spit upon for thee: did he not go to Prison for thee? and was he not mocked and scourged for thee? did not he bow to the Cross and Grave for thee, he who had no Sin, neither was Guile found in his Mouth? and did he not bear thy Sins in his own Body upon the Tree? and was he not scourged for thee? by whose Stripes we are healed: did not he suffer the Contradiction of Sinners, who dyed for Sinners, and went into the Grave for Sinners, and dyed for the Ungodly, yea, tasted Death for every man, who through Death destroyed Death, and the Devil, the power of Death, and is risen; for Death and the Grave could not hold him, nor the Powers and
Principalities, with all their Guards and Watches, could not hold him within the Grave, but he is risen, and is ascended far above all Principalities, Powers, Thrones and Dominions, and is set down at the Right Hand of God, and remaineth in the Heavens till all things be restored: And he is restoring with his Light, Grace, Truth, Power, Spirit, Faith, Gospel and Word of Life; so that you read of some, that came to sit together in Heavenly Places in Christ Jesus. And therefore all must bow at the Name of Jesus their Saviour, in his Light, Grace, Truth, Power, Spirit and Gospel (for he hath bowed for you) if you rise with him: And you must suffer with him, if you will reign with him; and dye with him, if you will live with him. And all that are dead and yed with Christ, and are risen with him, they will seek those things that come down from above, where Christ sits at the Right Hand of God; and there you will seek those things which come down from above, and not those things which are below. For those which seek those things that are below, are the Tall∣ers of God and Christ, and the Prophets and the Apostles words; but they are not dead with Christ, nor risen with him; and there∣fore they cannot seek those things that come down from Heaven, where Christ sits at the Right Hand of God. But they are them that seek the things that are Above, that are dead with Christ, and risen with him; they, I say, do seek those things which come down from Heaven, where Christ sits at the Right Hand of God; and they have not only sought them, but have found them and received them, and come to sit together in Heavenly Places in Christ Jesus, a safe established and heavenly sitting in a heaven∣ly Rest and Habitation in Christ Jesus, who is the First and Last, and over all, from Everlasting to Everlasting; Blessings and Praises over all be to the Lord God through him forever, Amen. The Eternal living God of Truth, he is a God of Order, and is not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace in all the Churches of the Saints. Now, the Author of Confusion, and not of Peace, is the God of the World, who abode not in the Truth, because there is no Truth in him; and when he speaks a Lye, he speaks of his own; for he is a Lyar, and the Father of it.
Now, the Jews, which did the God of the World's Lusts, and them called Christians that do, were in Strife, Confusion and Disorder. For the Jews, they went out of the Order of Aaron and Mo∣ses, going from the Spirit of God poured out upon the House of Israel, and so went from the Lord and his Law, went into Confusion and Disorder, which the living God of Truth was not the Author of. Also the Christians, which go from the Light, Grace, Truth, Power, Spirit, Gospel and Faith, which Christ Jesus is the Au∣thor of, they go from Christ and his Order, who was not made a Priest after the Order of Aaron, but after the Order of Mel∣chizedech, who was without beginning of Dayes or end of Life, an Everlasting Order. And such go into Strife and Confusion that go from Christ, which Christ and God is not the Author of, but the World's God, who got into Man and Woman by Transgression and Diso∣bedience of the Command of God; who is the God of Confu∣sion, Strife and Disorder, in whom there is no Truth. For what Order can there be in the World's God, and amongst his Subjects, in whom there is no Truth; and in whom there is no Truth, there is no true Order; and they that abide not in the Truth, Grace, Light, Spirit, Gospel, Faith and Word of Life, they abide not in the Order of God and Christ. And such will cry against the Order of the Truth, Light, Grace, Spirit, Gospel, Faith and Word of Life, which brings into the Order of Christ, and the Order of the living eternal God of Truth, who is a God of Order, and delights in Order, having Pleasure in them that live in his Spirit, and Law of Life, and the Gospel, and its Order. For blessed is the Man that de∣lights in the Law or Order of God; it was so under the old Co∣venant: much more blessed is the Man or Woman that delights in the Law and Order of Love, and the Law and Order of Faith, and the Law and Order of Life, and of the Gospel, the Power of God. And none keep the Law of Faith, but who keep in the Faith which Christ is the Author of, which works by Love. And none
keep the Law of Life, but who keep in the Law of the Spirit, and walk in it, which is in Christ Jesus, the heavenly and spiritu∣al Second Adam, who was before old Adam was, who was un∣der the World's God, out of Truth, i whom there is no Truth nor true Order, but Confusion and Unruliness. And therefore all who come to God, who is a God of Order, must come by the Grace, Truth, Light, Power, Gospel, Faith and Aninting, the Word of Life within; and such come to love the Lord Jesus Christ, and to delight in God and Christ's Order. So you may see, that God is a God of Order, who called Aaron and Moses, and they had an Order from God. And Melchize∣deck had an Order; and Christ is after his everlasting Order. And Christ the Truth hath an everlasting Kingdom, that stands in everlasting Righteousness, and Power & Joy in the holy Ghost; yea, an established Kingdom, that will never have an end, and can∣not be broken: and no imperfect, defiled nor corruptible thing enters into it. And all Christ Jesus his Subjects of his everlasting Kingdom, that see it, and enter into it, are born again not by the Will of Man, but of an incorruptible Seed, by the Word of God, and have the incorruptible Milk of the Word of God, by which they grow from Babes to Men of God; and have the Fine Linnen, the In∣corruptible Clothing, the Righteousness of Christ, which is the Fine Linnen, which they do wear in Christ's Kingdom. So all Christ's Subjects of his Kingdom are known by their Birth and Clothes, and live in his Order of his Gospel of Love, Life, Light, Grace and Truth; which no man comes into his Kingdom and Order, but by the Light, Grace and Truth, Faith, Power and Spirit, and Anointing, and Word of Life within, through which they know Christ, and his Everlasting Kingdom, that stands in Power and Righteousness, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; and by it keep in his Order of the Law of Life, which they have in Christ Jesus. And they that follow the World's God, that are out of Truth, & disobey their Creator, the God of Truth, and the Lord Jesus Christ; I say, all such obey and follow him in whom there is no Truth; and such cannot endure to hear talk of the Order of
Truth and of the Gospel, or the Law, or Order of the Spirit of Life which is in Christ Jesus, which all they that do obey the Voice of the Lord, and Christ Jesus in his Light, Grace and Truth, and Gospel, the Power of God, and his Holy Spirit, and Faith, and Word of Life within, come into Unity and Fellowship one with another, and with the Son, and with the Father; and in this they know the Order of Christ, and God to be a God of Order, and delights in his Heavenly and Eternal Or∣der of Light, Life, Power and Spirit of God, that is over Death and Darkness, and the World's God, who is a God of Disorder, in whom there is no true Order, but Confusion; and into this holy Order of the Everlasting Light & Life he cannot come: Glo∣ry to the Lord God, and his Son Christ Jesus, who is over all from Everlasting to Everlasting, and is the Rock and Foundation and Habitation of his People, blessed forever and evermore, Amen, G. F. Postscript. HERE you may see by these following Scrip∣tures, how the Apostles loved the good and holy Order of Christ in his Gospel, and Light, and Life and Truth; but as Job said, The Land of Darkness is without any Order. And Babylon signifies Confusion, which is the False Church, and is called a Woman, and a City of Confusion, who is against the Order of the true Church, and gets the Titles of the true Church that
is called a City, and a Woman, which brings forth the Man Child, Christ Jesus; and of the inerease of his Go∣vernment and Peace there shall be no end; who sits upon the Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom, to Order it, to stablish it with Judgment and with Justice, from hence∣foth and forever. So here you may see Christ doth order in his Kingdom; and them that have him, have his Order, Isa. 9. And David saith, Although mine House be not so with God, yet he hath made with me an Everlasting Covenant, Ordered in all things, and sure for all my Salvation, and all my Desire, &c. 2 Sam. 23. Again, David saith, Order my Steps by thy Word, and let not Iniquity have Dominion over me, Psalm 119.133. Which is the Duty of every true Christian, to have their Steps ordered by the Word of God, that lives, and abides, and endures forever; which Word is a Word of Order. And David saith, The Steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, and he delights in his Way. I have been young and now am old, yet I have not seen the Righteous forsaken, nor his Seed begging Bread: He is ever merciful, and lend∣eth, and his Seed is blessed, Psal. 37. Here you may see, how the Lord delights in him and them that walk in the Steps the Lord orders them with his Word. And him that orders his Conversation aright, shall see the Salvation of God, Psalm 49. And this Order must be in the Light, which is the Life in Christ the Saviour. And the Apostle Paul, after he had spoken many things to the Corinthians, he said, The rest will I set in Order when I come, 1 Cor. 11.
And he saith concerning the Collections for the Saints in 1 Cor. 16. As I have given Order to the Churches of Galatia, even so do ye (to wit, the Corinthians.) So they were to practise the same Order, which were the Believers in Christ, which the Apostle in the Power of Christ had given to them. For the Apostles had the Wisdom of God, which he had ordained before the World, unto the Glory of his People then and now also, 1 Cor. 2. And the Order that the Apostle did give to the Churches of the Galatians and the Corinthians was, That upon the First Day of the Week, every one of them lay by him in store as God had prospered him, &c. And in Acts 14. When they had Ordained Elders in every Church, and had prayed, they commended them to the Lord on whom they had believed, con∣firming the Souls of the Disciples, &c. and exhort∣ing them to continue in the Faith; and that they might pass thorow much Tribulation to enter into the Kingdom of God. And as Paul and others with him went through the Cities, they delivered them the Decrees for to keep, that were Ordained of the Apostles and Elders which were at Jerusalem, and so were the Churches establish∣ed in the Faith, and increased in Number daily, Acts 16. And the Occasion of these Decrees was, because some men that went from Judea, taught the Brethren, saying, Except ye be Circumcised after the Manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved, Acts 15. And these De∣crees were to stop such Preachers. For the Apostles and Elders said, Forasmuch as
we have heard, that certain which went out from us, have troubled you with words, subverting your Souls, saying, Ye must be Circumcised, and Keep the Law; to whom we gave no such Command∣ment. Now it is clear, the Apostles and Elders gave these Teachers no such Commandment, to preach such Do∣ctrine to trouble the Churches. And the Apostle Paul, after he had spent some time at Caesaria and Antioch, he went over all the Coun∣try of Asia and Phrygia in Order, strengthning all the Disciples, Acts 18. So you may see, how they were a Comfort one to another. And the Apostle writes to Titus, Chap. 1. For this Cause I have left thee in Creete, that thou shouldst set in Order the things that are wanting; and Ordain Elders in every City, as I have appointed thee. So here Titus in the Spirit of God did observe that which Paul in the Power of Christ did exhort him to. But such as are against the Order and Practice in the Light and Gospel, cannot Order their Speeches by rea∣son of Darkness. And the Apostle saith in Col. 2. Though I be absent in the Flesh, yet am I with you in the Spirit, joying and beholding your Order, and steadfastness of your Faith in Christ: As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him. Here the Apostle rejoyced in the Order that kept them in the Faith and Stedfastness in Christ Je∣sus,
Therefore the Apostle saith, Every man in his own Order, Christ the First Fruits, &c. For in Adam all dyed, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. And they that be alive in Christ Jesus, are in his Order of Life and Light, and in his Gospel the Power of God. And the Apostle saith in 1 Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done Decently and in Order. And the Heavens and the Earth, and all things therein, are Governed and Ordered by the Lord in his Power and Wisdom; and all God's holy Angels are Governed and Ordered by God; and all God's Children and People are Governed and Ordered by God and Christ in his Light, and Spirit, and Grace, and Truth, and Power, Gospel and Word of Life. And the Lord hath set apart him and them that are Godly for himself, Psalm 4. And God hath Ordained his Arrows against the Persecu∣tors, Psalm 7. And it ought to be the Practice of all the true Christians now, that are in the same Power and Spirit as the Apostles were in, to let all things be done De∣cently and in Order, in the New Covenant of Light, Life and Grace, to the Glory of the Great God, who is over all, and orders all things to his Glory, Amen. G. F.
AND now Friends, you who are called into this glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, stand fast in it. And as the Apostle saith, Brethren, ye have been called unto Liberty, only use it not for an Occasion to the Flesh; but in Love serve one another, Gal. 5. As free, not using your Liberty for a Cloak of Malici∣ousness, but as the Servants of God, 1 Pet. 2. For there were some, who while they promised themselves Liberty, they themselves were Servants of Corruptions: such were like the Dog and the Sow, biting, and renting, and vomiting, and wallowing in the Mire; and as bad as the Synagogue of the Li∣bertines that turned against Stephen, 2 Pet. 2. and Acts 7. And therefore the Apostle was careful of the Churches Liberty in Christ, when he said, But take heed, lest this Liberty of yours become a Stumbling-block to them that are Weak, &c. 1 Cor. 8. For the Apostle was so careful and tender, that he would not have his true Liberty judged of another man's Conscience, &c. as you may see more at large in 1 Cor. 10. And the Apostle said, False Brethren came unawares privily, to spy out their Liberty, which they had in Christ Jesus, that they might bring them into Bondage; to whom we gave place by Subjection, no not for an Hour, that the Truth of the Gospel might continue with you (to wit, the Galatians) Gal. 2. And therefore he exhorts them to stand fast in
that Liberty wherewith Christ Jesus hath made them free, &c. which is the Duty of all true Christians now, for to stand fast in that heavenly glorious Liberty which Christ the heavenly and spiritual man, the Se∣cond Adam, makes them free in; and in this they will all have Salt and Savour in themselves to discern between the true Liberty and Freedom and the false, and know how to use their holy and spiritual Liberty and Freedom in Christ Jesus to the Praise and Glory of God. So Friends, The Lord God Almighty preserve you all, in the Heavenly Order of Christ Jesus, in his ho∣ly Seed, Life, Power and Spirit, that all may live and walk in it, to the Praise, and Glory, and Honour of God and Christ, Amen. The 3d of the 9th Moneth, 1679. G. F. THE END.
