F2303A R213213 99825685 30071
A FULL and TRUE ACCOUNT Of the DISCOVERY of the Late Treasonable Plot SCOTLAND, As also of the Original Bond of Association, that several disaffected Persons have entred into, and Signed, against the Government; and of the Seizing of several Persons in the House, of the Lord Olyphant, where the said Association was found. LICENSD. March y. 1690. I Doubt not but you may, have heard several Reports about an Association, that several of the Highland Clans, and other disaffected Persons were entring into against the Government, and to support the declining Interest of King James in this Kingdom. But till of late I have not been able to give you any certain Account of what I was doing, and contriving amongst those Persons, the Discove∣ry whereof happen'd in the following manner. It was dis∣coursed of in the North, especially in the Shire of Bamf, That a certain number of Men were going up and down to seve∣ral Gentlemen's Houses, whom they believed well inclin'd to contribute their Endeavours to keep up the Rebellion and to assist Coll. Cannon, who Commands amongst the Highland∣ers, and to get them to set their Hands to a Bond of Asso∣ciation, which was prepared for that purpose, name To stand by King James with their Lives and Fortunes, and pro∣mise never to lay down their Arms, until they had setled him again in Scotland. There was private Intimation of such an Association, and a meeting of some 10 or 12 of the Party, to be held at the Lord Olyphant's House in Bamf It concer Matters about the signing of the Bond, given to Sir Thomas
Levingston, who Commands a Regiment of Dragoons at In∣verness, who immediately dispatch'd 100 of his Men, under the Command of Capt. Hay, and another Captain, with Instructions to them, to March with what Diligence they could to the said Lord Olyphant's House, and when they came there, to see, and search if there were any Strangers in the House, and in case there were any considerable number of them, to secure them; but in case there were none but those of the Family in the House, not to make any further enquiry, or to disturb them. This Party marched with that Diligence and Secre∣cy, that they came and surrounded the Lord Olyphant's House before he had any Suspition or Notice of their marching that way; they found 10 or 12 Gentlemen, Strangers in the House, besides those of the Family, whom they presently secured; then they searched into a Closet, to see what Papers they could find, and a∣mongst other things, they had the good Fortune to light upon the Original Bond of Association, with the Hands of about 400 Persons to it; some whereof were Heads of Clans, and other Heritors; many were such as were of desperate Fortunes, ruined in their Credit and Do∣mestick Affairs, whom no Law could reach, and such like Circumstances. This Paper was immediately sent to the Pri∣vy Council, and from thence transmitted to His Majesty. The Privy Council upon so important a Discovery, has or∣dered Parties to go out and apprehend as many as they can of those Persons, who have Signed the said Assocition; whereof I hope to be able to give you some good Account by the next: Amongst other Matters, which I am told are contain'd in the Association, besides the general Expression, of standing with their Lives and Fortunes by King James, and to endeavour the Settling of him on the Throne of Scotland; they engage and oblige themselves in particular, To appear with all the Men they can raise, and Interest they have in their respective Places of Abode, in June next, and joyn Coll. Cannon, and the rest of the Rebels now in Lochaber, and to furnish them with Victuals and necessary Provisions. The said Lord Olyphant, and all the Conspirators that were found at his House, are sent Prisoners under a strong Guard to Aberdeen. Besides the said Original Association, there were found other Treasonable Papers, which will not a little contribute towards the Discovery of the secret, as well as publick Enemies of the present Government. LONDON: Printed for Rich. Baldwin. 1690.
