F2284 R215796 99827565 31987
A Full and Impartial ACCOUNT OF THE Late Besieging and Taking OF THE Famous Castle of Killishandra▪ In the Province of Ʋlster in IRELAND: BY THE Brave Inniskilling Forces. ALSO, K. James's late Proclamation from Dublin, and the great scarcity of Pro∣visions there. With the present State of the Late King's Affairs, in the Province of Lenester and Ʋlster. Licens'd, J. Fraser, And Entered according to Order. Dear Sir, SInce my last, here being several Gen∣tlemen of good Repute, both from Dublin, and the North of Ireland arrived, I think it not amiss to fur∣h you with the true state and condition Affairs, in and about both the fore∣ntioned Places, as it hath been related to me by the said Gentlemen, from one Mr. Johnson, and three others that left Dublin the 6th. instant, and came here in an open Boat. We are informed that all sorts of Provisions are extreamly scarce and deer, in and about Dublin: That Mutton is sold at Seven Pence, and Beef at Four
Pence a Pound. That there is little or no Bread to be had for money: an Alderman of Dublin, having declared to one Mr. Shirely, who came from the said City, that he and his Family had not tasted one bit in four daies. That the late King had taken up all the Corn, and ordered it to be stored up for his use: And that it was discoursed; that a Proclamation was in the Press, for all Protestant Women and Chil∣dren, to depart Dublin, to the North of Ireland, and the Men to the Province of Connagh. He further saith, that he saw Two Gompanies of the French Supplies, march into Dublin; and that several others were on their march that way. And that neither the late King, nor the Irish, are so well pleased therewith as was expected; most of the Men, of which the Regiments are composed, being Prisoners of War, and other Countries, and not Natives of France; for which Reason they rather distrust them, then rely on their Truth and Fidelity to their Cause. The Regi∣ments sent to France, in lieu of these Sup∣plies, are the Lord Castles, Collonel Browns, Coll. Buter, Coll. Bryens, Coll. Fieldings, and two others, whose Names we can∣not learn. That several of the Irish not being willing to leave their own Country, deserted; and that at least one Thousand Protestants were Pressed, to fill up the Vacancies. A Ship of ours, brought in here Fif∣teen Prisoners, which she took Sailing in a Boat, between Wexsord and Dublin, (Four of which are Officers of the Irish Army) who affirm to us, that the late King, takes away, as well the Goods of Papists as Protestants, that are Vendable in France (such as Tallow, Hydes, Wooll, &c.) paying the one half in Copper Mo∣ney now, and the other half at his Re-esta∣blishment in England. By the Lord Done∣gall, who arrived here on Thursday last, from our Army in Ireland, we are infor∣med, that Charlemont is now actuall Besieged: That the Miners Bombs, M¦ters, Battering Pieces, Ammunition, an all other necessaries, were brought the before he left Ireland: And that two  our French Regiments, lye now bef the Town. That the Garrison is mu straitned for want of Provisions; so th if it be not taken by Storm, they will b forced suddenly to Surrender. There arrived at Highlake this Wee about 60 Sail of Ships from Bellfast, whic bring us an account that the Money an Forces Shipp'd off here, under the Com of Sir Cloudsly Shovell were safe arri there, and that Sir Cloudsly, with abo 12 Men of War, left Carruckfergus  Wednesday last, and steered their Cou towards Dublin-Bay. That part of t Garrison of Belturbet, have taken the C¦stle of Killishandra, three Miles distant fro Belturbet, in which was three hundred In Soldiers, furnished with great store Provision: The manner of its taking thus, a detached Party from Beltur consisting most of the Inniskillin M (who well knew the Country) marc out in the Night, and before break of D were got under the Walls of the Cas and immediately fell to Digging, and U¦dermining the Walls, which noise  bussel soon alarmed the Garrison. Thou at our Mens Approach, they w fast asleep. This sudden surprize ¦ing not agreeable to the Irish Warri and finding themselves so beset, that they imagine) they could not peep o without danger (to their eternal sham they surrendred upon discretion. Yes¦day marched from this City to High L Eight hundred Men, in order to the Transportation; and this Night one Reg¦ment of Foot is expected here, a gr number of Ships lying at High Lake read to receive them. LONDON, Printed for R. H. in Little Britain, 1690.
