h1167 12275557 58436
MILITARY AND SPIRITUALL MOTIONS, FOR Foot Companies. VVith an Abridgement of the Exercise of a single Com∣pany, as they now ought to be taught, and no otherwise. Composed in IRELAND, and now published for the good of his fellow Soldiers in ENGLAND, By Captaine Lazarus Haward, of Ailsford in Kent. soldier London, Printed by Tho. Harper, and are to be sold in Little Britain. 1645.
To the Honorable Sir Anthony Weldon Knight, and the rest of the Honble Deputy Lievte∣nants and Comittees of the County of Kent. Honourable Gentlemen, THE noble favours I daily receive from you, since my arrivall out of Ireland, into this County, hath imboldned me to offer this poor tribute of mine experience, not to teach your uncontrollable knowledges, but humbly de∣sire it may kisse your hands, as a sacrifice offe∣red from your servant, or as a weaknesse that stands in need of your protections. In your Honours I know is power to judge of my labour, and in you also is power to exercise mercy; I hope I have written nothing that is erring from sence or truth: having not laboured mine own, but the profit of my poore bleeding, dying Country-men, whom these miserable times have called out to this miserable unnaturall War: desiring not only his temporall victo∣ry, (but above al) his spirituall. There may be many puny Scho∣lars that from these briefe Rules, may gather more abler judge∣ments: Your noble favours and allowance can only make it acce∣ptable to those which need it, especially in this Country, which I wish to be served by it: then let those graces fly from your noble natures, that as now I live, I may die your Honours poore Servant and Soldier L. H.
To the Curteous Reader. I Have not presumed to adde any thing to the uncontrollable knowledges of such as have formerly taken much pains in writing at large upon this Subject of drilling, drayning, or exercising of Foot Companies, nor any new thing to catch covetous spirits, but only what may ever be embra∣ced of solid and substantiall judgements: Innovations and divisions have stirred up such dismall distractions, that it hath brought us neere to a fearefull desolation: and that which by the blessing of God should be the principall means of our restoring, being the Honourable art of War, is with the times, much of it be∣come full of divisions and divisionall practises, onely serving to delight curious spe∣ctators, otherwise dangerous to the poore soldier, if ever he be brought upon service, the actors little regarding the old briefe rules from whence their new devised divisi∣onall whimzies are fetcht. But since peace it lost, and the devouring sword strives to be conquerour of all, and fearing that thou that art my fellow soldier who standst in need not only of military discipline, but also in more need of spirituall, so that not having put on S. Pauls spirituall armour, nor beene exercised in any spirituall mo∣tions, thou be in danger to lose both soule and body together: Let me intreat thee to peruse these few briefe rules, concerning the defence of thy soule and body both: the brevity of the rules which thou art to use for defence of thy body will affoord thee sufficient time: peruse and double over those good motions, admonitions, sentences and sayings, as their letters have linkt them to their order, which being well obser∣ved, will bring thee to be a soldier of that great Captaine, Christ Jesus, under whose obedience is obtained ever lasting victory, and a crowne of glory. Thus uni∣formity in discipline spirituall and temporall, will make us like the Israelites, go up as one man with one heart, and in one forme; and so take away the evill from before our brethren, and so once more enjoy a happy peace in Church and State, this being the briefest way to give an end to our miserable troubles: having comprehended the full and whole Exercise of a Foot Company in the last sheet of this Booke, I com∣mend thee to it and the rest, which being construed according to my honest meaning, I have got my desire, and shall ever rest at thy service Lazarus Haward.
Military Motions for Exercising of Foot Companies. S Ilence is the daughter of shamefastnesse, both which as they are excu∣ses for mediocrity, so they are prejudices to excellencies. I t is a shame a godly mans zeal should not be as couragious to defend the truth as a wicked mans malice is violent to oppose it. L et heaven thunder, earth and hell roar, speak for the truth, for it is truth that preserves our lives, and makes us blessed for ever. E vill thoughts can seldome bring forth good words, never good deeds: for as corne is, so will the flower be. N othing more lewd then error; the more false the matter, the greater noise to hold it up. C ursed is that speech, that is either against the God of truth, or against Gods truth, or against the friend of both, God and truth. E very man that is Christs Souldier, will fight for him. S erve the time I wicked counsell: we are made to serve God. T hat minde can never be steady, that stands upon anothers feet, untill it will rather lead then follow. A Commonwealth is a tent picht up to shelter men from wrong, that they may live happily together: Lawes are the cords of it, breake the cords, and the tent falls. N othing that the Law allowes, but the male-content censures; what it forbids, that he strives to justifie: but thats a treacherous hand that steals away from States-men their reputation. D ivinity is a mistresse for the highest masters of men: and the Scripture is the best counsellour for the greatest States-man in the World. R ulers to be unrighteous, are like blazing Stars with long tailes, drawing traines of mischiefe after them; and is ominous to a whole Kingdome: but piety in a Prince, blesseth all his Subjects. I f Magistrates will uphold Gods Kingdome, he will uphold theirs: if they will have God to be mindfull of them in his mercie, they must be minde∣full of him in their businesse. G od permits false teachers for mans ingratitude: because Ahab will not beleeve Micha, a lying spirit shall deceive his Prophets. H ee that comes in Gods name, and is sent; yet delivers a false message, when he is come is a falsifier of Gods Word. T o intangle the soul with multitude of traditions, ceremonies, and uncon∣cerning rites is to be condemned; for it takes away liberty of conscience.
I t would coole the heart of the Devill if the Church had escaped the in∣genious solicitations of our superstitious teachers, who not only trouble the waters of our peace, but poyson her very springs of life. N o sooner was God worshipped and served, but hatred and spight fell to the portion and lot of Religion. Y f false teachers had not store of followers, hereticall positions would fall to the ground, and themselves slinke away with reproach and shame. O ur wickednesse in these daies and dangerous times, proceeds not from weake, but from wilfull ignorance. V iolent opposing the truth (which we have rejected) with tongue and hand, justifying and defending mischievous opinions against the Gospell of Christ, is a deniall of Christ in judgement. R eligion in an unstable man lyes alwaies in wait for the inclination of his Prince, as a Spaniell hunts according to the face of his Master. F easting sinners doe little know how neare jollitie is to perdition, judge∣ment is often at the threshold, when drunkennesse is at the table. I n vaine doe they flye whom God pursues, for there is no mountaine so high but God can reach it, no depth so low but his eye sees it, and power reaches it. L ying and false teachers are amongst us by Gods permission, that the true only might more painfully and patiently exercise their knowledge. E very one that desires to be true to himselfe, and free from all errors, let him be sure to be true to Christ. S uperstition first loves, and then beleeves; but true Religion first beleeves and then loves. S inne at first was the cause of ignorance, now ignorance is the cause of sinne; as long as we thinke we see we continue blinde, when we per∣ceive our blindnesse then we begin to see. T he first punishment of sinne is blindnesse of minde, and that blindnesse is the cause of future sin. A lewd man is a pernitious creature, that the damnes his owne soule is the part of his mischiefe, for he commonly draws vengeance upon a thou∣sand, either by desert of his sin, or by the infection of it. N ever was any man so desperately wicked, but he had some followers, Lucifer fell not alone from heaven. D estruction should teach us to thinke of our sins; doe we marvell at this distracted age? every man look to his own sins, and cease marvelling. R ankmirth, with full bellies, with gaming and wine, hath laid us all open to the Divell.
I t is just that they who have made themselves partners in sinning, should not be separated in suffering. G od is not just without mercy; nor mercifull without justice, slow to an∣ger, yet he will not acquit the wicked. H ee that will not take Gods word for good, shall feele his sword for evill; so near is unbeleef to Atheisme, as the word of God is to the noblenesse of his Majesty. T he Almighty hates to be disturbed, and accounts infidelity so much a greater sin then another. I t is ridiculous for a man to professe he is going to heaven, when his whole life is forwarding him to hell. N o man can charge God with over hastinesse; for if he should be angry as often as we sin, and strike as often as he is angry, what man could escape? Y f the summons of vengeance should awake us to repentance, we shall no sooner change our mindes, but God will change his sentence. O pennesse of sinne hath saved justice a labour of inquisition; there needs no hue and crie after the thiefe that presents himselfe. V engeance is alwaies Gods owne weapon, so appropriated to his hand that no creature can meddle with it. R oot out all corruption out of thy heart, or else it will root thee out of the land: for concupiscence is to a man, as Peter to the Maid that made him deny his Master. R ighteous art thou, O Lord, and just in thy judgements: no man can con∣fesse this, but such as live uprightly and truly as he hath commanded. A ll complaine, yet every man addes to the heap of sin, redresse stands not in words, but each man amend one, and we may all live. N ever did God so irrevocably threaten judgement for sin, but the peni∣tent confession of the sinner cancels and avoids the sentence. K nowing the sweetnesse and excellencie of Christ we cannot but love him; and if we love him, it must needs be grievous to us to lose him. S inners may so weary the invincible patience of God, that he may say of them as he did to Ephraim: Ephraim is joyned to Idolls, let him alone. T he Divell is let loose for a season to try the patience of Gods Church; yet let falsity vomit her poyson for a while, we shall finde saving health in Christ. O ur enemies, O Lord, are near us to hurt us; but thou art near to helpe us: thou art Judge of the whole World, therefore deliver thy people. T he sword never prevailed, but sin set an edge upon it; God indeed is judge of all, but sin is the cause of all. H asten from the company of the wicked, that there may be no stay in
your passage to heaven for feare judgement overtake you. E ven as our teares must slacken Gods bow, so our prayers must get out his arrows when they sticke fast in our sides. R ipenesse of sinne makes ready Gods wrath; so that neither greatnesse nor strength can protect us. I t is a grievous judgement upon a Nation, when teachers sent for mans salvation, shall become meanes of their confusion. G od is angry against all sinne, but his wrath is most hot against universall sinne, thousands, or a whole Army falls then in one day. H umble confession, and devout penance cannot alwayes avert temporall judgements: David spent three daies in sad contrition, yet in that short time Gods Angell destroyed 70000. T he desolating actions of Gods justice is not to destroy and deprive of be∣ing, but to further the growth of his Church, as men root weeds out of a garden that the hearbs may grow the better. H oly men out of their acquaintance with their Master, foresee punishment, but fooles run on and are punished. A sinfull Commonwealth cannot live unlesse it bleed in the common vein, neither is there a better sacrifice to God then the blood of malefactors. N o target, no corslet, nor armour of proofe, nor banks, nor fortifications, can withstand the hand of the Almighty. D readfull blasphemy, desperate sacriledge, apostacie, covetousnes, drun∣kennesse, luxurie, prophanenesse, and excessive pride, has provoked Gods wrath: therefore mourne for them that will not mourne for them∣selves. A ll Gods blessings, all his judgements, all his creatures, are as so many Sermons and Trumpets to bring man to repentance. S hall a land mourne for the inhabitants, and not the inhabitants for the sinnes of that land? God forbid! Y f we doe not perish every mothers son and daughter by the sword, as the old world did by the deluge, it is not because we are lesse wicked, but be∣cause God is more mercifull. O England! the Gospell of Christ is fittest to lead our times, and as that is either distressed or prosperous, so let us frame our mirth or mourning. U ngodly policies may bring a Kingdome to desolation; because they are contrary to repentance. W ee have suffered the mischiefe of a long peace, and our estates are not the better, but through security much worse; and for our sinnes God hath sent his bloody arrow amongst us. E very man is a limbe of the Community, and must be affected with the
estate of the whole body, whether healthfull or languishing. R epentance neglected is the despising of Gods goodnesse, and will cause war to fill our streets and fields with blood. E ven Gods long-suffering is an affoordment of time to repent, and is a fa∣vour; not mans, but Gods, not a common grace, but a speciall fruit of his goodnesse. T here is great need of mourning where sin is great; for heavy judgements will not be turned away without deep sorrows. O ur sinnes deserve destruction, our repentance is no satisfaction; it is only Gods mercy in Christ that gives absolution. T he greater the corruption, the vaster the destruction; but if we be found in the faith there is no end of blessednesse. H ee that lookes outward upon some eminent and notorious sinner, con∣cluding he is in the plague of our Nation, is a vaine man, looke inward, there is an Achan in thine owne bosome. E very sin is mighty, therefore our repentance must be more hearty; or else expect not the removing of calamity. L ittle pleasure doth the Father of all mercies take in the death of a sinner: ere David could see the Angell, he had restrained him. E very man censures, none amends, nay all grow worse; therefore vain man apprehend, condemne and execute thine owne sin. F east, drinke, carouse and play, when so many hearts are bleeding, is the signe of a desperate soule that can rejoyce and be merry when God shews himselfe angry. T he content hath corrupted the continent; mens sinnes have infected the whole world, as the plague in persons infect th ery walls of a house. H ee that wounds the truth by his sinnes which God hath sent to save his soule, no wonder if he perish by her forsaking kim, that hath lost himself by forsaking her. A s no importunity can delay Gods judgements, no secresie avoid it, no policie corrupt it: so nothing but sanctification can give us comfort in it. N oah preached much, the World was warned; so patient is God, that if sin were not desperate, it should not smart. D educt our owne evills from the evills of these dayes; and then God, the land, and our owne consciences shall finde the lesse. A s Gods mercy hath her day in giving time of repentance; so justice shall have her day of retribution. S atan would have all perish, the infinite goodnesse of God would have all blessed; their names will fit in our language, good and God, evill and Devill.
Y f a whole Nation apostate to lewdnesse, and there be none to stop the course, how should it stand an houre? O h England, prepare to meet thy God, for although he be offended with the whole Land, yet there be some that he will owne. U niversall judgements call for universall repentance; our Land mournes, yet some feel not the sharp wound of that hungry sword. W hen man turnes himselfe out of Gods service, all the creatures serving him, are as it were turned out of his service. E very man pray heartily that the Lord destroy us not: let our sins be lesse, and our prayers more, that we may sinde mercy. R un not on in sin till thou meet with unexpected mercy, for thou maiest as well spur thy beast till he speake, because Balaam did so. E xcept we love our owne lusts and vanities more then the wellfare of a whole Land, let us confesse and redresse our sins. T he wrath of a King is a fright, we feare an ague, wonder at a comet, and tremble at thunder; but fear not the Commander of all these. O ur fathers were more devout then we, for they did but what they heard, though it were but the devices of men; we heare and doe not, though it be the Word of God. T hat heart is hard frozen, that nothing but hell fire can thaw; beware of such a heart. H ee that laughs at the memoriall of his sins, shall weep tears of bloud for those sins. E liphants will be ruled and led about by little dwarfs, but man is an indo∣mable creature, a forsees not the judgements of God. R eligion made a staking horse for policie, is odious, and of all men the religious dissembler shall be sure of plagues. I n vaine doe men speake well of us when no man knowes good by us. G od is just, he hath many wayes to punish us; we have none to escape him. H ee loves not the Lord that will not suffer for him; be patient therefore unto his comming. T he glosse of profession will off in a storme, and unlesse we be dyed in graine we never hold grace. H ee will hardly brooke wounds that cannot endure wounds for the cause of our Saviour. A true Christian may live without doing wrong, but not without receiving wrong. N o walking to heaven upon roses, God put his children into the way of discipline by the fire of correction to eat out the rust of our corruption. D eceits are most abominable when we shrowd them under the name of
Religion; nor is there any such Devill as he that lookes like an Angell. A true Christian is like Jacobs ladder, while his body the lower part stands on the ground, the top his higher part is in heaven. B ee not devout in a storme, and stormy in a calme, like Mariners on land, who imitate the rage of the Seas, and roar here as fast as they doe there. O ur faire shewes are a just argument of our unsoundnesse: no naturall face hath so faire a white and cleare a red, as that which is painted. V aine glory swells men with rank opinions of their owne worth, mighty are their words, as if they shooke mountaines, and spake thunderclaps. T he tongue that yeelds not defence when Gods glory is in question, is ty∣ed by the Devill, and not loosed by God. A wise man wil not be scoffed out of his mony; nor a just man out of his faith. S ome men may be stored with some acts of patience, but what are they a∣mongst so many troubles? yet if patience be with us we are all safe. Y f we had before we went about our warlike affaires penitently cleansed our hearts, we might have expected better successe. O ne lust fights against another, both against the soule; they made one soul against another, and many soules fight against God. U nnaturall coldnesse in some, and preternatuall heat in others, hath set us together by the eares about trifles, while the common enemy breaks in. W oolfe and woolfe can agree, lambe and lambe fall not out, but who can reconcile the woolfe to the lambe, but Christ Jesus? E very day it is the Devills policie to assault the best, the multitude hee knows will follow after; for the unstable vulg are soon carried away with the religion of authority. R ooms Schoolmen have invented a doctrine of fables cunningly devised, and the Friers had crotchets enough, but the Jesuit put downe all. E very bad King hurts much by his unjust commands, but more by their ex∣amples: for the Common wealth like a fish rots first at the head. T he precepts of Kings are sometimes evill, therefore we must only obey them in God, but when God commands we may not examine, but execute. O nly a forme of godlinesse will never remove Gods judgements from a Nation. T o weare the Devills livery, to be the pentioner of hell at the command of that malignant spirit, is a most damnable name and shame. H ee that is to day a Papist, tomorrow a Protestant, next day no man can tell what, nor himselfe; such a man denies Christ. E very man will try to write with two pens, hunt two wayes, fight with two swords, or travell two wayes together, is a troublesome folly: truth
hath but one way, no second, not another. L et truth once flourish, and heresie finde no footing, then shall justice reigne, oppression shall be oppressed; the hand of bribery shall be broken, the arme of injustice cut off, and the mouth of iniquity stopped. E very man shall sit under his owne vine, we shall feare no breaking in of enemies to invade us, nor heare any news or noyses to affright us. F or joy we shall sing aloud, our Princes shall be wiser, and our Judges bet∣ter instructed, and instead of serving themselves and the time, will learne to serve the Lord with feare, and rejoyce in him. T he Lord is a living Lord, and a giving God, unchangeable his good∣nesse, most bountifull in his benificence. H ee that is the common enemy, seeks to devoure all: therefore every man cease quarelling one with another, and fight with him. A ll men are merry, but who mournes, for God is angry with us, and would destroy us, did not Jesus stand in the breach for us. N ever depend on the favour of God, untill our hearts be purged of pride and selfe-love; be every thing denyed that hath no relation to Christ. D oth all the world acknowledge some God, doe some Narions acknow∣ledge too many gods, for shame let us acknowledge one God. A sall times have their incident troubles, so there is one maine day of trou∣ble, yet considering Gods promise he will never faile his. B ecause we know not the time of our deaths, let us learn with St. Paul to dye daily. O ne halse houre spent fixedly every day, will by Gods grace bring altera∣tion heart and life. V igilancie, carefulnesse, and love, are the three marks and helpes of di∣ligence. T hat mans life is well bestowed in death, when to patience is adde godli∣nesse. A s finer tempers are more sensible of the changes of the weather, so the faithfull and familiar with God can discry his judgements. S uch is the Worlds desperatenesse and pollicie to vex whom God hath blessed; but still he takes them into his tuition, and will devout their ene∣mies. Y f man say to God in the middest of his distresses, Is this thy justice? he will answer, Oh man, Is this thy faith? O ur sins by sea and land are so great, that it is the only infinite mercy of God that in every place we perish not. U nthankfull men are the worse for all Gods favours, and the worse they grow towards the end, the worse it shall be for them in the end.
W ee commonly kill our beasts when they are fattest, but judgement sur∣priseth sinners when they are leanest, which is the remotest distance from goodnesse. E very sin is mighty, therefore our repentance must be more hearty, which mixt with faith and hope, will bring us to heaven. R epent in life, that thou maiest finde comfort in death; for the great Judge cannot erre, he knowes our going out and comming in. E xtraordinary terror was at the Law-giving, but was a burning Image of what shall be at the Law enquiring. R oome thinks the Gospels rising, must needs be her falling, and therefore cannot endure like a sister to communicate with us, but like a Tyrant to excommunicate. A unwise King destroyes his people: but through the wisdome of them which are in authority, Cities are inhabited. N othing so sovereigne but by being abused by sin, may not of a blessing become a curse. K nowledge separated from obedience doth but inslames a mans reckoning, and helps to a greater measure of condemnation. S aint Johns short Sermon in his old age was, Little children love one another. T hree things let us alwayes commit to God, our injuries, our losses, and our griefes, for he is onely able to cure our griefes, to restore our los∣ses, and rederesse our injuries. O ur afflictions shall never end us, but God will rather put an end to them, our mouthes shall be filled with laughter, our tongues with singing. T he end of our conversion is to amend our conversation; and that word which sounds peace and joy, and remission of sin, leaves this lesson be∣hinde it, Sin no more. H ee that is never so poore, if a true beleever, Peter and Paul, and Jesus Christ himselfe are his brethren. E xhortations to particular duties of holinesse, is alwaies needfull, even to those that are most holy, for the seeds of vertue are much hindred by na∣turall corruption. R ingt holinesse is true nobility, for without goodnesse there can bee no true glory. I tis the honour of Gods Saints to be attended by Angels while they live, and to be exalted by Augels when they dye. G od both can and will deliver his chosen, he can at all times seasonable for his own glory. H ee that will not be found out of God in his mercy while he he lives, shall
be sure to be found out by him in his judgement when he is dead. T hough all enemies be conquered and vanquished, yet the Christian souldier shall be crowned. H ee that neglects to please, cannot complaine to be neglected. A ll that live godly in christ shall suffer persecution: thus Paul Christs A∣turney pleads our affliction. N ever thinke the vertuous and vitious go all noe way, or that good and bad speed all alike, for it a beast could argue, he would abhorre such a tenant. D espised and distressed soules that humbly acknowledge God on earth shall be acknowledged and glorified by him in heaven, when Atheists shall be throwne downe into endlesse calamity. D estruction bates nothing of totall ruine, Gods justice will leave nothing, for the wicked shall be preyed upon by insatiate judgement till nothing, be left. O ur ignorance is our curse: but that which knowes not Christ is the most miserablest. V ice is alwaies an enemy to true knowledge: but how shall a man like that food of which he never tasted? B lessed is the man that seeks by all means to grow in grace, for he shall be sure to win a Crowne of glory. L et good and we meet in all our actions: for to be wicked is not much worse then to be undisereet, for knowledge without vertue, makes a mans mitimus to hell. E very evill man hath lusts of his own which he is as resolute to maintain, as a father to keep his owne children. A mans conscience is like a pulley that keeps reason in the right wheel. and cashiers mutinous affections, or executes Marshall law upon them. S uch as turne grace into wantonnesse, deny Christ, for he that calls himself Christian, and teaches that in Christ is granted liberty of finning, denies his Redeemer. Y f thou buy honour thou callest it thine; indeed thy friend thou calst him thine, purchasest a house thou calst it thine: but Christ hath bought thee with his blood, yet thou deniest to be his. O ur inward sincerity is not without externall profession: but externall profession may be without inward sincerity. V ertue is ever full of proselt enemies: darknesse is not more contrary to light, nor sicknesse to health, nor death to life then vice to goodnesse. W hat meanes the worldling in our birth, we had but swadling clouts and cradle: in our death we shall have but a winding sheet and a coffin.
E very man is a soole that forgets his owne name, that are the sonnes of Adam, the son of dust. R iches are but for this world; yet God is both Lord of this world, and of that to come; and where the glory of this ends, the glory of that begins. E very mans death is the punishment of his first birth: if faithfull, the glo∣ry of the second, not a dying but a departing life, with some sorrow laid off, but with much joy said up. R achel weeping for her children because they were not, and shall not we? can we see the Churches teares, and not doe our utmost endeavours to comfort her? A prayer made in confidence that God will hear us, because he hath heard us, may obtaine mercy: then approach boldly to the Throne of Grace. N o shame, sorrow or misery, should ever put any Christian to any despe∣rate attempt: for there is more valour to endure a miserable life, then to imbrace a wretched death. K eep thy shield of faith, and thou shalt victoriously march with the Saints on earth, and triumphantly sing with Angels in heaven. S uch is the sincerity of Christian Religion, that it not only imposeth up∣on us pure innocencie, but also profitable honesty. T he feare of God, and the love of God are inseparable; he doth neither that doth both: he omits neither that doth one. O fall the medicines administred to us by our spirituall Physitian, love is the sweetest, bitter pills will downe when they are made up in love. T he rules of our faith and life are manifest; if we would study enough, study them and practise. H ow poore soever thy cottage be, set thy prayers as a guard without, and thy faith as a locke within: the sevenfold walls of Babylon cannot bee so strong. E very man hath his owne faith, yet all men have but one faith, by which they must be saved. L et thy thoughts examine thy thoughts, for thy conscience must not only extend to deeds and words, but even to secret thoughts. E ndeavour to be thrifty husbands of time and meanes to bee spiritually rich; for if man neglect, the occasion will neglect him. F eare God as Noah: Noah beleeves he shall be saved: why he above the rest? because he beleeved with feare. T he inseperable effect of justification is obedience; then we follow Christ, when we follow his. H ee that preserves the truth from the malediction of men, preserves him∣selfe from the malediction of God; and he that vindicates the truth
from present blasphemy, tha truth shall preserve him from everlasting misery. A threefold lot belongs to all faithfull men, the lot of suffering, the lot of happinesse, and the lot of salvation. N o man will hardly brooke wounds that cannot endure words for the cause of his Saviour. David had a great company of Souldiers at his backe, yet he slew Goliah alone: thus Faith alone conquers the Devill. D estruction is alwayes incident to opulent Cities and delightfull places: Sodome abounded with all delights and pleasures. O ur sinnes greedily heare that the mercies of God endureth for ever, but they shall all sensibly heare that the wrath of God endureth for ever. U nthankfulnes is the sole witch and sorcerer, whose drousie inchantments have made man forget God himselfe. B ee not such sinnes, rather the image of hell then of heave; neither measure the joyes of heaven by our owne corrupt and sensual pleasure on earth. L et us appeale from mens lips to their lives: he that obeyes not Christ, knowes not Christ, it is fruitfulnesse in good that setles him in our hearts. E vill hearts have corrupt hands; for if the hand grope for a bribe, as Felix did of Paul, there must be an unjust heart. A wicked man thinks he may be out of danger of the Law, if either he have agreat man to his friend, or have not a great man to his enemy. S inne with a voice, is sinne in action; sinne with a cry, is a sinne in pre∣sumption. Y fone act of filthinesse doe so distresse us, that we would give all the World for a pardon; what torture will the same sin bring being com∣mitted againe? O ur dayes are evill, whether we respect their troubles, or that which trou∣bles them our sinnes; and not likely in either of them both to amend. U ntill knowledge and goodnesse goe together we may be doubtfull, for knowledge will fall from us, when we fall from goodnesse. W oe to those that call evill good: woe indeed for refusing the right way, for approving the wrong: woe, for they have erred: woe, because they will not be converted. E rrors are infinite, and but one truth; God chargeth us to refuse all waies but one: but the Devill bids us refuse that one. R eason, will, memory, imagination, affection and sense, by one act of re∣bellion, put all their noble family into a shattered disorder. E very corruption is so pleasing to the wicked that they thinke it health
it selfe, for every heart overruns with sinne, is all sinne. F orget all sinne in respect of continuance: but remember them in respect of repentance. I n the last dayes we live, on the last dayes we doe not meditate; so the last dayes falls upon us whilest our first and last, and all our sinnes are found in us. L et us be so kinde to our selves as to thinke doomes day is not past, there is a day, an evening and a morning; we shall finde no peace, unlesse wee provide for it in the day. E ndeavour to run so much the faster, as we run for the better prise. S o far as holy joy is entred into us, so far are we entred into the everla∣sting Kingdome of Christ. T o begin in the spirit and end in the flesh, is in Pauls sense folly: but to begin with grace and end with wickednesse is malicious impiety. O ur troubles are felt without, but our peace of conscience is alwayes felt within. T he right way to heaven is by the signified will of God revealed in his Word, and whatsoever repugneth that is the wrong. H appy repentance is sorry for ill beginnings; but to dislike good begin∣nings is an unhappy repentance. E very wise man will worke by knowledge, but a foole will spread abroad his folly. R ememoer that God is faithfull, and will suffer no man to be tem pted a∣bove what he is able to beare. I n Gedions Army all faint hearted Souldiers were commanded to stay at home, no cowards get into the Kingdome of heaven. G od will not be worse to them that follow him, then he is to them that for∣sake him: yet alas, how doth the world ingrosse mens consciences? H ee that looks up to the promised Land, and sees but one glympse of those heaveny treasures, will looke scornfully upon the world. T he way to keep amans heart in heart is by hearty prayer, meditations, hearing and receiving. H ee that obtained the pretious jewell of Faith, let him be more thankfull, because it is denyed to thousands. A mans faith, his credit, and his eyes admit of no jest, if his faith be sound, though injury wound his eyes, ignominy his fame; yet faith shall make all whole. N othing but the infallible promise of God can be the ground of our faith: but the cause of our feare is our owne sinfull weaknesses. D evotion honors God, charity doe good to men, holinesse is the image of
heaven, therefore beautious thankfulnesse: but faith is good for every purpose, the foundation of all graces. D oubling and questioning of that truth we have so long imbraced, is the first step of falling away from our owne stedfastnesse. O ur obedience to God must not be only inward and habituall, but out∣ward in the actions of faith, and of the feare of God; like fruitfull trees bringing forth fruit in due season. U nfruitfulnesse hath ever been held a curse; for when God gives salvation, he is said to take away barrennesse. B ee not like Plaices blacke and white for they are such, as have the faith of Christ in their mouths, and the world in their hearts. L et no extremity of sorrow or suffering enervate thy faith; grudge not to dye with Christ or for Christ. E very man is charged with every good worke, all holy duties are required of all men; if we know Christ we will imitate him forthwith. A Souldier without courage, a horse without mettall, a creature without vivacitie, such is a Christian without fervencie. S inne upon earth in its owne soile growes without planting or any paines bestowed on it, but much more when it is manured with applause and practise. Y f the sword of vengeance that devoured the heathen having bin shaken amongst us, amend us, we shall escape Gods fury, and become blessed ex∣amples of his mercie. O ur expectation may be challenged with too much violence, if we bee not qualified and directed by patience. U nload thy conscience by repentance, and the everlasting doores of hea∣ven shall give thee entrance. W hether the good we hope for be deferred, or the evill we feare bee in∣flicted, still patience is a cordiall, which if God preserve to us, will cer∣tainely preserve us to him. E nter into the joy of your Lord saies the King himselfe, thus all excuses of our not entring into the Kingdome of heaven is taken away. R emember what Christ faith to thee, and thou shalt be the better able to remember what he hath done for thee. E ntrance into heaven consists of two things, our union with Christ, and communion with the Holy Ghost. F ull of good works, full of fruits, full of blessings, full of God, brings to lye downe full of peace, and rise againe full of glory. I t is a barren mindefulnesse that does not declare it selfe in holy fruit∣fulnesse.
L et others be ambitious of great and glorious parentage, only pray wee Lord make us thy sons and daughters in Christ Jesus. E xpectation of heaven belongs only to Gods owne afflicted; and to them that suffer much misery in this world, is promised a new. S ome vertues cannot be exercised, but in troubles: we must be poore and want before we can exercise the vertue of thankfulnesse. T here could be no destruction to destroy us, if there were no corruption in us; neither could man or devill destroy us, if we did not destroy our selves. O Israel thou destroyest thy selfe; if there be-any helpe it is in me: Gods hand of justice strikes, but man by his wickednesse draws out the sword. T he tolling of a bell for a friend wakens a man at midnight: yet for all the lamentable dying groanes of the Church of God, with the innume∣rable gaspes of dying Christians we are all asleep. H ee that will not be so sullen as to be holy, for feare of displeasing a com∣pany of sinners, shall never be so happy as to enjoy the society of God and his holy Angels. E mbrace not the world, for it will steale away thy faith: faith obtained, and faith retained, shall without faile advance thy soule to glory. L et no man dye in sinne, for thou canst not be so quicke to dispatch thy sin, as God is to dispatch thy soule. E very sinfull man can no more escape his triall, then a pregnant woman can escape or avoid her travell. F ew men have the lucke to steal themselves into heaven in spight of hell; many have the fate to cousen themselves into hell, in spight of heaven. T he world is not a minute to eternity, mans life is but a minute to the world, occasion is but a minute to our life; yet we scarce apprehend a minute of that occasion. H ee that made the world in six dayes, and could have done it in six houres, spared it above a thousand yeares before the flood. A s we are sure our life shall not reach to a thousand yeares, so we are not sure is shall not last out a day. N oman shall ever be condemned for being ignorant of that which he is not bound to know. D eare bought and far fetcht things are for rich purses and rich pallats; but there is a poore herbe in the garden called Time, more pretious then all. D evotion of the heart, profession of the mouth, and conversation of life, are the objects of a Christian. O f the flesh comes three sorts of things: some good, as the knowledge of Arts: some indifferent, as honour and riches: some evill, as the works of sinne.
V ertue grows fastest upon us when vices decay in us; it is alwayes busie, but then most eager when we are most holiest. B lessed is the man that is holy, nothing can make that man poore, he gra∣ceth all conditions, honours and places. L et others boast of generation, but a godly man of regeneration; this is the best ornament of blood, the nobliest part of the secuchion, and fairest flower in the Gentlemans gatland. E ternall life and salvation is not allotted to every one, but for the Saints; he that will have a lot in Canaan, let him be sure to be a true Israclite. A desire of blessednesse cannot be expected where there is not a well groun∣ded hope to be blessed. S alvation in repentance is Gods end, let not him lose his hope, and wee shall not lose ours. Y f a man will be noble, let him be humble, for the humble shall bee ex∣alted. O ur honours are the fruits of birth, of wisdome, of valour, of riches, of place and authority, or of royall favour: but it is never of the fruit of grace, nor the blessing of God without humility. U nlesse we honour Christ otherwise then the world doth, we have no more grace then the worldling hath. W ee have not the signe of a star in our foreheads, but the signe of the crosse: still humility is the way to glory, this way went all the Saints; this way went even the God of Saints. E arthly inheritances are oftentimes divided with much inequality, and the priviledge of primogeniture stretcheth far, but in the new heaven it is not so. R iches gotten and forgotten must be accounted for before God the divine Justice: Gehezaes talent of gold could not buy off his sores, nor hide his shame. E ven the poorest amongst us may give praises unto God; and the more he spares us in our bloods and estates, the more we are obliged to him in thankfulnesse. H olinesse is not tyed to literature, Doctor and Saint are not convertible, for then he that knowes his Masters will could not chuse but doe it. A man may be sooner acquainted with the nine Muses, then with the three Graces, Learning, Discretion, and Honesty. L et others be full of the politicks: it is good for us to be well habited in the morrals: one thing is necessary, integrity of heart. F lattery and treachery are but two names of one vice  dry suits of mischiefe.
E very man that defends not Gods Church, glorifies him not, for he means small honour to the head, that does not his best to save the body. F aithfull service is most accepted where it is least expected: some would doe much for Christs glory, and cannot; thousands of us can doe much for his glory, and will not. I t is better for a man to want some truth then want peace: for a man that never studied controversies, may without controversie be saved. L et every soule humbly cast himselfe downe at the foet of Christ, and bee beholding to him only for his salvation, for our best workes are but blankes. E very wise man will be easily requested to doe himselfe good when God sues to us to save us, we are sullen to hinder our own preferment. S alvation comes from God: yet he will be found a God of judgement, they that have denyed it their mortall flesh, shall acknowledge it in im∣mortall fire. T here be two things torment a man: sinne, and a bad conscience: grace delivers from sinne, and peace quiets the conscience. O ld men, covetous young men, voluptuous Nobles, ambitious common persons, ceremonious, or whosoever is led away with any kinde of wan∣tonnesse, is brought within the Devills lure. T here is fearfull combustion all over the world, wars at home, wars abroad; if therefore we love peace, every man pray for peace. H ee that desires to be found in peace, let peace be found in him; peace or nothing, peace and every thing. E very whispering and murmuring is like a vapour rising out of the earth, multiplying into stormes of sedition: sedition grows into mutinies, and mutinies into confusion. R emember David, that holy King would admit no States-min as far as he could discerne, but such as were after his owne heart. I ts a true protraitor of the Churches condition, that as Israel hath beene temporally wasted; so the Church of God is now spiritually assaulted. G od would have us read our sinnes in our judgements, that we may both repent of our sinnes, and give glory to his justice. H ee that cannot keep himselfe from death while he lives, will more im∣possioly restore and revive himselfe to life againe, being dead. T hy Prince hath honour, thy father reverence, thy master service, thy wife love; all these are due to God in a more transcendent manner. H ee that sincerely loves God, and detests sinne, desires dissolution for no other end but to be freed from temptation. A s no wise man leaves his he house for some flyes, but rather drives them
out: so no good forsakes his holinesse for temptations. N either the gifts of grace, nor the seales of grace can free us from assaults: we may have force to repell bad suggestions, we have not to prevent them. D eclare thy grievance by prayer, it shall bring downe heavenly graces: God knows thy wants, aske, he hath promised to heare. D eath to the godly is good in the cessation of paines, better in the reno∣vation of all things, best in the immutability of all happinesse. O ur talke is of vanity, and vanity is with us: but if Christ could be kept in our mouthes, we should alwayes have him in our hearts. U nbeleefe is the bane of constancie and perseverance: of constancie in the purpose of our mindes: of perseverance in the tenor of our lives. B arrennesse is a privation of fruit, shame privation of innocency, and death a privation of life; for these privations men sell themselves. L ike horses, whether put into perfumed Coaches, or noysome carts, they will draw: so our affections will be doing set them on what worke you will. E arth will to earth, an earthly desire to an earthly center: so man lives till earth be turned into earth; so he dyes till earth be turned out of earth, their earthly soules into hellish torments; such a life is base and brutish. Y f there be ignominy in thraldome, there must be glory in freedome: Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherein Christ hath set you. O nce turning from God, we continue nought: nought till we returne by repentance. U nholy Machiavels admired for policie, commonly falls under Jehoakims curse, to be buried with the buriall of an Asse: they live fooles, but dye Asses. R ighteous men shall live for ever, for their reward is with the Lord; hee hath a care of them. F aith and repentance were two short lessons; yet Israel was forty yeares before they could learne them. R emember your sinnes to repent of them; forget to practise them, that God may forget them in judgement, and remember us in mercy. O ld sinnes must be lookt backe into, because the vanitie of youth, proves the vexation of age. N one can be too yong to amend that is old enough to dye, for man is apt to sin before he be able. T o give over sinne when we can no longer commit it, is no repentance. A good Christian will be good and devout, like good Daniel, though alone.
S ome trust in horses, some in their swords, some in their lands, some in their wits, some their friends, and some in their monies; but let every good Christian trust in the Lord. Y f we must converse with evill men, let it be in no evill matters. O nce God spake it, another time performed it, a third time redouled it; therefore none can plead ignorance that they want instruction. U ngodly men may taste of the waters of life by chance, as a dog laps at Nilus, but his voyage is bound for mischiefe. W hile the Devill can busie men with ceremony and circumstance, he hopes well, and will let them alone about faith and manners. E xternall prosperity is no good marke of our election: the fairest beasts are kept for slaughter. R emember alwayes the house of mourning is not for mirth; Christ turned the Musitians out of doores. E very judgement we see should make us wiser in the feare of God: every mercy we feele wiser in the love of God. H ee that thinks to asswage the anguish of one sin by doing another, pre∣seribes to himselfe a remedy far worse then the disease. A faire carriage keeps temptation out at staves end; but lightnesse of pre∣sence lets it into the graple, and gives encouragement to lewd desires. L ove is commended like water, it neither makes a man in debt nor in drinke; so love is neither hard to get, nor costly to keep. F alling from Christ can be incident to none but Christians: for they that were never up, can never be said to fall. F or knowne diseases there be knowne medicines: but hypocrisie prevents all wayes of remedy. I t is better with Philosophers to have honesty without Religion, then with wicked Christians to have Religion without honesty. L et men turne from wickednesse to piety, and God will turne judgement to mercy: Solomon and Idolater, Zacheus an extortioner, Noah drunke; yet all these went to heaven. E xpectation is sometimes of feare: so the timer ous traveller looks for the theef, and so the conscious malefactor looks for the comming of the Judge. Saul is tempted, sinneth, and sleepeth his last: David is tempted, sinneth, and sleepeth not his last. T he lesse space a man hath allowed for his businesse, the more he should ply it, the fewer dayes, the fruitfuller lessons. O h that my people would have heard, these are royall and sweet speeches: but to the wicked God changeth his speech into sharpnesse. T he more a man fears God, the lesse he fears any thing else: for all the fear
of Satan ariseth from the want of the due feare of God. H ee that loves God only for temporall blessings, and faile him when those blessing faile: is like mutinous souldiers, no longer pay, no longer fight. E ndeavour to keep thy shield of faith, and thou shalt victoriously march with the Saints on earth, and triumphantly with Angels in heaven. L et Princes boast of their delicacies, Christ liveth in me: this be the food of our soules. E ndeavour that your faith be encreased, and grow still from faith to faith. F aith is a fundamentall grace, and should overcome the World; yet it will prove a coward without servencie. T here is no poverty of estate, or consumption of body, to a leane starved soule, which neither knowes nor cares to know Christ. H ee that loves God for himselfe, and goodnesse because it is goodnesse, can God. A s God will crowne the faithfull above their deserts with glory: so hee will load the wicked according to their deserts with eternall torments. N ot to have no spots here; but to have no spots imputed to us hereafter, is the happinesse of Christian. D arknesse of nature must have its due course by creation: yet no dark∣nesse shall afflict thy body while there is saving light in thy soule. D esire more grace, seeke more, never thinke you have enough: be still poore that you may be rich, rich that you may be full, full that you may be glorious. O h that men could see how much better it is to be poore then evill; and that there is no comparison between want and sin! U se the world, but enjoy the Lord: be thankfull for outward blessings, but rest thy heart on Jesus Christ. B etter are the troubles and differences of righteousnesse, then the peace of wickednesse. L et nothing pierce your hearts deep, either in griefe or feare, but sin and unbeleefe. E nvy not the gifts of God in any, neither thinke hardly of their infirmities, nor fret at the prosperity of the wicked. Y f we be departed from Babylon, let not a rag or relike of superstition a∣bide with us: for it is proore comfort to escape in Sodome, and perish in the Playnes. O ur conversation to God must be with a whole heart, without exception, without hypocrisie, without delay, without apostacie, and without despaire.
U nstable men are in a wretched estate, their Religion is yet to chuse: they know they shall dye, but know not what faith to dye in. R ight holinesse, is true nobility; for without goodnesse, there can be no true glory. F aith working by love, performes all duties to God and man: but false faith is like sandy earth which never brings forth fruit. R eligion and true Piety is the readiest way to the highest advancement: therefore above all treasure, set your hearts thereon. O ne sparke of true Religion is far beyond a whole flame of secular wis∣dome. N eeds must that vertue be fruitfull that is stirring: and needs must that be stirring that is living: and needs must that be living that is quickned by Jesus Christ. T he neglect of resolution to enter the way of righteousnesse, is the for∣lorne state of a sinner: for what hopes can be had of him that hath not so much as a purpose to be holy? A good man lives after death: but the name of the wicked is rotten before their carcaste is cold. S inne like a viper may hang upon Pauls hand and not poyson it; it may bring a potentiall guilt, not an actuall. Y f mans heart be divided, if sinks to confusion; but keep it whole to the way of truth, and it shall be saved. O ur eyes be good, we know our hands be good: God grant our hearts be good, that we may defend Christs cause. U ntill a man seele his owne want, and that feeling breed sorrow, that sor∣row desire, that desire prayer, that prayer increase of faith; that prayer of his shall never bring downe Gods mercy. W retched are they that flatter themselves: but blessed are they that can prove themselves to be out of the ranke of the ungodly. E xamine thy selfe whether thou hast suffered an heavenly holy violence, or whether grace hath wrought upon thee: if not: thou livest the life of nature. R emember to walk in a measure of holinesse answerable to Gods mercy; for if we turne his grace into wantonnesse, he will turne his mercy into judgement. E very argument is shut up with an ergo, and is the knowne note of a con∣clusion, thus may the syllogisme be framed: but whosoever would escape destruction, must adhere to the truth. T he greatest shew of sanctity that error puts on, the more fuller of suspiti∣on: therefore beware of the intended mischiefe.
O ppinionate wisdome is in a manner the sole cause of all folly; for it tran∣sports a man with an imagination of his owne knowledge, that he runs into error with confidence. T hey that will walke to Christ, shall have Christ walke with them; for he is the truth, the way, and the life. H ee that beleeves will keep the Commandements: for as the Law sends us to Christ to be saved; so Christ sends us backe againe to the Law to learne obedience. E very Scribe instructed unto the Kingdome of heaaen, brings out of his treasure things new and old; the new before the old, because the Gospel was promised, before the Law was Printed. R econciliation, and the peace that was made between God and man, did not stretch so far as to conclude a peace between God and sin. I am a sinner, therefore God hath from everlasting rejected me, is a des∣perate conclusion: I beleeue in Christ, and endeavour to live like a Christian, therefore am chosen, is a sound inference: so far God gives leave to looke into the booke of life. G ods informer is conscience, a spy in the soule mixing herselfe with all our thoughts and actions. H ee that hopes for a new heaven above, and does not become a new crea∣ture below, that mans expectation is in vaine. T he highest act of a Christian is to comfort himselfe in Christ: he never fell from us; we are basely unthankfull if ever we fall from him. H ee that knowes God, and lives in evill, is no better then a devill in the shape of a man, or a man in the shape of a devill. A s no place can content the fire but the upmost rising towards its owne region: so let no knowledge satisfie us but the knowledge of Christ. N atural men perceive not the things of Gods Spirit: in other knowledge the righteous have part with sinners; but in this sinners have no part with the righteous: let me be weake in policie, so I be wise of salvation. D ivine knowledge mounts aloft, and finds no rest but in the region of immortality. C elsitude of honour is a meer dwarfe to faith; that can but command mor∣talls, faith is attended by Angels. O ur faith hath need of a good foundation, for it is an heavy and weighty building, all other vertues lye upon faith. U nbeleeving sinners tremble: but let such feare to dye as have no hope to dye; if we have made our peace with God, we shall escape from death. N o man can take Christ from thee, unlesse thou take thy selfe first from Christ.
T he Gospell is no weake thing, but comes in power; for Christ hath a fur∣ther latitude, he came once unto men, but he comes still into man. E xcept a man be borne he can never see light on earth; and except he be twice borne he can never see light in heaven. R edemption by Christ hath stated us into a blessednesse never to be for∣gotten: for no soule that Christ hath truly bought can ever perish. M ans sinnes have made heavens entrance narrow; but Christs sufferings have made it wide. A little faith with knowledge, is true and saving; but great presumption with ignorance is damnable. R eligion knows no outward calling or condition: for all those that are in Christ, are holy beleeving brethren. C ertainly if men beleeved in Christ, they would not, nay could not speak, not look upon his workes without great reverence. H ee that trusts his salvation on a strange faith erres in darknesse, and holds not the way which the light of the Gospell directs him. T he Gospell speaks of Christ buying: Ye are bought with a price: to fell that which is bought, is to crosse his proceeding. O f all purchases, buy Jesus: for be thou never so poore, Christ will sell himselfe for thy soule. T he life of man is pretious in the sight of God: but the life of his whole Church is far more pretious. H ee that cares not for any mirth but that which must grieve the Holy Ghost, must needs procure that peace which is at wars with Christ. E very man thinks he loves himselfe better then his enemy; but while hee loves sin, he loves his enemy better then himselfe. L et the servants that are under the yoke count their owne master worthy of all honour, that the name of God and his doctine be not blasphemed. E very action that gives way to Gods dishonour, and heartens others to superstition, is a deniall of Christ in some degree of fact. F alse Prophets intrude amongst the people, but principally amongst the people of God. T he Devill is a false Prophet, he calls evill good, and promiseth bad, at∣tempts good events; either he conceales the end from the way, or the way from the end. H earken not to the world for it is a false Prophet, it tells you your gold shall make you rich, when it rather makes you cursed. A n Infidell perswades himselfe there shall be no reckoning day, and an Epicure dreames of no future life: false: for the Lord will take them a∣way in a whirlewind.
N atures colours will last; if not, artificiall shall say pride to the beauti∣full: false: Art shall make a foole of Nature, Time make a foole of Art, and Death make a foole of all. D runkards prophesie to morrow shall be as to day, and much more abun∣dant: false: awake and howle, Oye drunkards, for the wine is cut off from your mouths. C arnall mindes hope and saie, I will be sure to repent: false: thousands are in hell that promised themselves this evasion, neither hath any man a patent of repentance. O ur ambitious men flatter themselves, saying, we will arise out of the dust, and sit with Princes: false: for they shall fall from the throne to the dust. V anity and worldly pleasure saies, I am a Queen, and shall see no mourn∣fulnesse: false: for the day of lamentation is come. N aturall men are moles to spirituall objects: but wise and regenerate eyes can pierce the heavens, and espy God in all his earthly occurrences. T he flesh is a false Prophet, every affected sin is a false Prophet to the soul; for falshood if it cannot deceive another, it will deceive if selfe. E very man sayes he is in Gods favour, so were the children of Israell till they were tempted by false Prophets and sinned. R ighteousnesse is the life of all lives, without which our bodies shall rot in the dust, and our memories stinke above ground, yea our selves perish in the lowest pit. M any will be in the Church way, the road of profession; not for any love they bear to devotion, but that the sent of their turpitudes may not bee discovered. A ll ungodlinesse robs God of his honour, and is either the true worship of a false god, or the false worship of the true God, or the true worship of the true God with a false heart. R hetoricke is the art of speaking well; Logicke the art of disputing well; Magistracie the art of governing well: but Christianity is the art of li∣ving well. C an the Naturalist with all his eloquence disswade the covetous world∣ling from his greedinesse: no, one ounce of gold weighs downe all his reasons. H eavenly things are far from carnall sense, and he that will beleeve no more then he sees, shall for ever be blinde. F ew and evill are our dayes, few in number, evill in nature, not one of them good, few and evill below; many and evill above: misery is our familiar, happinesse but a stranger. I t is a great comfort in distresse to hope for a deliverer: to beleeve is
better, but to bee sure of it is best of all. L et us be sure to repent one day before our death; but hereof we cannot be sure unlesse we repent every day. E very man repent while be lives, that he may rejoyce when he dyes. Simeon desired not to dye sooner, he desired not to live longer: Now let∣thy servant goe away in peace. T here is a double martyrdome, a bloody one when Christ is magnified in the roses of his Church by death: a bloodlesse one when he is magnified in the lillies of his Church by a holy life. O f vanities we soon grow weary, and loath them; but the joyes of righte∣ousnesse will be as everlasting in our desires, as they are in their owne sweetnesse. T o turne from sin is Gods speciall grace by giving repentance: but to fall from stedfastnesse, is through defect of perseverance. H ave you righteousnesse, seal and deliver it as your act and deed; never say you praise God with your words, when you despise him by your works. E very man decline unrighteousnesse which dissolves peace, and then God shall fulfill in our hearts St. Peters wish, Grace and peace. R espect God in all things, doing nothing but as in his presence, looking unto him as the directer and discerner of all our actions and thoughts. I t is Gods delight in extremity to be a deliverer when Armies besiege his servants, then he musters up his servants. G ods displeasure for sin is able to turne a Nation upside downe; that like Senacherib, they become the spoyle of their owne bowells. H ee that marvells in this rebellious age how or why we thus fall by the sword, let him looke to his sinnes, and cease marvelling. T here are destructions that creep upon men by degrees: but sudden de∣struction often seizeth upon the wicked. O ur God will not favour us because we have studied hard, and knowne much, but rather the more punish us, because we have knowne good, and done evill. R eligion and Piety is made havocke of, and all to atchieve glory, that which the Apostles rent their cloaths to put from them; let us rend our very skins to pluck to us, Act. 14.14. L et every servant of God thinke his crosses are meant for his blessings; punishments to them are signes of his favours. E ven for those who have fought a good fight, a Crowne is laid up, bee diligent then in this point, and be saved. F aith is a Queen, repentance her usher, and good works the Court that shall follow her: so let her come to the King of mercy, the presence chamber of Christ Jesus.
T he ground of hope in the middest of delay is when the deferring of our desires discourageth not our faith. O ur affections if they be not shod with patience, will be so pricked with crosses, that we shall be weary of our journey to heaven. R egard not so much what portion thou hast in the punishment of sin, as what interest thou hast in the Covenant. T he execution of Gods justice doth magnifie his mereies, when he punish∣eth some, that he may spare many. O nly a forme of godlinesse will never remove Gods judgement from a Nation. T o beare meekly with thy persecuters is commendable patience; to bee commendable at Gods dishonour, is commendable basenesse. H ee is a foole that loves sin better then his soule: then never seek to please sin that seeks to confound us. E very man commonly fears Gods temporall blows more then his eternall: yet of both they neglect the antidote and prevention. C onsidence in God doth only support us: we cannot put too much trust in him, not too little in our selves. E very affliction prepares us for salvation: a meer paradox to the children of this world, who run in the cirele of sin and pleasure. N ever did pride goe more blustering through the streets then now; and the language of her pace is, Who made me? T he dust of this world makes many a man blinde; they did like moles in the earth, and there lose the light of heaven. E very man seeks for something to rest his minde upon; but to make this world the center, that and our hopes must faile together, for the fire will dispatch them both. R iches shuts abundance out of heaven, but the grace of God lets in many. C hrist rejoyceth in a Christian, whensoever a Christian rejoyceth in him: the repentant son was not more glad of the father, then the father was glad he found the son. L et every man labour to preferve what hee hath gotten: for the losse of faith is a dangerous ship wrack; save your faith and save your soules. O ne and the same end is to the sinner without repentance; and to the righ∣teous without perseverance. S alvation is with more difficulty wrought up then perdition; yet grace, time and diligence, will worke it up in season. E very worke hath his owne season: only Gods worke requires every sea∣son, especially the worke of praysing his name.
T he law was perfect truth, but we were weake, it could not save us, be∣cause we could not keep it: but on the Evangelicall truth we may repose our soules. O ne way to honour is by flattery, another to pleasure is by making the flesh mistresse, and a way to be rich by usury: yet but one way to make a man blessed, and that is the way of truth. Y f our obedience doe not testifie our faith: that Law was not more deadly then the Gospell to inhance our condemnation. O ur Souldiers are valiant till they come to fight, all Philosophers are ex∣cellent till they come to dispute; and all good Christians till we come to master our owne lusts. V anity in some men, curiosity in other men; and unconstancie in all men, makes many faiths. R eligion that bindes the conscience where God hath not bound it, brings snares and fetters, and takes away due liberty. C ommonly too much heat annoyes, but too much heat destroyes: but Re∣ligion of all tempers in our dayes, complaines not of heat. L ot could be holy among the wicked, a Saint amongst sinners; yet we are evill amongst the good, and sinners amongst Saints. O ur growing or fading in grace brings us to heaven or hell, Paul turnes an Apostle, Judas an apostate. S trong bodies without strong grace, are strongest to sin: thus the stron∣gest is weakest; strong to commit sin, weake to resist sin. E vill can never be the childe of goodnesse, nor can sin so basely descended, lay claime to omnipotencie. O vercome evill with good, and be farre from snatching Gods weapon out of his hand, but rather master unkindnesse with kindnesse. R ather labour to avoid sinne by knowledge, then venture to sin upon the conceit of repentance. D elay is dangerous when we are once resolved: if ever good, why not now? E very man is charged with every good worke, all holy duties are required of all men: if we know Christ, we will imitate him. R emember that as addition a addes to grace, so multiplication increaseth the effect of those graces. R epentant eyes are true Cisternes of holy water, and the sighs of sorrow∣full spirits on earth, makes the Spirits joyfull in heaven. A s God regards not so much the quantity, as the quality; not how much, but how true faith is: so he never rejected them that had any at all. N either the greatnesse of crime, not the thortnesse of time can bar true conversation from for givenesse.
K nowledge, vertue, temperance, patience, godlinesse, brotherly kindnes, and charity, with one end tyed to heaven, fasten the other end to the conscience, and it shall draw thee up to heaven. S aving knowledge takes away barrennesse, andmakes fruitfulnesse in the works of obedience. T here be two things torment a man, sin and a bad conscience, grace deli∣vers from sin, and peace quiets the conscience. O ne that hath a will bent to doe harme, and a wit able to prosecute it is like a Canon shot that makes a Lane where it goes. T here is fearfull combustion all over the world, wars at home, wars a∣broad; if therefore we love peace, let every man pray for peace. H ee that desires to be found in peace, let peace be found in him, peace or nothing, peace and every thing. E arthly peace the earth can give, though sometimes she will not: but the peace of Christ the world cannot take away. F or profit peace is like the dew of heaven that makes all fat and fruitfull; wheresoever peace sets her foot, there drops fatnesse. R egeneration makes a man like the Garden of Eden, wherein stands the Tree of life: Jesus Christ when he dyed, one Paradise entred into another, O ur condemantion is great, if we know the light, and yet chuse darknes. N o more but eight saved of the old world: see what sin can doe, bring many millions to eight persons. T here can be no safety without faith, there is no faith without a promise, and no promise is made to disobedience. C hrist was made a sinner by the reputation of our sinnes; and we made just by the imputation of his justice. L ife brings appetite, appetite brings desire of meat, and meat affords nou∣rishment, if the soule hungers not after Christ, it lives not. O ur sins deceived us of our birthright, let it not deceive us of our blessing: it stole us from our happinesse of nature, let it not steale us from our hap∣pinesse of grace. S inne shews the Devill horrible, God a severe judge, let the Gospell re∣move that: God is my father, the Devill his and thy slave. E very wound of Christ is a passage, his side was opened, his heart was pierced: through both these breaches we have entrance into heaven. T his is a faithfull saying, and worthy all acceptance that Christ can forgive more, then we can offend: but that he will forgive all, is a fearfull question. O ur salvation is sure in Christ; upon sin, will follow doubt; upon doubt, terror; upon terror, remorse, upon remorse, deprecation: upon that par∣don, and after that peace.
Y f holinesse be not in the heart, it is not where it should be: Ismael was an unbeleever in the house of faith. O pen thy heart as well as thine eare: if the seed of Gods Word be not sowne there, it will never abound with fruit to everlasting life. V ertue is not temporall, but is still ambitious of improving it selfe, and so is admitted into the number of Gods Jewells. R ecollect your selves, and become fruitfull trees, that when God trans∣plants you from this misery, he may set you in his owne glorious garden. O ur best works are but blanks, then let us goe out of our selves, and be be∣holding to the righteousnesse of Christ only for our salvation. R aise thy affections above a common pitch, and let thy soule bear herself as the Spouse of the great King of heaven. D iligence respects so great an object as salvation, and such an object re∣quires great diligence. E lection in heaven, calls for vocation on earth; vocation calls for corne, wine, and oyle, which are the fruits of a godly life. R iches brings contention, godlinesse brings contentation: gaine hath of∣ten hurt the getters, but piety is profitable to all men. O ne Jesus Christ in the Gospell never satiated any man that read him: therefore let the Word of God dwell in you plentiously. R ecover you affecttions so deare to you, that were the prisoners and drud∣ges to lust, and let them now doe service to God. C harity gives part of thy wealth to the poore, but faith gives thy self, yea thy whole self to God. L et this sinfull flesh doe what it can, it shall not hinder thy entrance into heaven, for which thanke God through Jesus Christ. O ur good is only accepted through the righteousnesse of Christ, our very persons are accepted in the beloved: if our persons, then our good actions. S ecurity and expectation are opposites: the servant that lookes for his Masters comming is afraid to fall asleep. E very man that is kinde to his brother, comes with best speed to his Maker. O f such a zeale as prefers Gods service before all other things, comes true godlinesse. R ighteousnesse of reparation is the reforming of errors, and confirming of manners, salving past defects by a bettered life. D ivorce must be suffered, one husband must be lost, happy is he that findes another in heaven, Christ Jesus. E ndeavour to be saved, is no easie taske, but requires labour; refuse no worke for such a reward as heaven is.
R ead the Scriptures constantly, and meditate upon them: for it was holy Davids practise day and night. T o be strong to sin is no credit for man, for strength to sin, is to be strong to goe to hell. O Christian acknowledge thy dignity, and being made the consort of a di∣vine Nature, returne not by thy degenerate conversation unto thy anci∣ent vildnesse. T o small purpose doe we keep the Law in memory, and break it in life; in vaine do we remember Christ in our words, and forget him in our deeds. H ee that carties a Bible in his hand, and hath not a leston of it in his heart, is like an Asse that carries a dainty burden on his backe, and feeds upon thistles. E ither they had no beginning or no end, whose end is worse then their beginning: for death that ends other miseries, begins his that falls away from God. R emembrance of one daies sin, brings to minde how great a masse many dayes have made up; too great a bottome for one houres sorrow to ra∣vell out. I n youth I was too yong, now I am too old, between both these time I had other businesse: so to shufflle off repentance, is very dangerous. G ods patience invites our repentance, his sparing us so long, is, that our a∣mendment might proeure him to spare us for ever. H ee that hath any motion of repentance in his soule, or but a touch of sor∣row, a sparke of hope, a graine of saith, be comforted; the God of mer∣cie will not have him perish. T his is our day, the next is the Lords; if we do not in this day provide for that, that day shall condemne us for the losse of this. H ee that hath a secret pride, root out that, or a secret infidelity cast out that: strive not to know where or when we shall be judged; but how we shall answer the Judge. A s no day without sin, so let no day passe without sorrow, such showres kill the weeds of lust, and spring the herbs of grace. N ot a Lot in Canaan without a Joshua our Captaine: no roome in heaven without a Jesus our King. D oe not protract thy conversion: for if thou repell or neglect one good motion, thou art not sure of a second. W ithout some sawce of sorrow, all worldly delights are but like delicate meat to a man that hath lost his taste: give God leave to scrourge us, so long as he doth save us. H ee that is lowest in the World, if his conversation be in Heaven, is the
highest, let his feet stand upon the earth, his head is in heaven. E very one puts off conversion, and at twenty send Religion afore them to thirty, from thence forty; and yet not pleased to entertaine it at three∣score: at last comes death, and allowes not an houre. E very man repent while he lives, that he may rejoyce when he dyes. L et every man be sure to repent one day before his death: but hereof thou canst not be sure unlesse thou repent every day. E arth must do something to bring it selfe to heaven: Gods bountifuluesse is beyond our thankfulnesse, then looke to thine owne duty. T o speake of vertue is nothing, the labour of it, is to shew the power of it in vertuous actions. O ur conversation is the Index of our estate, if that be bad, the credit of our profession is lost, and we are broke in our Religion. T hat heart that conceives grace will bring it forth; for he that gives strength, denies not strength to bring it forth. H ee that is truly called, hath a sincere devout affection to Christ, and a∣bove all things loves the place where his honour dwells. E vill men may shew the good they have not: but good men cannot hide the good they have. L et thy life grow white thy haires, lest thou be full of daies, and fuller of sinne. E very mans conscience testifies that there is a rule, which if he follow hee does well, and is at peace; if not, he findes trouble, with feare of pu∣nishment. F aith is the foundation of a Christian, but that once lost, all is desperate, T he good man sleeps more secure in his tent, then a sinner in his barraca∣doed fortifications. H appy is the man that cares not to call any thing his owne, save Jesus Christ. A righteous soul is alwayes like the body of a square figure; lay it how you list, it will still be constant, and like it selfe. N o neighbourhood is able to make the Serpent and the Woman, the cur∣sed seed of the one, and the blessed seed of the other agree. D eath is contrary to life, and commonly they that live like Laban, dye like Nabal, which is but the same word inverted. W hen man turnes himselfe out of Gods service, all the creatures serving him are turned out of his service. H ee that plaies on purpose to lose, is not like to win: therefore be resolved against transgression, as you would be resolved of your salvation. E ither never chuse me, or never lose me, this is vertues charge: to begin
in the spirit and end in the flesh, in Pauls sense is folly. E very man must fall, and as the tree falls so it must lye; and commonly it falls to that side which is most loaden with fruit, the fruit of obedience to the right hand, and of wicked nesse to the left. L et us eat to live, not live to eat; for when we have devoured the most delicate creatures, the wormes shall devoure us. E very man that lives dishonestly will dye shamefully: Saul so bloudied against David, that the Priests became unmercifull to him. T he lesse space a man hath allowed him for his businesse, the more let him ply it: the fewer dayes the fruitfuller lessons. O sinner thy life is short, the world is not long, but hell is eternall, of whose torment there is no cessation, and from which there is no redemption. T ime past is irrecoverable, the future to us is contingent, and our very now is slippery and transcient: this is all the terme we have, we must en∣joy this or none. H oly David ran the way of Gods Commandements: it is but folly to ask why he made such haste, when we know he would faine be at home. E very day will I blesse and praise thy name, saith David: the day will have an evening, if his praise should last no longer, night would bring in silence, but for ever and ever. R ide faire and foftly, is the weary travellers rule when he comes near his journeyes end: but if we lag so in the way of godlinesse, we shall never come to the end of our expected journey. I s there fulnesse of joy in Heaven? yes: but thy laughing and singing in a Taverne is no paterne of it. G reat honour and glory is in heaven: but our base covetous desires of the riches of this world, are no paternes of it. H eavenly musicke and harmony is above: but our wanton sonnets and drunken carches, are no paternes of it. T here is peace and rest above: but mans idle security and slippery neglects are no paternes of it. H eavenly beauties with clarity are above: but mans peecing the defects of nature with art, dressing up of dust in rich atires, are no paterns of it. A great light shines above: but the workes of darknesse that is in man, is no reflection of it. N othing but pure innocencie is above: but mans rapines, rage, and blou∣dinesse, are no resemblances of it. D oubtlesse there is perfect obedience above: but mans rebellions, are no modules of it. O ther language then the praises of Christ is not heard in heaven: mans
oaths, curses, and blasphemies, are not like those sounds. R epent and for sake your sinnes while it is called to day, remember the covenat we made in baptisme forbids it. L ooke to the innumerable savours where with God hath blessed us, gra∣ced and honoured us, and we shall find them sufficient to oblige us to o∣bedience. E ither the name of Saviour in our salvation, or the name of Judge in our confusion, some way this honourable name will strike upon us. F eare God more, and we shall feare all other things lesse; turne all thy feare into the feare of God, for he will honour them that honour him. T ill we have put our sins to the worst, we shall never get the better of our enemies: for God will not be wanting to us, if we be not wanting to him, and our selves. W hen rebellions abound, punishments are full of variety: God destroyed Corah by fire, the Canaanites by the sword, the whole earth by water. H ee little loves Christ, that will not love him without company, and his zeale is cold to heaven, whom the example of numbers can turn away. E very true childe is obedient, and will follow his fathers directions: then if we follow not God, we are bastards. E very promise of God is a cordiall able to fetch backe a swooning soule: there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ, is a sweet cordiall. L et every Christian soule on the holy feet of faith and obedience travell towards Jerusalem, then Christ will say thou shalt have my company. E arth is more honourable and brave in the spectators then in the spectacle: but the glory of new Jerusalem, the splendor of righteousnesse, is farre more honourable. A s a traveller passeth from Towne to Towne, till he come to his Inne: so the Christian from Grace to Grace till he come to Heaven. B lessed is that man that is holy, nothing can make that man poore, for he graceth all conditions, honours and places. O ne grace opens the doore for another; for God is never weary of bles∣sing where he hath once begun. V ivification and living unto grace, comes only by mortification and dying unto sinne: for by the death of the body, comes the life of glory. T here is nothing for which Christ will reward us, but that whereby his glory is the greater for us: such as in great tribulations confesse him. R eprobates and wicked men, if their bodies were like their soules, they would grovell like beasts. A s God shews mercy to some in their salvation: so it is fit he should shew justice upon others in their damnation.
N othing can defend against the arrows of God, neither are the strongest Cities shot-proofe: for things ordained for refuge, are by his justice made destructive. K nowledge neglected brings great judgements: for he that cloaks error with ignorance, binds two sins together, and receives double vengeance. S innes of ignorance stand in need of mercy: but what cloake is long e∣nough to cover sinnes against knowledge? O f servants they are in worst case that are sold, but worse that do service in prison, worst of all bound in fetters: such is the condition of the ungodly. P estilence should not be more avoided then the conversation of the mis∣religious or openly prophane. E xpiation was offered for the world, and offered to the world: but those that are blessed by it, are separated from the world. N othing so sure as there shall be a judgement: such as is the conscience, such shall be the sentence. B oasting of sin when it is done doubles the lewdnesse, wicked men glory in that which shall everlastingly cast them from glory. A Canon doth not so much hurt from a wall as a myne under the wall, nor a thousand enemies that threaten, so much as a few that take an oath to say nothing. C hristianity is become the footstoole of policie, and hath made bargaines with the World for universall Monarchy, Religion being but the labell to that Indenture. K nowledge is not wholly exercised with good, nor wholly taken up with evill; but it knows both good and evill: thus man thought to have be∣come like God, and became indeed like the Devill. W ee know Christ to be the best Counsellour: therefore undertake nothing without consulting at his Oracle. A whole garment is more hand some then a broken one: but a broken heart is more pleasing to God then a whole heart. R epentace is the necessary way to salvation: it is the will of God that none should perish; yet withall it is his will that all shall perish, except they repent. D estruction would not fall upon the wicked, unlesse they first by their wic∣kednesse bring it upon themselves: O Israel, thou hast destroyed thy self. T he imitaters of evill deserve punishment, the abetters more: but there is no hell deep enough for the leaders of wickednesse. O ur owne feet carrie us to sin; we love the journey, our affections seduce us, and so have been our undoing. Y f there will come no period to the rebellion of the wicked till they sinke
downe to hell: yet for shame know no date of thy obedience till thou come up to heaven. O f all victories love is the greatest; to overcome evill with good, is to be like God, whose Image we beare in our creation; and to whose Image we are restored in our redemption. U pright justice is without equivocation, it seeks not to obey God for mans sake, but man for Gods sake; it obeyes men, but never against God. R ighteousnesse and all happinesse is in the will of God to his creature, for holinesse is the daughter of repenance. O ur persons are justified by our faith, our faith is justified by our charity, our charity by the actions of a holy life. R emember that there is nothing that makes a man so unlike to God as a hard heart without pity, without patience. D iligence and patience, with painfulnesse, are good: but it is the sincere∣nesse of the heart that commends the rest. E very Christian souldiers scutchion must be patience, and his motto, I serve: Angells are glad of this title. R emember the end is neare, thy end nearer, whether the end of this shall not be the end of all thy dayes, thou hast no assurance: to day then heare his voice; repent one day before thy last day. O ld age were better gather grace for themselves, then goods for their po∣sterity; for it is their last time of gathering. R eward belongs to labourers, not loyterers; the Crowne is laid up not for cowards, but for Conquerers. O into what infortunate times are we fallen, when all our wrongs must be answered in blood! P ray and repent; repent and pray: joyne with them abstinence, adde to them three, patience, faith, obedience, and amendment of life; and the Lord our God will deliver us. E very man kisse that hand that strikes us, love God that crosseth us, and trust in that power that kills us: this is the honorable proof of a Christian. N o man is the worse for his repentant grief; if the evill do come; its labour well spent, if not its a labour well lost. O ur good God takes it in a foule scorne to speake, and not be heard; to be heard, and not minded. R eligion promiseth no worldly pleasures; but contrary, they shall whip and scourge you they shall binde and lead you whither you would not. D oe as the most doe, and fewest will finde fault with you: but God char∣geth us not to follow a multitude in evill. E very mans hand is not an able instrument of mischiefe: but whosoever
the instrument be the consenter is as deep both in the sin and the penalty. R ighteous men shall never be swept away for company: yet the unrigh∣teous are often spared for company. F ew words to the wicked in the latter day, but full of bitternesse: depart, word of separation: ye cursed, words of malediction: into everlasting fire, words of desolation: prepared for the Devill and his angell, words of exemplification. I n many things familiarity breeds contempt: but in these things strange∣nesse and ignorance hath made men prophanely insolent. E very man hath his knowledge from nature; but the Christian his from grace: one is from earth, the other from heaven. L et no man cast with himselfe how old he may be before he returne from his sinnes, lest he reckon without his host. S inne is like Stibium, it will tarry with no body, up it must, either here by an humble confession, or hereafter by a wretched confusion. T here can be no full satisfaction or consolation in the minde of any know∣ledge but of Ghrist. O utward crosses and calamities may take from us our goods of this world, but it can never take Christ Jesus from us. T he contempt of the truth makes it not worse, but thy selfe, and the ad∣vancing of it makes it not better, but thy self. H ee that is alwaies for the time, nothing for the truth, is like a top that goes alwayes round, never forwards, unlesse it be whipt. E very worldling is left-handed, he will be doing, though hee have no thanks for his paines. R eligion derived from Christ preserves unity with Christians: he that will not keep the peace of God, shall not be kept by the peace of God. I t is easie for the greatnesse of authority to beare out the smalnesse of pie∣ty, and commonly the sins of the mighty are mighty sinnes: therefore their destruction is answerable to their presnmption. G ods children have three suits of apparrell, blacke, white, and red; here we are blacke with mourning, red with parse cution; and shall be white only glorified. H ee that mournes for the cause of his punishment shall mourn but a while; but he that mournes for the punishment and not for cause, shall mourne for ever. T he good man looks into himself, not into another; and therefore thinks best of another, not of himself. O bedience it selve would lose a reward by comming short, but for perseve∣rance: for no vertue can expect eternall blessednes, but that which holds out to the end.
R emember, O man, how short thy time in and be not weary of thy pains: for what cause can be long in that which is so short of it selfe? L ooke where the glory of this world ends, the glory of heaven begins: but riches are here to day, and gone to morrow. E very service in the end brings wages: but the wages of sinne is without end. F lattering up others in their sinnes, is the very next way to make them our owne. T he Word of God sets down the wages of sin, and tyes punishment to it as an inseparable effect to the cause. H ee that chose us when we were not called, and called us when we were nought, and hath justified us being sinners, will glorifie us being Saints. A man may partake of one nature of Christ, and be cursed: but if of his divine, then most blessed. N ature created, and nature corrupted, is the difference between Gods workmanship and ours. D eath is fearfull wages when it is paid in the proper coine, without the allay of Christs death to qualifie it. O ne that will plead Christs cause without a fee; or he that will say with Job, Though he kill me, yet I will trust in him, shews the heart of a Saint. R esolve with Hester, If I perish, I perish: for nothing can be lost that wee piously trust God withall. F aith goes along with Christ from his cradle to his crosse, it sees him do∣ing good, and suffering ill. R ecrant souldiers first forsake their courage, and the last thing that forsakes them is their heels. O ur backwardnesse requires continuall provocation; to be good is a thing hardly gotten, quickly forgotten. M ans habitation pleaseth him, his gold bewitcheth him, a womans beau∣ty tempteth him, and yet all is but earth. T ruth is never to be numbred by the pole; for it is not numbers, but weight that should carry it. H e that mouths a Pater noster while his heart is in his coffer, as if he would at once serve God and mammon, in vaine thinks himselfe godly. E arth will to earth, an earthly desire to an earthly center: so man lives till earth bee turned into earth: so he dyes till earth be turned out of earth, their earthly soule into hellish torments: such a life is base and brutish. C omplaine not though other men blanch thee, so long as thou hast fel∣lowship with Jesus Christ.
E very man be contented with his owne measure of good things vouchsa∣fed him, for God will not be prescribed. N one but the King of Kings, hath right to the stile Imperiall, I will, or I will not, without limitation; because his will and power are matches only. T o obey well is as great as to governe well, and more mens duties; they that thinke otherwise, know not the Christians part, which is to suffer. E nter not into a restlesse course of life for honour, for a Princes breath blowes is up, and the Peoples breath blowes it away. R eady for honour, ready for disgrace, for poverty, for riches, for joy or sorrow, for life or death, for all: such a Christian will hold out to the latter end. O ur grace is Gods glory, the more we are amended, the more he is com∣mended: thus the truth appeares greater in us, though it cannot bee made greater by us. P erseverance is the queen of all vertues; and the master of all temptations, commands to sight against none but those that persevere in goodnesse. E vill men may shew the good they have not; but good men cannot hide the good they have. N othing but grace can satisfie the soule of man, give him grace, and then be goes away springing like Joseph, and singing like David. T here cannot be a greater argument of a foule soule then the deriding of religious actions. O ther sins have but three enemies to deale withall: but a backslider hath a fourth, a hard heart. Y f we receive not the blessed Gospell with faith and feare, Sodome and Gomerah never sinned as we sin, nor were never so plagued as we shall bee. O pinion of the minde are like diseases of the body, all alike infinite. V iolent passions makes men bandy controversies, who fight with their Pens, like Souldiers with their Pikes, wounding the peace of the Church. R eligion is more practicall then theoriticall; rather an occupation then a meer profession, dwelling like an Artizan, wit at singers end. O ne man is an Atheist, and beleeves no God, another is an I dolater, and worships many: one will be of a new Religion, another of none: no matter to the Devill, they are both travelling towards his kingdome. Roome never means us so sudden a storm as when she makes faire weather, and beares us in hand all is peace. D ogs are fawning, but sicophantising Iesuits are worse; for their tongues doe more harme then their teeth.
E very man that will not adhere to the God of truth, shall be turned over to the faither of lies. R esist the Devill and he will flye from thee; give to God obedience, to thy Prince allegiance, to superiours reverence, to the weak assistance, to the Devill and sin resistance. O ur day is broken, why day we sleep in sin: when the Sunne is up good husbands thinke of rising: the slumber of the body and the soul is not much unlike. R epent therefore in life, that thou maiest finde comfort in death; that thou maiest be acquitted at the day of judgement of Jesus Christ. O ur entrance into this world is full of weaknesse, our proceeding full of wickednesse, our departure full of wretchednesse. P ray that you may leave the earth when you know the way perfectly to heaven: desire to live till you are inspired by grace, desire to dye when you are assured of glory. E very man with Paul learne to dye daily; for no man knows when he shall dye: therefore be evermore armed with expectation. N ever expect peace without Christ: whosoever dyes in peace, dyes in Christ the Prince of peace. O ur breath is in our bodies; the life of our soules is in heaven, our bodies move upon earth, let our heart dwell in heaven. R ighteousnesse must dwell in those that looke to dwell in heaven, where righteousnesse dwelleth: for Christ is the Lord of righteousnesse. D eath takes the clocke of our life asunder: but then the omnipotent Maker takes it into his owne hand, and sets it together againe at the Resur∣rection. E nquire not what heaven is too curiously, lest thou have a snib, as Manoah had for asking the Angels name, it is secret and wonderfull. R emember Gods mercies and blessings to us in all times of this pilgrimage, and he will hear us when we pray, with the penitent theefe, Lordremem∣ber us in thy Kingdome.
Silence. STand right in your Files. Stand right in your Rankes. To the right hand. As you were. To the left hand. As you were. To the right hand about. As you were. To the left hand about. As you were. Rankes to the right hand double. As you were. Rankes to the left hand double. As you were. Files to the right hand double. As you were. Files to the left hand double. As you were. Halfe Files to the right hand double your Front. As you were. Halfe Files to the left hand double your Front. You may doe the same by bringers up, or leave it our. To the right hand Countermarch. To the left hand Countermarch. Files to the right or left, or to the Center: Close to your order, or close order. Rankes close forward to your order, or close order. To the right hand wheel. To the left hand wheel. To the right or left hand wheel about. Rankes open backward to your order, open order, or double distance. Files to the right or left, or from the Center, open to your order, or open order. In distances observe, if you open from the right to the left, that the left hand man next to the right hand man, is to take his distance from the said right hand man first, and so every man on the left hand successively one alter another: be in any of the distances of close order, order, open order, or double distance: If in Ranks, the first standing, the second opens backwards to either of the distances above said and not forwards: in closing of Ranks it is to be done forwards, and not backwards, all mo∣ving together, saving the first Ranks.
In facings you are to be sure to keepe your left foot on the grounds: in doublings if you come up to the right, turne off to the left, and so alway to the contrary hand. In wheelings, if you close to the left, then wheel to the right, or if you close to the right, wheel to the left, or you may wheel upon the Center. According to my intended purpose, I shall adde to the exercise of the Pike and Musket in the briefest manner, being only what shall belong to present service: and first for the Pike: in all standing postures of the Pike, keep your left foot fast fixt upon the ground: in all marching postures move with the left foot advancing for∣ward. 1 Advance your Pikes. 2 Order your Pikes. 3 Shoulder your Pikes. 4 Port your Pikes. 5 Advance your Pikes. 6 Shoulder your Pikes. 7 Traile your Pikes. 8 Cheeke your Pikes. 9 Charge your Pikes. 10 Shoulder your Pikes. 11 Charge to the Front, Reare, right or left. 12 Shoulder your Pikes. 13 Advance your Pikes. 14 Or order your Pikes. 15 Charge to the horse and draw your sword any of the foure wayes. For the Musket standing or marching: First, your Musket not being char∣ged without a Rest, supposing alwayes your left hand to be your Rest. 1 Slip your Muskes. 2 Poyse your Muskes. 3 Bring her to your Rest. 4 Open your Pan. 5 Clear your Pan. 6 Prime your Pan. 7 Shut your Pan. 8 Cast off. 9 Blow, cast about, and 10 Charge. 11 Draw out your scourer 12 Shorten your scourer 13 Put in your bullet. 14 Ram your scourer 15 Draw out your scourer 16 Shorten your scourer 17 Put up your scourer 18 Recover. 19 Poyse. 20 Shoulder. 21 Slope. 22 Slip. 23 Poyse. 24 Bring to your Rest. 25 Draw forth your Match. 26 Blow. 27 Cock. 28 Try. 29 Guard your Pan. 30 Blow. 31 Open. 32 Present. 33 Give fire. 34 Returne your match. 35 Clear your pan, and so charge again as is taught.
All these in service are reduced into these three words: Make ready. With these two added, either Shoulder your Muskets. Present. Or Give fire. Order your Muskets. T he postures of arming and disarming, according to my intention of brevity is needlesse to be here inserted, they having been sufficiently written of by your Trai∣ned Band teachers: I shall but only present you further with what firings are ne∣cessary for our present service out of a single Company or Regiment: wishing hear∣tily all noble Captaines, and their officers, would conforme themselves to these brief rules, using no other words of Command then what are here used. Y our single Company being drawne up Regiment wise at three foot distance, be∣ing your order, and your Pikes all shouldered the manner of firing to the Front, is first, let the two first Ranks, making ready, advance 8 or 10 paces from the Body, the rest of the Ranks marching to the front of Pikes; which two Ranks having pre∣sented and fired one after another, let them march off to the right and left hand, the next two ranks doing the same with the rest successively as long as you please, when you draw near to your Enemy, or by way of supposition, charge over your Pikes three ranks deep, and the rest ported following the charge. T o fire from the reare; first command your Body to advance their Pikes, then face them about to the right or left, and then shoulder your Pikes againe: moving your Body, command the two last Ranks to make ready, being ready, command the last Ranke, to the Rear present, who is to turn to the right hand, and give fire, and so turning up to the right and left, advanceth into Front, placing themselves before their Leaders: the rest of the Ranks doing the same successively one after another. T o fire from your right and left stanks, command the right and left hand file to make ready, which done, marching your Body, command them to present to the right and left, and so give fire, which being done, let the files stand and charge their Mus∣kets again, by which time the two next files wil have performed the like, who are also in like manner to stand facing toward their Commander, and the first file is imme∣diately to march up to the second: the next files having done the like are to stand, the first and second file advancing up to them; and so of all the rest successively making up your Body again with all speed that may be. T here is sometimes another firing used standing, whereby an Enemy may receive suddenly a very hot charge when you are retreating; command your Body to face a∣bout to the right or left, and then let them all make ready, which done standing, let the first Ranke fire and fall off into the Reare, and so the rest of them in like maner suc∣cessively one after another, your Pikes retreating back as your body loseth ground. Y ou are to use your endeavour to bring your souldiers to know the severall notes of a Drum, and what he is to performe upon the hearing of them, your Pikemen be∣ing to be shouldered upon the beat of a march, and advanced upon the beat of a troop: This thing perfected, will be sufficient for our present service: to which God give FINIS.
