H47 R20641 12679934 65620
LONDONS REMONSTRANCE TO THE PARLIAMENT, In subscribing to the Pro∣positions of both HOUSES, Concerning Money, Plate, Horse, Horse∣men, and Armes to be lent for the maintenance of an Army for the Kings Peace, and the safety of the Parliament. As it was concluded by the Lord Maior, Court of Aldermen, and Common-Councell-men of the Citie of LONDON, in Guild-Hall; and by the Ma∣sters, Wardens, &c. of all Companies in each severall Hall. With the just summe and proportion of Money and Plate collected, and to be presented to the Parliament. Received by Sir Iohn Wollaston Knight and Alder∣man, Alderman Towse, Alderman Warner, and Alder∣man Andrewes. Written by I. H. Gent. London printed for Iohn Harrison. Iune 23. 1642.
LONDONS REMONSTRANCE TO THE PARLIAMENT, In subscribing to the Pro∣positions of both HOUSES. SInce by too-apparent demon∣strations it appeares, that the King (deluded, and seduced by the evill Counsels of a malig∣nant party, whose Spirits are ill-affected to the publike peace of this Kingdome) intendeth to make warre against the Parliament, and that in con∣tinuance of the same intention, he hath already col∣lected and levyed great forces both of Horse and
Foot, to maintain the former resolution throughout the County of York, and a multitude of Papists, and other resolute and ill-disposed persons in other Counties adjacent; all which doe apparently inti∣mate his resolution to make warre against the Par∣liament: They have therefore after a serious and deliberate consideration thereof, propounded cer∣taine Propositions to the Citie of London, desiring their assistance in a present ayde for the security of both Houses; for otherwise the pernicious malice of such desperate persons, imployed in so horrid, and unnaturall an Act, will be ready to commit all outrage and violence, which will consequently tend to the dissolution of this present governement, the violation of the Priviledges of Parliament, the de∣struction of our Religion, and all hopes in refor∣ming the Church, to the perpetuall ruine of the Lawes, the liberty and propriety of the Subjects. Wherefore the Lords and Commons, considering how great an obligation doth lie upon them in Ho∣nour, Conscience, and Duty, according to the high trust reposed in them by the whole Kingdom, to use all possible meanes in such cases for the timely pre∣vention of so great and irrecoverable evils, have thought it expedient to publish their sence and ap∣prehensions of these imminent dangers; thereby to excite and extimulate all well-affected persons to contribute their respective assistance to the pre∣parations necessary for the opposing and suppres∣sing the trayterous attempts of those malignant spi∣rits. The Citie of London seemed to sympathize
exceedingly with these Propositions: and the Par∣liament were not more ready to propound them, then they as ready to performe, and obey the same. Last Tuesday the Lord Maior, Court of Alder∣men, and Common-Councell-men, met at Guild-Hall in distribution of their affections, and in con∣sultations what should be dispensed out of the Ci∣tie Treasurie. Every Company likewise did meet at their Halls, and there distributed every man re∣spectively; for men had better dispense with their Money and Plate, conditionally to receive the same with interest, and have the publike faith of the whole Kingdome engaged for the security thereof, then being parsimonious and refractory, perhaps have that Money and Plate taken violently from them by intestine enemies: and let any man judge, Whether the prevention of such impendent dangers be not more plausible then the policy and diligence of a Remedie, when extremity shall drive a man to the last hopes: It is more easie to keepe out of dangers, then to get out of them. Wherefore it were more prudent for men (that can spare mo∣ney, without any detriment or prejudice to them∣selves) to dispense with what money they can, for the conservation of peace voluntarily, then when violent warre shall come rushing in upon us, to dis∣pense then with compulsion; or else perhaps to be reduced to an estate not lesse miserable then slavish. But not to hold the Readers desiring eye in any lon∣ger suspense, I will delineate, and expresse the parti∣cular proportion of moneys gathered in London.
The Lord Maior, Court of Aldermen, and Com∣mon-Councell-men, sitting at Guild-Hall, made a fi∣nall determination of their intents, and have dis∣bursed fifty thousand pounds, partly out of the Ci∣tie Treasury, and partly out of their owne purses; and will maintaine fifty Horse. Most of the twelve Companies have dispensed twenty thousand pounds a piece; and of the other Companies, ten thousand pounds is the least that any have disbused: besides an infinite number of Plate that is lent, of an un∣knowne worth. Some Companies maintain three-score Horse, some forty, some thirty, but twenty is the least that any Company maintaines, with as ma∣ny Horse men: for the preservation of the publike peace and tranquility of the Kingdome, for the per∣sonall defence of the King, and both Houses of Par∣liament. The affection of no man was measured by any limitation, but according to the proportion of his offer, he expressed his good will to this service. But according to the appointment and direction of both Houses of Parliament, the Money, Plate, Horse, or Horse-men were delivered to Sir Iohn Wollaston, Knight and Alderman, Alderman Towse, Alder∣man Warner, and Alderman Andrewes: for they were Ordered to be Treasurers to receive all the Money and Plate, brought in for the purposes afore∣said. And the Acquittances of them, or of any two of them (as it was ordered by the Parliament) for the Receit of the same is a sufficient ground for the Party so lending Money, or Plate, to demand the same againe with interest; and likewise considerati∣on
for the fashion of the Plate. The totall summe of all the Moneys and Plate that the Citie hath brought in to the said Aldermen, is supposed to a∣mount to above ten hundred thousand pounds: the Horse and Horse-men to the number of about eight hundred and fifty; but there are many more Horse in preparation to bee sent. FINIS.
