I381 10746075 45633
A DECLARATION OF THE General Convention, OF IRELAND, WITH The late proceedings there, Newly brought over by a Gentleman, to the COUNCIL OF STATE IN ENGLAND. LONDON; Printed for Henry Crips, in Popes-head-Alley, 1660.
A DECLARATION OF THE General Convention OF IRELAND. WHereas the high extremities of Ireland necessarily requiring it, this General Convention is assem∣bled to consider of and apply remedies to redeem the Nation from those extremities; And whereas it is visible to all the Kingdoms and Nations throughout Christendom, and most lamentably felt by the three Nations of England, Ireland and Scotland, that the horrid vio∣lence offered to the authority and dignity of the Parliament of England in December, 1648. did let in all the miseries and cala∣mities in Church and State, which have ever since afflicted and distracted these Nations, and have plunged them in a gulf of sor∣rows and confusion, under which they have long suffered, and that not without secret designs and great endeavors utterly to ex∣tinguish the true reformed Protestant Religion, to eradicate Parliaments, to subvert the fundamental Laws of the Land, to take away the Rights, Liberties, Freedom and Propertyes of the people, and to introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Govern∣ment over these Nations.
And whereas the just consideration of those sad confusion brought upon these Nations, moved the Council of Officers of the Army in Ireland, by their Declaration Dated the sixteenth day of February 1659. to Declare for a Full and Free Parliament in England, wherein they have since had the General concurrence of all the Army in Ireland, This General Convention doth not only approve of the said Declaration of the Council of Officers of the Army, but doth also Declare that this Nation is resolved (by the blessing of God,) to joyn with the said Council of Officers & Army in Ireland, and with their brethren in England and Scotland, who have joyned or shall joyn, for the accomplishment of the good and publick ends therein expressed, and to conribute cheerfully and readily to the charges requisite thereunto by all good and Lawful ways, hoping by the mercy of God to be no less prosperous in this undertaking then the cause is just. And whereas (after the said Declaration of the Council of Offi∣cers of the Army in Ireland, and since the assembling of this Con∣vention,) there came advertisement of the sitting of the late ex∣cluded Members at Westminster, for which this General Conven∣tion, doth most humbly and thankfully acknowledg the great and extraordinary Providence of God, & his Mercies therein to these Nations; And doth Declare that this Nation doth Resolve (by the blessing of God) constantly to adhere to the present Parlia∣ment, and future Parliaments of England in the preservation of them in Fulness and Freedom. And this Convention doth also Declare and assert, that as for several hundreds of years last past, by the Laws and laudable Cu∣stom and constitution of this Narion, Parliaments have been usu∣ally held in Ireland, and that in those Parliaments Laws have been Enacted, and Laws repealed, and Subsidyes granted, as the pub∣lick occasions required, So that Right of having Parliaments held in Ireland, is still justly and Lawfully due and belonging to Ire∣land, and that the Parliament of England never charged Ireland in any Age with any Subsidyes, or other publick Taxes or Asses∣ments, until after the violence offered to the Parliament of England in December 1648. since which time; they who inva∣ded he Rights of the Parliaments of England, Invaded also the Rights of the Parliament of Ireland by imposing Taxes and Asses∣ments upon Ireland.
And because some of those who have been instrumental in draw∣ing on and increang the Miseries, Calamities, and Desolations of these Nations, particularly, the late Lt: Gen. Edmond Ludlow, Col. John Jones, Miles Corbet Esq and Col. Matthew Thomlinson, and others of turbulent spirits, have laboured, and do labour to asperse this Nation falsly and scandalously, as if the people of Ire∣land did by their necessitated proceedings intend to divide or se∣parate from England, Therefore this Convention for vindicating this Nation from that fowl and unjust calumny and aspersion, and for satisfaction as wel of our brethren in England, as of all the World, doth surther Declare, That the People of Ireland, are so far from designing or intending to divide or separate from Eng∣land, as that they conclude such a Division or Separation would be absolutely destructive to the Nation, and is that, then which there is nothing that Ireland more abhorres, they being General∣ly bone of their bone, and flesh of their flesh, and therefore that they do Resolve (by the Mercy of God) for ever to adhere to England, as that Nation which hath derived to Ireland such and so great Comforts, Benefits and Advantages, and all in so high a degree, as the welfare and Interests of England and Ireland are so infeparably interwoven as the good or evil of either, must neces∣sarily become common to both. And this Convention doth also Declare, That they will use their best endeavor, that a Pious, Learned and Orthodox Preach∣ing Ministry of the Gospel and no other, may be setled through∣out Ireland, and that only in a Parochial way, and encouraged and supported by Tythes and other Legal maintainance, and Univer∣sities and Schools of Learning countenanced and cherished; And that all Arrears of the Army, as well those due to such as have been Officers or Soldiers of the Army of Ireland before the fifth of June 1649. as those since, may be satisfied; And that all the Estates and Interests of all Adventures, their Heirs and Assign's, who by virtue of the Act of 17. Carol, fot satisfaction of Adventurers, have had forfeited Lands assigned to them by Lot, and possessed by them accordingly, may be confirmed to them; and that care be had for the just satisfaction of Adventurers, who have not yet had satisfaction pursuant to the said Act; and that such Officers and Soldiers as are or have been of the army in Ire∣land,
heirs their Executors, administrators and assigns, and have had forfeited Lands ordered or set forth unto them, and possessed by them accordingly, may have the same confirmed to them. And this General Convention having discharged their duty herein to God, and to their Country, do in the greatest humility Implore almighty God so to guide and dispose all things as may tend to the Glory of his Name, the advancement of the true Re∣formed Protestant Religion, and the Unity, Peace and Tran∣quility of the three Nations of England, Ireland and Scotland. Dated at Dublin the 8. of March 1659. The 12. of March, 1659. Ordered by the General Convention of Ireland that this Declara∣be forthwith Printed and Published. Mat. Barry, Clerk of the General Convention of Ireland. An account of the chief Occurrences of Ireland. Wednesday, Feb. 22. THe womb of this day, no less then others, was pregnant with joyfull tydings: nor was there ever more reason for the whole Nation to congratulate one another with Songs of Thanksgiving, there being so sweet a harmony of many prospe∣rous events tuned by the Almighty hand of Providence: so that we are are confident ere long the world will see a good Account of Gods mecifull dispensations about the ways and ands for which we have lately engaged. Nor despair we of convincing if not sa∣tisfying our very enemies, being men many of them, in whose Ignorance, the world may read in legible characters, the hatred of Universities: in their avarice and self-giftedness, the extirpa∣tion of Ministers and Ministery: and in a strange complication of ambition and fear, rightly apprehending that Justice never dies, their implacable malice against a Free Parliament. The most remrkable chractey of this day was given by Sir Hardress Wallers departure, whose pretty affronts by the private Souldiers were highly redeemed by the civility of the superior. Officers: and so he was conveyed away to Athlone.
A Letter from W. Lord Caulfield to the right Honorable Sir Charls Coot, dated at Charlemount, Feb. 20. 1659. May it please your Lordship, AT my coming to this place, I immediately acquainted the Officers and Souldiers here with your Lordships and the Armies Proceedings and Declaration, whose general concurrence I had both from the Horse and Foote, with great rejoycings and acclamation; and this day the chief Gentlemen of the Country doe meet here, from whom I hope your Lordship will receive a speedy Address and congratulation for that most acceptable ser∣vice your Lordship hath been pleased to enterprize, and which hitherto God hath blessed with successe. Before I came down, the Anabaptists party were very high, and spake big words, be∣ing confident of a sudden change for their advantage: but now they are more dejected then ever. I beseech your Lordship think upon settling the Militia, which if it be placed under the charge of faithfull men, would by the blessing of God be as con∣siderable a strengthening to your Lordships hands as the whose Army. If any thing shall occur in these parts worthy of your Lordships knowledg, I shall not fail in my duty to your Lord∣ship, in the mean time I beseech your Lordship impose your commands upon Your Lordships most humble and most faithfull servant, W. CAVLFIELD. Friday, Feb. 24. Another Letter to the right Honorable Sir Charls Coot, &c. From Capt. Whaley, Dated at Nenaugh, Feb. 22. 1659. THe sum of it is to declare, how himself and others were al∣ways ready to observe his Lordships commands, and in per∣fect obedience to his late declaration signed by the Council of Officers at Dublin. the rest may be omitted about his judhe∣ment of the Anabaptists, and some wholsome reflections on the tyranny of the Quakers. Thus without determining which is a grea∣ter
preparative to the common destruction, their first Tyranny, or their fifth Monarchy, he tells his Lordship in hast, that he re∣maines his Lordships most humble and faithful servant, &c. A Letter from the Mayor of Droghedah to Sir Charls Coot. Right Honourable; IN Answer to your Honours Letters and Declaration to the Mayor of this Town directed, which came to his hands on Lords-day in the morning last, which on Munday being the Nineteenth instant about Eight of the Clock in the Morning, was Proclaimed in three several places of this Town by beat of Drum; And this day all the Inhabitants of the said Town being Summo∣ned, did Meet, and unanimously did own the same, and the said Declaration is Ordered by the said Assembly to be Registred in the Assembly book of the said Town, as a Record for future Ages of your Honours, and the rest of the Officers Care and Pains therein, and the Town in their Names desire me to return Your Lordship thanks. Droghedagh the 21. of February 1659. ED. MARTIN Mayor. Monday, Feb. 27. THursday much joy was occasioned among us by the Lord Broghils coming to Dublin: he having first been complemented by the Lord President and other persons of quality meeting him on the way. This day the convention met at the Tholsell, but no∣thing was done but to adjourne the Convention to Friday next ensuing, in expectation of a full con∣fluence of all the Members.
Wednesday, Feb. 29. Among al the days since the first stone laid in Ireland the testimony of Gods mercie hath not revealed it self to this Nation, than in the news of this day sent from England. For we shall ever acknowledge. That the birth day of the English liberty in readmitting the excluded Members to sit in Parliament; and the Christning of it in committing the military affairs of the three nations to the valor and fidelity of Gene∣rall Monk, is a blessing, of which we have nothing to complain, but our unworthinesse to receive it. This evening was ended with abundance of bonfires ringing of bells, acclamations of joy throughout the whole City of London. Friday, March 2. This day being the second Session of the Con∣vention at Dublin, after the adjournment. First the Members in great solemnity met at Christs-Church, to lay the foundation of their future councils incon∣sulting with the Oracle. Here M. Cox an eminent Peacher of the City, entertained them with a Ser∣mon full of piety and discretion; neither forgetting the Magistrate in laying his duty before him, nor himself, in running beyond the bounds of the Gospel, to plunge himself over head and ears in matters of State, or another cognizance. He was observed to have many Lessons and two Whips. First for buyers & sellers, turning all mechanical & unordained Prea∣chers out of the Temple: and then, for another sort of men, who more desparately whip the Temple it self out of the Temple, by gethering Churches out
of Churches. So that after much winnowing, nothing is, lest the poor Parish but the windie chaff and ex∣crements of Christianity; the good grain being puri∣fied keeps close together in a comfortable private combination. Thus the Preacher. He having with great approbation concluded, the honourable Mem∣bers of the Convention departed to the place of their Meeting, and there fell upon the necessary work of their Generation. This day Sir James Barry was much talked of for a noble speech made by him in the Convention, which is elsewhere to be Printed; it being thought worthy to stand alone, that it may receive the ad∣miration of the eye in a single encounter, which is lost in a croud of other businesses. After this Speech of Sir James Barry, many others inflam'd with the success of his fortunate eloquence have since playd the good Orators in the Conven∣tion, where without popularity aiming onely at the good of the people, (the natural end of artificial speaking) they all as it were with one spirit, shewed the various perfections of their art, in beautifying one common Theme, to wit, That the benefit of Ire∣land is chiefly contained in a subordination to the authority of Parliament now sitting in England. This argument is further confirmed by the greatest To∣pick of the nation, the authority of the Convention; by whose Order a Declaration is already prepared to be made publick. Note also, that the late Decla∣ration of Sir Charls Coot and the rest of the Officers of the Army, instead of a laurel, the trivial ensign of out forefathers glory, hath been more remarkably crowned with a full and ample approbation from the House.
Saturday, March 3. Devotion opened the womb of this morning, and the first thing it was delivered of, was Prayer: which duty was performed by Mr. Cox, and afterwards the first thing ordered was, That thanks be given Mr. Cox for his great pains in the Friday Sermon, desiring that he would constantly perform the duty of Pray∣er in the House every morning: and Ordered that Sir Theo. Jones, Col. Ar. Hill and Dr. Loftus repaire unto him with the thanks of the House, and signifie their desires that he would print this Sermon. Ordered, That the Lord Broghil, Dr. Jones, Sir Paul Davis, Sir William Bury, Dr. Loftus, Major As∣ton, Mr. Recorder Byss, Mr John Temple, and Sir John Clotworthy or any four or more of them, be & are ap∣pointed a committee of this convention to prepare a draught of a Declaration for a day of Humiliation to be kept in the City and Suburbs of Dublin on Friday next being the 9. of this instant March, and in the other parts of the Nation on Friday three weeks next, being the 30 of this instant March. Ordered, That Mr. Cox and Mr. Charnock be and are desired by this Convention to preach in Christ-Church on the said Humiliation day. Ordered, That every Wednesday at two of the clock in the afternoon, the House do resolve into a grand Committee, to consider of the maintenance of Ministers, and the University and Schools. Ordered, That the House be resolved into a grand Committee every Thursday at two of the clock in the afternoon, to consider of the matters relating to trade.
At the General CONVENTION of IRELAND Monday, March 5. Lord Broghil being returned for the University of Dublin, and County of Waterford, his Lordship made election to serve for the University. William Hancock Esq being returned for the County of Westmeath, and Burrough of Athlone, he made election to serve for the County. Sir George Atcheson Knight & Baronet being retur∣ned for the County of Ardmagh & Burrough of Ard∣magh; he made election to serve for the County. Ordered, That new Orders do issue for electing new Members in such places where the Members of the Convention, being doubly returned, have refu∣sed to serve for; and that it be intimated under the Clerks hand, to those places that have not yet retur∣ned members to this Convention to make their re∣rurns with speed. Tuesday, March 6. Ordered, That the Declaration for the day of Hu∣miliation being read with the Amendments, do pass as the Act of the House, and be forthwith printed and published. Ordered, That M. Patrick Adare and M. Bains be and are ad∣ded to M. Cox, and M. Charnock in carrying on the work of the day appointed for the City of Dublin, by the Declaration of this Convention for days of publick Humiliation and Fasting, to be ob∣served throughout Ireland. Ordered, That it be recommended to the Committee appoin∣ted to consider of the maintenance of Ministers, and the Univer∣sities and Schools of Learning, to send for Ministers out of all parts of the Nation to advise with. Ordered, That directions issue for a new election for the Bur∣rough of Cavan instead of Richard Aylet Esq who is lately de∣ceased. March 8. The Committee appointed to consider of the Declaration in the name of the General Convention of Ireland, make report by Sir Paul Davis. Resolved, That the Declaration do pass as the Decla∣ration of the Convention.
Friday, March 9. This being the day publiquely set apart, and for six houres together in Christ-Church, solemnly spent in the exercise of Humiliation. First, Mr. Cox in a Sermon never to be forgotten, dischargeth his con∣science, and finding in the whole Scripture no words more agreeable to his principles against Church-se∣paration, he takes the 19 Verse of Judes Epistle for his Text, Thus, These be the who separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit. At the naming of the words, presently there fell a kinde of spirit of Prophecie upon all the Auditors, supposing by the very bending of his bow in the text, what the mark was, at present, and partly present, at which he principally aimed. And so he proceeded to discover the naked beauty of truth so long con∣cealed. After many judicious and pious Observati∣ons about the circumstances of his Text, he fell plain∣ly to work, telling us that in the notorious and gene∣ral iniquity of separation, the people of God were extreamly guilty, and how that the gatherings of Churches out of Churches, under the phantastick notion of non-communion with the unregenerate, had in it, not so much of Serpents head, it being a∣gainst all reason, as of his tail, in the oblique wind∣ings of avarice, pride and indiscretion, the counter∣feit champions of Devotion. Then he informs, when this sin of Separation took beginning, and putting a disparagement upon its pedegree, he quarters it with the Levitical coat of Corah, and the rest of his damna∣ble Separatists. But with some supposed differences: they onely aiming at equality among their brethren, these at superiority. They devoured by the earth, these in their large possessions, devouring more earth then indeed the moderation of the former Ecclesia∣sticall Laws, allowed to be Canonical.
After this he descends to his Exhortations of the Magistrate, and the concerned people. The Magi∣strate to pluck the branches of Separation out of the fire, (a work to be done rather then spoken of.) Then the concerned people, that they indeavour to quench the flames, upon a double account: for first, they are generally branded, besides this, which will be matter of amazement in settled times, these fires are of their own perticular kindling, exclusively to the publick authority of the Magistrate. And to speak plainly, without a complement to Church In∣terest, the fire of martyrdome, this directed to the communion, the other to the division of the Church, is in conscience more capable of election, supposing that Christ and Mammon are two distinct persons. When Mr. Cox had run his race in this present oc∣casion, the worke of Humiliation was carried on by Mr. Adare in prayer, with much ardency of zeal ef∣fectually to Gods Glory. After him Mr. Charnock ascends, who after the sweet incense of his prayer to God, turned himselfe upon the Auditors in the oblation of this Text, viz, Isaiah 1.25, 26. After many holy observations, the principall part of his devotion, agreeable to the nature of the times, was to affert the necessity of a fixed and standing magistracy, since the houour of publick authority is never lesse triumphant than when it rides in a cha∣riot whose wheels being alwayes turning, the peo∣ple find nothing but over-turnings, in the predo∣minant resolutions of sundry factions; Here he in∣serted many documents, as to the spirituall interest
of Church and State. Then applying himselfe to the Learned Universities of our Nations, (they being as the fountains of the deep and the windows of Hea∣ven) he seemed to ground on their corruption, an unavoydable danger, that a deluge of error may o∣verwhelme the face of our Nations, especially in these times, where there is more danger threatned by the overflowing of the waters, then care taken in the building of an Ark for the preservation of common interest. To this exercise of Humiliation, the sacred Seale was affixed by Mr. Bains in prayer, of whose words the best account that can be given, will manifest it self in the heavenly blessings of our proceedings. Onely thus is noted of him, that in the Pillar of the wildernesse, when nothing but the cloud appears, he followes his conscience. But when the other face is turned, with light he follows reason. March 9. Ordered, That Sir John Clotworthy, Dr. Jones, and Col. Hill be and are hereby appointed a Committee to return the thanks of this Convention to M. Cox, M. Charnock, M. Adare and M. Bains, for their pains in carrying on the work of this day in Christchurch, Dublin: and that M. Cox and M. Char∣nock be desired to print their respective Sermons this day by them delivered before the Convention. March 10. Ordered that the Committee appoin∣ted to consider of the maintenance for Ministers, U∣niversities and Schools, do meet on Monday in the afternoon. FINIS.
