l450 12148167 55009
ZINGIS: A Tartarian History. WRITTEN In Spanish, and Translated into ENGLISH. By J. M. Humbly Dedicated to the EARL of DALKEITH, Apparent Duke of BƲCCLƲGH. LONDON, Printed for Francis Saunders in the New Ex∣change, and Richard Parker at the Royal Exchange, 1692.
TO THE Right Honourable LORD JOHN, EARL of DALKEITH, Apparent DUKE of BƲCCLƲGH. My Lord, AMong the many Ornaments which For∣tune hath bestowed, Nature infused, or Noble Industry acquired to your Lord∣ship, there is none more Illustrious than your Love to your Country, generous Clemen∣cy, and courteous Facility to all Men: And indeed as these Noble Virtues always most flou∣rishingly budded in the early Blooms of your Lord∣ship's tender Years, so they do now most ripely and radiantly display themselves in the glorious Sun∣shine of your couragious Inclinations and honour∣able Intentions; Which also as they do encourage
an obscure Stranger (desiring to grace his weak Endeavours with the Honour of your Lord∣ship's Name prefix'd) to prostrate this small Piece at your Lordship's Feet; so they do just∣ly entitle your Lordship to the Noblest Actions of the greatest Heroes, and incline you to grant your Patronage to the unworthiest of Your Lordship's most humble and devoted Servants, J. M.
ZINGIS: A Tartarian History. EAstern Tartary, after having en∣joy'd several Kings worthy to govern that fair Canton of the World, saw her self in the end subje∣cted to Undkan a weak Prince, and go∣vern'd by an imperious Wife, who in∣spir'd him only with violent Resoluti∣ons. The City of Cambalu, where the Kings ordinarily resided, every way magnificent and glorious in the Maje∣sty of six Kings who stay'd at Undkan's Court, was upon the point of being made a Theatre of the Cruelty of
Zamar, for so was the Wife of that Prince called. Undkan had an only Daughter of his first Marriage, call'd Taxila, who was admir'd by all the Tartars, and whom he design'd for the Son of the Queen his Wife. That Prince, nam'd Timur, was King of Tenduc, and in lieu of all merit had the blind love of an ambiti∣ous Mother, capable of sacrificing all things to her own Grandeur. The Princess of Tartary was born with admirable perfections, never was there seen any thing so fair as she. The Charms of her Wit equall'd those of her Beauty. She had a great Soul, a perfect Virtue, and it may be said that Heaven was not wanting in its Favours to her. Her Inclinations were very op∣posite to the designs of the King her Fa∣ther, and in spite of Timur's pretensions, she avoided dexterously the force of the absolute Orders that were impos'd upon
her. But her Heart, which the Son of Zamar could not touch, was neverthe∣less not insensible. Zingis who was banish'd from Cambalu, tho' guilty of no Crime, but that of having too much merit, occasion'd a tender unquietness in her Soul. She saw all leagu'd a∣gainst him, Undkan, Zamar, Timur, and several Kings, cowardly adorers of a Tyrannick Power. Taxila alone took his part, with a perseverance due unto the services of that illustrious Lo∣ver: but he was absent, and the jea∣lous Timur possess'd of an absolute Power by the Authority of his unjust Mother. One night Taxila wholly taken up with the remembrance of Zingis, heard a great noise, and saw the King her Fa∣ther enter into her Chamber, who came, with eyes full of fury, to upbraid her with holding private Intelligence with his most mortal enemy. After an in∣finite
number of injurious Speeches, he commanded her to be strictly guarded in her apartments, where he left her alone. The Princess easily judg'd that this Enemy he talk'd of could be no other but Zingis; but she could not compre∣hend what had mov'd Undkan, who for more than a year had left her in some sort of quiet, to begin a persecution a∣fresh, which time seem'd to have miti∣gated, and now to recall into his me∣mory a man whom he had always en∣deavour'd to banish from it. An Offi∣cer of the Guards unriddl'd the mystery to her, telling her that Zingis was very lately surpris'd at one of the Gates of the Palace, on the banks of the Poli∣zangi, where Zamar had heard him speak from a Terrace where she was walking. That she perceiving by his Discourse, that he was returned to Cam∣balu, for the sake of the Princess, had
order'd him to be assaulted, that his va∣lour being over-power'd by number, they had overwhelm'd, tho' not con∣quer'd, him, and that he was carried la∣den with Irons to a great Tower, in which the vilest Malefactors were usu∣ally shut up. This Discourse pierc'd the Soul of Taxila with a new Grief, she bid the Tar∣tar withdraw, and suffering her self to fall into Axione's arms, a Maid whom she tenderly loved, because she was al∣together lovely: Ah! my dear Axione, said she unto her, the fatal accident which I so much fear'd, hath now befaln us, and the generous Zingis is in the chains of the implacable Zamar. Alas! I supported his absence patiently, be∣cause it remov'd him out of the reach of that barbarous enemy; but he pre∣cipitateth himself into her hands, and it is the passion that he hath always had for me that driveth him back again.
I enjoy'd all kind of sweetness in think∣ing that he lov'd me, and that I had no cause to be apprehensive of any dan∣ger for him. I reckon'd up his Servi∣ces, that I might recompense them with a most tender affection, and endured the importunities of Timur, hoping that Heaven would not abandon me to a Man so little worthy of me. The afflicted Taxila accompanied these words with a torrent of Tears, and the fair Axione, who, because of the liberty which the Princess of Tartary gave her, and the noble Motions which animated her Soul, used all decent free∣dom with her, said unto her all that she judg'd proper to moderate her Grief. No, Axione, replied the fair Princess, we can no longer entertain any hope. My Father is faint-hearted, Zamar hath her Victim in her Power, Timur hath no Virtue, and the Heavens are resolv'd to convince me to what heighth they
are irritated against me. But, Madam, continued Axione, D'ye believe that the King will abjure Equity altogether, and that he will give so just a cause to so many Princes that have their Eyes upon him, during their abode at Cam∣balu, to detest his Cruelty. Axione, re∣plied Taxila, the Princes you speak of are naturally base, and are moreover incens'd against the Valour of Zingis, who hath made them Slaves, and impo∣sed upon them the Tributes that support Zamar's pride. Madam, answered Ax∣ione, among the Kings whom we see here, there may perhaps be some that are brave and generous. 'Tis true, re∣plied the Princess, that the King of Thibet hath a merit that distinguisheth him from the rest; together with that, added Axione, he hath Power, and I am persuaded that he will attempt any thing for Zingis, for he is a lover of Virtue, and cannot endure Injustice.
Whilst these two amiable Persons entertained one another in this manner, Zamar had the pleasure to see her self Mistress of the Destiny of a Man who had so much curb'd her insolency. Und∣kan had a great share in her joy, and Timur triumphed unworthily over the misfortunes of a generous Rival, to whom he was obliged for his Life and Liberty. The day published the astonishing News among the Tartars. Those who had seen Zingis, both in time of War and at Cambalu, prayed for his Ruin or Safety, according to their different in∣clinations; but there were very few who would not have willingly rescued him from the present Danger. Assoon as they could have access to Undkan, the Kings of Tanguth, Cerguth, Ergimul, and Ung, waited upon him, and after them Philing King of Thibet. The first four exprest a great deal of
joy for the captivity of his Enemy, and the last, who with an independent King∣dom much more considerable than the rest, had also inclinations infinitely more noble and generous, spoke boldly in Zingis's favour, and openly made it appear, that without knowing his Per∣son, he was full of Respect and Esteem for his Virtue, and for that glorious Re∣putation, which had render'd his name so famous in Asia. Undkan frown'd at Philing's discourse; and Zamar who heard it, from that time looked upon him as a suspected Person. Never any could discover in him inclinations un∣becoming a King. His Person was perfectly handsom, his Realms were of a vast extent, and owned no other Superiour. The neighbourhood of China, which bordered on his Domini∣ons, was able to give him very great Advantages, in calling to his Assistance a People, who being often assaulted
by the Tartars, had hitherto kept on the defensive side, but long'd for a oc∣casion to humble them. All these rea∣sons render'd the King of Thibet re∣doubtable to the Tartar, who answer∣ed him calmly, That Zingis was a Trai∣tor, and that the security of his Crown obliged him to keep him in Prison. Philing did not think fit to importune further an incens'd King and Queen at present, in behalf of a Man whom he knew but imperfectly, and he went out looking disdainfully on four Prin∣ces, who dishonoured their Character in basely flattering Undkan and Zamar. Philing from thence went strait to the Princess, whither his Heart often call∣ed him, but by reason of the Orders al∣ready given out, he could neither be permitted to see her, nor the amiable Axione. From thence he went to see Almundzar, an illustrious Tartar, in whom he had found a great deal of
Virtue, who governed Tartary by the profound Knowledge which he had of its most secret Affairs, and whom Za∣mar upon that account did not love. He was a sincere Friend of Zingis, and Philing found with him a faithful Ser∣vant of that Prince, who having found means to get off in the obscurity of the night, was come to sollicit Almundzar to labour for his Master's Liberty. The generous Tartar had received him per∣fectly well: but he feared with reason to be unable to do any thing for Zingis, against the fierce and subtle Zamar. They were upon this subject when the King of Thibet enter'd. Generous Al∣mundzar, said he at first to the Favourite of Undkan, What shall we do for the Illustrious Zingis, against so many im∣placable enemies? Hatred, Subtilty, and Treachery, are arm'd against him; and it's our Duty, whom Heaven hath favoured with more reasonable inclina∣tions,
to unite Virtue, Friendship, and Sincerity for his Assistance. The Squire of Zingis, who knew not Philing, and admir'd his good Mien, was ravished to hear him speak in that manner. Al∣mundzar assur'd the King of Thibet that he was ready to hazard his Fortune and Life for the Service of Zingis; but withal that he knew nothing that could counterpoise the power of Zamar. I am ignorant of the particulars of Zingis his Life, said Philing, and am only pre∣occupy'd with that shining Merit, of which Fame speaketh so advantageous∣ly: but, Almundzar, Cannot you inform me better? There is a Man, my Lord, replied Almundzar, pointing unto the faithful Squire of Zingis, who can bet∣ter than I give you that satisfaction. Yes, my Lord, added Zerbin, with a respectful bow, and I will do my Ma∣ster a sensible pleasure, to make him known to a Prince such as you. Philing
caused Zerbin to withdraw into ano∣ther Chamber, to leave Almundzar in liberty to set about the Affairs with which he was usually busied, and having conveniently seated him∣self, Zerbin began his Discourse in this manner. The History of Zingis and the Princess Taxila. YOU know, my Lord, that may Master is the Son of Sukuh, or Bahadur, sirnam'd the Warriour, King of the Monguls; and you are not igno∣rant that amongst the rest of the Asiatick Nations, these have made themselves be distinguished by the undauntedness of their Courage, and the strict Unity which they preserve among themselves. Bahadur is of the Linage of our most
ancient Kings, the worthy Successour of innumerable Heroes, the Terror of his Enemies, and Darling of his Sub∣jects. His Dominions are of a vast Ex∣tent. The River Tartar and Lake of Coras render a great part of the Coun∣try fertile, and that desart Region which comprehendeth Bargu, and reacheth to the Sea of Tartary, is almost unknown to those who border on Undkan's Realms. Bahadur had two Children of the Queen his Wife; the famous Zingis whom Fortune doth now expose in so cruel a manner, and the Princess Ze∣nelie who was carried away by Rob∣bers at three years of age, in a Voy∣age which the Queen made to seek a place, the Air of which might be advantageous to their Health, which was in a languishing Condition. The loss of the innocent Zenelie brought her with Sorrow to her Grave, leaving the young Zingis the only Consolation of
her afflicted Husband. He was first called Temuzin; but there appeared in him even in his Infancy, so much Great∣ness of Soul and Courage, that the Peo∣ple named hin Zingis, which is a Name given only to extraordinary Persons. Bahadur enjoying a Son so worthy of his Affection, did not desire a more numerous Posterity, and made the Prince Zingis the Object of all his Cares, who in few years became perfectly well accomplished. The King with a great deal of Pleasure saw his excel∣lent Qualities increase together. He knew by his first setting out, that he would not degenerate from so many Great Men, whose Blood stream'd in his Veins, seeing he aspired unto true Glory, loved Virtue above all things, and bewraied only generous Inclinati∣ons. When he had attained the seven∣teenth year of his Age, he appeared of so graceful a Mien, that never any like
him had hitherto been seen. Bahadur delighted in his presence; but the young Prince who had thus far lived a peaceful Life, and whose Courage re∣quired Business of greater Noise, began to think of leaving his Father for some time. My Lord, said he, one day un∣to him, Are you not sensible that I owe something to the Honour which I have to be your Son? Hitherto I have been able only to testify my Respect unto you; but, my Lord, this is not sufficient to satisfy the Blood that ani∣mateth us. The profound Peace which the Monguls enjoyed by your Valour, doth not permit me to live at Molg in per∣petual sloth: we might one day blush, and even perhaps suffer for it. 'Tis time that I should learn the only Occu∣pation that is worthy of a Prince. If there be no War in Asia, I must seek it in Europe, and return to you with a Name less unknown to the rest of the World.
This Discourse flatter'd the great Courage of Bahadur, but the same time it frightned the tenderness of his Love. Zingis, replied he to the young Prince, Neither your illustrious Ancestors, nor the most envious Nations, have as yet any thing to reproach you with, and you have been employ'd in a diligent Preparation for a glorious riper Age. I love to see you, and I fear to lose you: But, my Son, notwithstanding this, do not think that I will always detain you in a Country, which in the Opi∣nion of the greatest part of Mankind is more proper for Wild Beasts, than for Princes, whom Heaven hath created with some Merit: I do not oppose that noble Emulation which anima∣teth you; but, my dear Zingis, wait a little longer; you know that the King of the Tartars doth threaten us; he is perhaps ready to declare himself our Enemy. The Tributes which he ex∣acteth of several Kings will certainly
come as far as us; and then we will not want War. Alas, my Lord, said Zingis interrupting him, How hard is it for a Man of my Age and Humour to delay such Projects? I don't know whether the King of the Tartars con∣foundeth us with the other Princes whom he would render his Vassals; but by what you have done, I believe he will consider more than once upon it before he attack you. In the end, my Lord, these are but uncertain Conje∣ctures, and if you will not permit me to pass the Limits of Tartary, suffer me to run through all the extent thereof, that I may instruct my self by sight of many rare things, which I have only confusedly heard of. The King of the Monguls found so much reason in the Prince's Design, that he consented at last to his depar∣ture, tho' not without doing himself a great deal of Violence; but upon Condition, that he should not pass the
Bounds of Tartary. He permitted him to visit Undkan's Court, with whom he had not yet any broil; and Zingis satis∣fied with what he had obtained, thought on nothing else but to make ready his Equipage. He would not carry along with him a great Train of Servants, because a profound Peace reigned o∣ver all the Countries through which he designed to pass. Seeing I had been educated near his Person, and favoured with his Friendship, I accompanied him, and we parted from Molg, as if we had left a Prison. The first thing we visited was the Burying-place of the Tartarian Princes. The Tombs are situated in Hills which do not hinder a Traveller to behold from afar an infinite number of mag∣nificent Pyramids which overlook the tops of the Mountains. From thence coasting along by the Desarts of Belgian, we saw the Kingdoms of Tanguth and Ergimul, without stopping in any place,
or making our selves known, and took the way to Cambalu, where we design'd to make a longer abode. As we drew near to that City, we were told that Undkan was gone with all his Court to pass the fairest Season of the Year at Cingui, a pleasant Town seated on the River Pazantu: Seeing it was only for the Court that my Master was going to Cambalu, upon this News he directed his Journey towards Cingui. The Palace-royal is without the Town, and one of the most magnificent in all Tartary: The Gardens are vast and cu∣riously cultivated; the Waters add un∣to them a thousand Embellishments; the Trees form a charming obscurity, which the Sun in many places can scarce penetrate, and there one may walk at all hours. We discovered the Royal House from a good distance, and Zin∣gis fatigu'd with the heat, seeing one of the Gates of the Garden open, and kept by none, had a mind to enter into
it and refresh himself some moments, pointing with his hand to a place where he commanded us to wait for him. Although he had already made a great Journey, there was nothing neg∣lected about him, and the magnificence of his Habit setting off the lustre of his good Mien, one may say that he ap∣pear'd to be something more than hu∣mane. He admired the Beauty of these Gar∣dens, which certainly is extraordinary, he walk'd in them with pleasure, and thought of returning to us, when cros∣sing an Alley, he saw at the end thereof several persons together, and distin∣guish'd amongst the rest some Women. As he is nothing less than fearful, he ad∣vanc'd with a great deal of boldness, and as he drew nearer, he perceiv'd that these Women were of the highest Qua∣lity, by the respect that was shew'd un∣to them: He was desirous to know more of them, and therefore walked
faster; but a Man breaking off from the rest came up to him, and looking upon him with a disdainful air; Ho! Who art thou, said he unto him haughtily, that violating the sacred Laws of the place, comest insolently to fail in the respect thou owest to the Ma∣jesty of the Princess of Tartary? Art thou ignorant that no Stranger dareth to appear before her, without being in∣troduced according to the usual Cu∣stoms? and is it to brave those who follow her that thou comest thus to ex∣pose thy self to our just Fury? Zingis was not accustom'd unto such Discourses, and this manner of accost∣ing him surpriz'd him: His Action ap∣pear'd unto him innocent, and the Tar∣tars incivility incensing him: I am a Man, reply'd he, who am not born to give an account of what I pretend to do: I would justifie my self to the Prin∣cess, but I do not know how to give that satisfaction to the Subjects of Undkan.
He who heard Zingis, was too haugh∣ty not to be incens'd with that Answer; 'twas Timur, whom the Titles of King of Tendur, and Son of the Tartarian Queen, had swell'd with Pride even to Insolency; and though that Character of Grandeur which appear'd over all the Person of the Mongul Prince, ought to have stay'd his hand, seeing himself back'd in his base Design, he drew his Sword, and lifted up his Arm to strike Zingis; but how fatal had his Rashness like to have prov'd unto him: The terrible Zingis prevented him by so heavy a blow on the Head that he laid him quite stun'd at his Feet, and had it not been for the thickness of his Head-Tire, he would never have afterwards disturb'd the quiet of my Master. The Fall of Timur made a great num∣ber of the Guards run thither, who would have seiz'd upon Zingis: He defended himself valiantly, but never∣theless could not have preserv'd himself
from proving what Vertue hath cause to fear from persons altogether void of it, if Undkan had not appear'd in the same Alley. At first he was inform'd of the cause of this Disorder, and find∣ing it so small, he was sorry for what had befaln Timur; and having but too good an opinion of him, who fear'd danger so little, he approach'd unto him with the Princess. Undkan hath a goodly Presence, able to inspire even those who do not know him, with respect; but it was the Beau∣ty of Taxila, and not the presence of her Father, that made the Mongul Prince render his Arms. This charming sight surpriz'd him in such a manner, that he found himself unable to abstain from gazing upon her, and from yielding up his young Heart to those glorious Fet∣ters which Fortune had prepar'd for him. Undkan who had not as yet bid adieu to Generosity, look'd upon my Master with admiration, and Zingis
accosting him with a Grace that was natural to him; I perceive, my Lord, said he, that you are the King of the Tartars, and it is only to you that I am oblig'd to justifie my self. I am Zingis Prince of the Monguls, and came into your Dominions with a purpose to re∣main a while with you as a Friend and Allie. Passing by these Walls, by chance I observ'd an open Door, and not knowing the Customs of the place, I enter'd without deliberation into a place I judg'd free, and was affronted by a man, who is as ignorant of his du∣ty to Strangers, as I am of the Customs of your Kingdoms. My Master's Discourse surpriz'd Und∣kan: He had not a more considerable Allie than the King of the Monguls, and it was a great Honour to him to see that King's Son at his Court, being withal the handsomest and most love∣ly Prince that his Eyes had ever yet beheld. I knew well that you were
none of our Tartars, answer'd he, for none of them are so handsom as you. But, my Lord, that which according to our Laws would be a Crime in an ordinary Stranger, is none in the Prince of the Monguls, whom I will always behold with pleasure at Cingui, Camba∣lu, and through all the Extent of my Empire. Ac these words he embrac'd him, and presenting him to the Prin∣cess; Taxila, said he unto her, Entreat the Prince Zingis to forget the bad Re∣ception he met with upon your ac∣count. My Master, who found all his Wrath asswaged, and his natural fierce∣ness yielding to Taxila's Charms, salu∣ted her kneeling, and ask'd Pardon of her for the Errour his Ignorance had betray'd him into. The Princess re∣ply'd, That she could add nothing to what her Father had said; and my Master who could not withdraw his Eyes from so charming an Object, did already feel the powerful Impressions
which her extraordinary Beauty made upon him. Timur was come to himself again, and Zingis hearing that he was the Queen's Son, Accosted him with an Air that had nothing of an Enemy in it: I am very sorry, my Lord, said he unto him, for having been engag'd in an Anger, which I entreat you would forget, and please to be reconcil'd to a Prince, who did not design in coming to Cingui, to create unto himself such E∣nemies as you are. At these words he offer'd to embrace him, and though Timur receiv'd him coldly, the Presence of the King hinder'd him from resisting my Master's advance. Zamar came afterwards, and was in a few words inform'd of the Adven∣ture that had happened. Undkan pre∣sented Zingis unto her, and she could not hinder her self from entertaining a secret Resentment of the Affront her Son had receiv'd. Nevertheless she
appear'd civil unto my Master, who not having his Eyes open but to con∣template Taxila, had not leisure to ex∣amine the Queen of Tartary's Actions. Undkan, who had secret Designs, would not suffer Zingis to go out of his Palace, and was not sorry to have in his power so dear an Hostage of the King of the Monguls. We had Orders to wait upon our Prince, who was plac'd in one of the fairest Apartments, and quickly judg'd that this Adventure would ere-long be the cause of many others. He was in a little time advanc'd by all the Tartars, and the Princess had a judgment too just not to distinguish his Merit: They liv'd in greater Tran∣quillity at Cingui than at Cambalu, be∣cause the Court was not so numerous. Undkan, who was desirous to gain the Affection of a considerable Prince, that he might obtain of him by Sweetness, what he pretended to impose upon
others by force, neglected nothing that might please the young Zingis. He sought all occasions of entertaining him with Pleasures agreeable to his Inclina∣tions, and seeing that Timur still kept up his coldness, he entreated him to constrain himself: And he, though not without Repugnance, by the Advice of a politick Mother, who hop'd to ob∣tain for this Son one of the greatest Crowns in Asia from Undkan, did what the King desir'd him. As for my Master, he wholly gave himself up unto Love. The more he saw Taxila, the greater Empire she gain'd over him: His Heart full of an ardent Passion, began to feel Pains be∣fore unknown to him, and fearing as yet more cruel Vexations, he became restless as soon as he began to love. He was the Son of a Prince that could de∣ny him nothing, but Taxila was the Daughter of a Man, that destin'd her for Timur; and the Dominions of this
Rival were much inferiour to the Kingdom of the Monguls, he was a King and the Son of Zamar who had all power over Undkan. In the end they left Cingui to return to Cambalu: There the Divertisements chang'd Face; instead of Walks, they were taken up with Plays and publick Spectacles. Taxila had several Maids of Quality about her: But a few days before our Arrival at Cingui, she had been presented with an unknown Girl admirably Fair, and perfectly Lovely, whom the Princess soon distinguish'd from all the rest, by a Friendship full of Esteem and Confidence. The Men who made the greatest Figure at Court, were Timur, Almundzar, and Omir Prince of Brema, who had been brought young to Cambalu, the King of Tartary having possess'd himself of his Father's Dominions, who had lost his life in de∣fending them. There were also Bazi∣an, Mirantes, Ozran, Ziphanes, and se∣veral
others. My Master perceiv'd at first the great Merit of Almundzar, and united himself in a strict Friendship with the Prince of Brema. Whilst some Months past over in this manner, those among the Tartars whom my Master frequented were a∣bundantly sensible of his Worth, and esteem'd him perfectly well. For him, his only Care was to please Taxila, who remark'd his Earnestness in serving her, though she was diligently observ'd by Timur, who enjoy'd the Priviledges which his Mother's Credit gave him, and often put the Patience of the Prin∣cess of Tartary to a cruel Test. For thinking himself secure of a Happiness he did not merit, he spoke before her with an insupportable Boldness, and Taxila comparing the submissive Pro∣cedure of the Prince of the Monguls, with the arrogant Behaviour of the Son of Zamar, she observ'd the same differ∣ence between them, that Nature had
put between their Persons. Zingis had too much Respect, not to impose upon himself an exact Dis∣cretion: Although he was a Prince, and in a Condition to pretend unto all Things, yet he would not precipitate a Declaration of his Love, lest it should irritate the Princess, and waited till he had by his Services prepar'd her to give him a favourable Audience. The Heart of the Princess found it self on Zingis side, and her Aversion for Timur receiv'd a great Augmentation since my Master's Arrival. On a Day which Timur look'd upon as his own, because it was Taxila's Birth-day, he prepared Divertisements for all the Court, and among the rest extraordinary Shews upon the Polisangi. A thousand gilded Barks covered the River: Every one wore what Colours he pleas'd, and nothing was to be seen but Cyphers and Devices on the Strea∣mers; the Cordage was of Gold and
Silk, the Oars cover'd over with shi∣ning Pictures; and these little Barks full of Magnificent Court, form'd the most pleasant Shew in the World. The Princess would have willingly dispens'd with all this Gallantry of Ti∣mur, but the fear of incensing oblig'd her to accept of it, and she was even forc'd to appear on this Festival with all the most far-ferch'd helps of Art. Ti∣mur in all his Equipage observ'd a Mag∣nificence that tended to Prodigality, and my Master with less Affectation had greater Advantages. Zamar did not slight these Shews as she had done many others, and Undkan to do his Wife a Pleasure, honour'd them with his Presence. The Amorous Zingis had the Vexation to see the Name of his Rival every where intermixt with that of Taxila, and to think that so much Beauty and Vertue was destin'd for a Man, in whom he saw nothing that could render him worthy of them,
and these Considerations did cost him many a heavy Groan, which the Prin∣cess sometimes over-heard. In the end, my Lord, that Day which Timur was desirous to Solemnize in an extraordinary manner was Remarkable for a memorable Adventure, which had like to have prov'd Fatal. All were taken up with the Pleasures prepar'd for them on the River; a harmonious Me∣lody fill'd the Air, when by an unex∣pected Misfortune, the Boat in which the Princess was alone with Axione the unknown Maid that was become so dear unto her, because these little Barks were able to bear but four persons at most with the Rowers, was o∣verturn'd, being dash'd against some of the rest, and Taxila and Axione were expos'd to so great a Danger, that all there present believ'd there was no Re∣medy. Cries of Grief succeeded the Harmony of the Instruments. Timur, the cowardly Timur did nothing but
excite some of his Train to dive for Taxila amongst the Waves; but the courageous Zingis animated with other Sentiments, threw himself into the Ri∣ver, and nimbly cutting the Water, received the Princess in his Arms, just in the nick that she appear'd again, and when perhaps she was going to sink for ever into the bottom of the River: His Action was so quick, that none of the rest were able to prevent him. The Prince of Brema who was with him render'd the same Service to Axione, and being equally happy on this Occasion, they were full of joy to have rescu'd from Death the two most Amiable Persons in the World. The Danger was great, for the Men who fell into the Water with Taxila perish'd, because of the little Care that was ta∣ken to help them, their Negligence in some measure meriting their unhappy Fortune. This Accident disturb'd all the So∣lemnity:
Undkan being Alarm'd, com∣manded them to regain the Shore; the Princess and Axione were carried thi∣ther almost without sense, and Timur incapable of, Shame, had the Boldness to approach unto them. Zamar who had beheld with Envy my Master's A∣ction, and who began to penetrate into the secret interest of his Heart, appear'd confus'd for her Son, and could not forbear murmuring at his Cowardli∣ness. The Princess opened her Eyes and came, to her self again; when they had laid her in a Bed, she ask'd News of Axione, whom they had tended with the same Care, and then betook her self to the Rest that was necessary for her: She past the Night sweetly, and finding her self perfectly recover'd in the Morning, she ask'd her Maids, To whom among the Tartars she ow'd her Life. Although she had no good Opinion of Timur, she fear'd she had
receiv'd so considerable a Service from him, and being inform'd that it was Zingis that had sav'd her, having pre∣vented all others with a Precipitation full of Zeal, she felt a secret Joy, and thank'd Heaven for it. They did not fail to tell her that the King of Tendur did not so much as hazard himself for her, and she was much joy'd to think that she had no Obligation to him. As soon as Day appear'd, Axione wait∣ed upon the Princess, who embrac'd her tenderly: Undkan had declar'd un∣to my Master, how much he was sen∣sible of what he had done for Taxila. Zamar who was excellently skill'd in the Art of Constraining her self, thank'd him also, and Timur said something of that nature to him, notwithstanding his Confusion, but it was not they who he wish'd might be sensible of it. Taxila arose, and willing to pre∣vent Timur's private Importunities, she went out of her Apartment, just as the
Queen was coming to see her; and meeting her in a common Gallery, Madam, said Zamar to the Princess, I praise Heaven for the great Care it hath had of your Life, and I assure you, that at that moment when I saw it in danger, I would have heartily hazar∣ded mine own to preserve it. You would have done much more, Ma∣dam, replyed Taxila with a modest Smile, than many Men were able to do, and you see that in the middle of my Fathers Dominions, there were only found two stranger Princes gene∣rous enough to despise the Danger. But, Madam, added she, with a pro∣found Reverence full of Grace and Majesty, your Days are more precious than mine, and too many Illustrious Persons have an interest in them, to let them be expos'd to the least Danger, and I am as much oblig'd to your good Intentions, as if they had produced other Effects.
Zamar perceiv'd by this Discourse that Taxila had much Gratitude for Zingis, and Scorn for Timur; but not being resolv'd to insist longer on this Subject, she was entreating the Prin∣cess to return unto her Apartment, when the King past by, followed by Timur, Omir, my Master, Almundzar, and several others. Taxila blush'd extreamly; her fair Eyes which as yet look'd languishing, told Zingis in an obliging manner, that she knew what he had done for her: and Timur had the mortification to re∣mark that she did not so much as turn them towards him. My Daughter, said Undkan to her, you have made me pass the Night with a great deal of anxiety, which the good Condition in which I now see you, doth agreeably dissipate. Mean-time, methinks you should not have left your Apartment so soon. My Lord, answer'd the Princess, a little Ex∣ercise cannot hurt me, and I feel no
more any remainder of my Illness. The King made an obliging Compli∣ment to the lovely Axione, which she receiv'd with much Respect, and all this goodly Company went with Za∣mar, because the Hour of Dinner ap∣proach'd. My Master, who saw that the Prin∣cess being watch'd by Timur, could not be entertain'd by another, retired, and after Dinner the King of Tendur Accost∣ing her without any Obstacle, had the liberty to say what he pleas'd: He look'd a great while upon the Princess with a premeditated Air, and then looking downwards; The same Day on which Heaven gave you to the World, as the richest Present it could bestow, had like to have been the last of your Life: Madam, said he, and I tremble to think of the Danger which threatned you. All the World did not believe it so great as you did, my Lord, reply'd Taxila disdainfully, and the
Princes of the Monguls and Brema shew'd that they despis'd it, in expo∣sing themselves thereto. It's true, Ma∣dam, answered Timur, Red with Anger and Shame, that they shew'd some fearlesness; but they at that time had all their Reason about them, whereas mine was disturb'd by the most fright∣ful of all Ideas: And all this Distur∣bance and Trouble, my Lord, reply'd the Princess, with a malicious Smile, would have even let me perish, had there not been found more unconcern'd persons, and less interested for my Life. I see well, answer'd Timur, that you would enhanse the price of a Service great indeed, but which a thousand o∣thers would have render'd unto you. All the World would have done it, ex∣cept the King of Tendur, said Taxila, interrupting him; but, my Lord, be not incens'd if I have some acknowledg∣ment for this Service, which well deser∣veth it; seeing I promise that I will
make reckoning of your trouble of Mind, and even of the fear it caused in you. Timur would have answer'd, and perhaps would have done it without respect; but a multitude of people that came to see the Princess hinder'd him, and he went out full of Confusion. Taxila who saw the Day was very fair, went down to the Palace-Gardens, and walk'd there for some time: Those that follow'd her, remarking that she was desirous to be alone, retir'd a good distance from her; She sat down at the end of a Terrace that faceth the Polisangi, and observing the place where she had almost been drown'd; Axione, said she to that fair Maid, as we after∣wards came to know, as couragious as you are, do you not quake, when you look upon that River? My Princess, answer'd Axione, I protest unto you that I was troubled only for you, and that with the knowledge that remain'd with me, though I believ'd my own Death
certain, yet the Thought of yours was that which most tormented me. You are too good a Friend, my dear Axione, reply'd Taxila, pressing her hand, and I cannot enough requite that tender and generous Motion of forgetting your self for me. I may truly say, answered Axione, sighing, that you are one of the most powerful Cau∣ses that make me desire Life, and one, added she with watry Eyes, which at present ought to carry it over all the rest. You render mine dear unto me, reply'd the Princess; but, Axione, I don't know whether I ought to rejoyce that it is lengthen'd. Ah, Madam! cry'd out Axione, why should not you be satisfied with a Happiness that is precious to all reasonable persons? A∣las! answered Taxila, a Happiness that must be Sacrific'd to Timur, can pro∣mise me no Satisfaction. What Man, among all the Men of the World, doth the King my Father choose? Shall I
be the Victim of that Power which his Weakness gives unto Zamar? Besides the little Inclination that naturally I have for Timur; he doth nothing that he ought to do to win me; he thinks I am his by duty, and you see how he be∣hav'd himself in our late Adventure; more in love with his Life than with the unhappy Taxila, he abandoneth her to an evident Danger, and leaveth to the Generosity of others to Rescue her. Ah! what can he ever expect from that Princess whose Preservation he so faint∣ly neglected? O Heaven! O just Hea∣ven, continued she in a sadder Tone! I who so much abhor Baseness, will you permit me to fall into the power of the basest of all Men? As the Prin∣cess expressed her self after this manner, my Master, who had heard that she was in the Garden, appear'd with the Prince of Brema; Taxila perceiving, rose up to meet them: Zingis present∣ed his Hand to her, after he had Saluted
her. Omir render'd the same Office to Axione, and they continued their Walk. Well, Madam, said my Master to the Princess, How do you find your self after that cruel Accident? And you, my Lord, reply'd she with a charming Sweetness, You who took so generous a part, and so advantage∣ous for me, in what condition is your Health? Though it had been attack'd by a Malady, answered Zingis, My joy that I had successfully serv'd a great Princess, in whose Safety all the World ought to interest themselves, would have entirely dissipated it: Our Bodies are fitted for greater Fatigues; you suffered much, and I have reason to be troubled at it. I assure you, my Lord, reply'd Taxila, that there remaineth nothing of that Adventure with me, but the remembrance of the sensible Obligation that I have unto you. O, my Lord, added she! with an Earnest∣ness that witness'd her Acknowledg∣ment
what can I do to acquit my self of it. It is too much that you remem∣ber it, answer'd the Prince of the Mon∣guls, and that Price is great enough to recompence more important Service. I do not know any that can be more worthy of my Remembrance, reply'd Taxila. —Madam, said my Master, sighing, and interrupting her, Although according to all Appearances, I have only labour'd for Timur, yet I cannot but look on Yesterday as the happiest Day of my Life. The Princess look'd downwards to hide some Tears which these Words forc'd from her, and which, nevertheless, Zingis perceived: He was grieved that he had touch'd her in so sensible a part, and continued thus; Par∣don me, Madam, if I have nam'd the King of Tendur: I fear I have fail'd in the Respect I owe you. No, said Tax∣ila, interrupting him, But you have set before my Eyes an afflicting Idea, which I often endeavour to put out of
my Mind. You know the King my Father's Intentions concerning Timur: but, my Lord, you do not know mine, and you are doubtless ignorant, that I can't think of seeing my self subjected to the Son of Zamar, without a mortal Grief. I am not resolute enough to disobey Undkan, and whatsoever it costs me, I must, if he command me, sa∣crifice my self. Judge, my Lord, ha∣ving a natural Aversion, or rather in∣vincible Hatred for Timur, in what Con∣dition I must needs be, when I think on my Father's Designs, and the Queen's Authority. This Freedom of the Prin∣cess Charm'd my Master, and render'd him bolder. I confess, continued he, That there is nothing in Timur that is worthy of you, nor even in persons much more accomplish'd. O! What Man, Madam, amongst all those whom Nature and Fortune have most distin∣guish'd by their Favours, could with∣out a Crime aspire unto the precious
Advantage of not displeasing you, or the Glory of possessing you one Day? My Lord, reply'd Taxila, I can dis∣cern Merit where it is, and not draw a blame-worthy Pride from that which I have not: There are Men enough in the World who might justly pretend to the Alliance of the King of Tartary, and Timur himself would not be un∣worthy of it for his Quality, if his evil Inclinations were not absolutely in∣compatible with mine. Though For∣tune should authorize some Prince to offer unto you all that he possest, ad∣ded my Master, if his person had not wherewithal to touch your Heart, his other Advantages would be to no pur∣pose; and there are Princes puissant enough who would sigh before your Eyes, without daring to tell you that they Adore you. I would certainly be very Savage, reply'd the Princess of Tartary, to arm my self with an unjust Fury against those who had some Af∣fection
for me, and I would need be free of all Passions, if I dared to boast of remaining always insensible. But, my Lord, continued she, with a freer Air; this Subject would carry us too far, and I had rather speak of the Ob∣ligation that I have unto you: If it in∣spire you with any Goodness for me, answered my Master, it will be very advantageous for me in the Circumstan∣ces I am in, seeing that loving you with an ardent Passion, the beginnings of which I have carefully hid, I cannot hinder the Declaration of this Myste∣ry from escaping in spight of all my Re∣spect. My Lord, reply'd Taxila with a trouble, which gave no sad Presage unto my Master, I see the King, and that is all I ought to say unto you. And indeed Undkan appear'd, and Zingis could not continue: He knew well by the Air of the Princess, that she had Confusion without Anger, and for some Days afterwards, if he remark'd any
Commotion in her Eyes, yet Indigna∣tion had no part in it. Taxila was belov'd of all the Tartars, and the important Service that my Ma∣ster had render'd unto her, made a great Impression on all grateful Minds. That Nation look'd upon Timur with Scorn after his late base and cowardly Action. Undkan was even vexed to see that he render'd himself so little worthy of all the Advantages he de∣stin'd for him; and could not forbear, as we knew by Almundzar, to speak of it unto the Queen: but she had so much power over him, that he past over the cowardliness of the King of Tendur, and resolv'd to be a no less re∣ligious Observer of his Promise. About that time Zamar, who was desirous to extend the Limits of Tarta∣ry, in hope to see her Son Master of it; insinuated into Undkan, that it was a Shame to him, who was Lord of so much Power, not to exact of his Neigh∣bours
the Tributes which he might easily impose upon them. The most part of these Kings have preserv'd somewhat of the Fierceness of the an∣cient Scythians, but have lost all their Valour, of which you may in this Court see Examples in those of Cer∣guth, Tanguth, Ergimul, and Ung. Und∣kan gave their Ministers to understand, that they ow'd something more than a simple Embassie to his Grandeur, and that together with Homage, they must pay him an Annual Tribute. These Strangers ask'd time to communicate this Affair to their Masters; & having in the end answer'd, That their Design was not to humble themselves so low, they Retir'd into the Dominions of their Princes, and every-where were made great Preparations for War. The Kings of Tanguth, Cerguth, and Ergimul, could easily joyn their Forces, because of the Neigbourhood of their Provinces, but he of Ung being more
remote, and lying on the opposite side, was to make a Diversion. Tho' Zingis had reason to believe, That the Monguls would have their turn next; yet lo∣ving Taxila as he did, he would not remain idle in her Father's Court, and tho' he found injustice in Undkan's At∣tempt, yet Love hinder'd him from examining his Procedures rigorously. He soon determin'd to offer his Arm to the King of Tartary; and however afflicting his absence from Taxila, might prove to his Heart, he re∣solv'd to remove, that he might be∣come more worthy of her. The Kings of Tanguth and Cerguth advanc'd to the Dominions of the King of Ergimul, who was first to be attack'd, being Undkan's next Neighbour. There was need of two Armies, because the King of Ung was alone, and Timur's Kingdom being adjacent to that, it was to him that Undkan entrusted a part of his Forces to make that Conquest:
But Experience taught him that he had put them in very ill Hands. The King of Tendur would have willingly stay'd at Cambalu, if his Mother more Coura∣geous than he, had not excited him to his Duty: So with good Lieutenants and Warlike Troops he march'd to∣wards the Enemy whom he had to Vanquish. Zingis had the Command of no Army given him, as had Timur, though he was much more capable of it: Und∣kan march'd in person, and my Master would take no Charge upon him, that he might fight near his Person. The Princesses beheld these Warlike Preparations with very different Agi∣tations of Spirit. Zamar who knew that her Husband and Son were not of an humor to hazard themselves, thought on their Departure without Alarms; but Taxila who already knew perfectly the Love and Courage of my Master, had not the same Tranquillity.
Affairs being in this condition, Zin∣gis went to take his leave of her, and Timur's present Occupations, freeing her for some time from his Importuni∣ties; He found none but Axione with her: Seeing they did not suspect her, the Prince did not constrain his Love, and the Princess suffer'd her Sadness to appear. You are going to depart from us, my Lord, to pursue Victories which we may well be without. Ah! how covetous is the Ambition of Zamar, and how skilful is she in finding out means to shed Blood? Seeing the Glory of the King your Father is concern'd, Ma∣dam, answer'd Zingis, those who may lose their Blood on this Occasion, have no reason to repent it. Whatsoever be the Motives of a War, reply'd Tax∣ila, it is still grievous unto me: But, my Lord, the War which you now undertake, appeareth unto me so much the more cruel, that Timur will be deck'd with the Spoils thereof, which
will raise his Vanity to an extream In∣solence. So long as the King liveth, continued my Master, he will not en∣joy the Fruits thereof; and if Fortune put an end to his Life, I see few Tartars inclin'd to submit themselves to the Laws of Timur. I cannot flatter my self, my Lord, answer'd Taxila, with a grea∣ter agitation of Mind than before, he wil Reign, the unhappy Ascendant which over-ruleth my Destiny hath so or∣dain'd, and would to the Heavens that my Death may prevent his Fortune. Ah! Madam, said my Master, inter∣rupting her in a passionate manner, is it thus that you comfort a miserable per∣son, whose duty constraineth him to fol∣low Undkan, & who cannot depart from you but with intolerable Grief? What shall I do in the Extremity to which I now see my self reduc'd? Shall I re∣main a cowardly and useless Spectator of a War which may expose Tartary unto some Disorder, because the proud
Timur layeth claim to it? and shall I behold the Father of Taxila, a Princess whom I adore, and for whom I would hazard a thousand Lives, if they were in my power, shall I see him, I say, march to the War, without making a Rampart of my Body and Arms to de∣fend him, because he favoureth my Ri∣val? In end, Madam, shall I stay at Cambalu, or shall I retire to the Monguls, to evite uncertain Evils, and merit that my Name be buried in oblivion a∣mongst Men? Ah, my Princess! How unworthy should I be to Sigh for you, and to bear these glorious Chains which I have receiv'd with so much pleasure! Whatsoever the time to come may pro∣duce, the present ordaineth me to serve the King of Tartary: My Fidelity and Zeal will perhaps make some impres∣sion on his Soul: But, Madam, you are silent, and I see nothing in your Eyes but a Trouble that alarms me. What Misfortune can it presage unto us? My
Lord, answered Taxila, You see that it is an effect of my Weakness, your Rea∣sons have overcome me, but they can∣not settle my Heart. Alas, Zingis! Was not I miserable enough to hate Timur, if it be the will of Fate that I must be his, without loving.—Taxila blush'd, and could not go on, but her Eyes were the Interpreters of her Heart, and those of the amorous Zingis read in them the happiness for which he sigh'd. Never was there Separation more tender on Zingis's side, and more obli∣ging on Taxila's, than was that of these two illustrious Persons: Timur did not give himself the trouble of so much Re∣spect and Niceness, he only in an un∣pleasant manner repeated what he had said so often, and appear'd as insolent, as if he had been assur'd of the Conquest of all the World. We found the three Kings joyn'd, and ready to give us Battel: Their Troops were refresh'd with a long Re∣pose,
whereas Undkan's Men were Fa∣tigu'd with climbing over the Moun∣tains and Woods. The Enemies were possest of advantageous Posts, and ap∣pear'd to be resolute: Nevertheless fight we must. All that is related of the fabulous Heroes doth not surpass that which Zingis then did: Undkan look'd upon him as a Prodigy; 'twas his Valour alone which made Victory still declare it self in our Favour: He sav'd Undkan's Life, who against his will was engag'd among the Enemies, and after many Battels, he took the three Kings Prisoners on different Oc∣casions, which put an end to the War on that side. Undkan left the Prince Master of the Destiny of the Captives: He gave them not only their Lives, but also their Liberty; and contented himself to engage them to pay the Homage and Tribute which the King of Tartary had demanded of them: The Gene∣rosity
of such a Conquerour serv'd on∣ly to animate them with a secret Rage against him: but Undkan after having publickly own'd, that it was to him alone that he ow'd the Glory of this Expedition, seeing his Enemies sub∣du'd, disbanded his Troops, and re∣turn'd to Cambalu. Fortune had not been so favourable to Timur, and the King of Ung with Forces inferiour to his, chas'd him out of his Provinces, and prepar'd to march towards those which compose the King∣dom of Tendur. These News afflicted Undkan, and my Master desirous to fi∣nish as he had begun, past without stop∣ping to the place where Timur was, brought him back to the Battel, and return'd to Cambalu after he had tri∣umph'd over the King of Ung, as he had done over the rest. Undkan receiv'd him with great Te∣stimonies of Joy, and Zamar, although envious of his Glory, was oblig'd to
testifie her Acknowlegment to him: but it was not their Applause that touch'd him, and Taxila's Praises were of much higher Value in his Heart: A Year of absence had as yet augmented her Beauty, and my Master at his re∣turn found her such as his Ardour could have wish'd. I do not know if my Vows have had any part in your Vi∣ctories, my Lord, said she unto him, when he went to salute her: But sure I am, I have made very ardent and sincere ones for you. I do not at all question the Obligations which I have to your Goodness, Madam, answered Zingis, and certainly the Hope I had that I did not displease you, hath ren∣der'd me more bold and brave than the Hope of possessing the Unners would have done. But, Madam, what will become of so much Love which your charming Beauties have inspir'd me with, if Undkan be only favourable to the Son of Zamar? O, what will be∣come
of my Tenderness and Acknow∣ledgment for you, interrupted Taxila, if in spight of me they give me to him whom I abhor? He is not sensible of his own Shame, and pretendeth to co∣ver himself with your Glory; and even my Father, notwithstanding all that you have done for him, is capable to requite all with Ingratitude. 'Tis the knowledge that I have of his Injustice that afflicteth me; bemoan with me, my Lord, bemoan with me, and whatsoever come to pass, believe me, I will be ever more miserable than you. Timur then enter'd; he had not seen the Princess but with his Mother; his Gate was full of Haughtiness, and he had receiv'd for a Reward of his Baseness, new assuran∣ces of Happiness; or rather Zamar, who desirous to comfort him in his bad Fortune in War, and to dissipate a gloomy Pensiveness which disquieted him, had drawn from Undkan stronger Promises, That he would give Taxila
unto her Son, than ever he had made unto her before. He was vex'd to see Zingis in a place, where from hence∣forth he was resolv'd to Reign alone; and if he durst have follow'd the mo∣tions of his Soul, he would have at that instant told him his Mind, but the re∣membrance of what past in the War retain'd him, and contenting himself with shewing him no Civility. We come from enriching the Crown of Tartary, Madam, said he unto her, with several Tributes of Importance, and it is at present the only Crown in Asia that can reckon great Kings amongst its Subjects. You might speak less generally, Timur, answer'd the Princess, with a disdainful Coldness, worthy of the King of Tendur's Arrogancy; and if Fame hath done you Justice, the King of Ung ought to have carried the same Advantages over you, which the Prince of the Monguls hath carry'd over him and the rest.
These Words did pierce the proud Son of Zamar to the quick, insomuch that his Fury for a long time shut up his Mouth: But coming to himself a∣gain, if you were more just and less pre∣judic'd, continu'd he, you would not take from the Arms of the King your Father, the Glory which is due unto them, to give it unto others; and I was not in so desperate a Condition, when they came unto the Provinces of Ung, but I could have quickly subdued them. If they had followed my Ad∣vice, reply'd the fair Princess with the same Coldness, they should have given you all the time you had need of; and truly, my Lord, you ought to have taken it your self. I don't know, said my Master, whether I have any part in the obliging Words of the Princess, or in Timur's Scorn; but this I know, that I would esteem my self much more Glorious in the one than Dishonour'd by the other. My Lord,
added Taxila, I would certainly be ve∣ry unreasonable, if I was the only per∣son in Tartary, that render'd not Ju∣stice to the Services which it hath re∣ceiv'd of you, and the taking of Four Kings hath spoke loud enough to be heard of all the World. There are some Kings, replyed the inconsiderate Timur, that are not so easily Conquer'd; and if we were one to one, he would perhaps find it hard enough to do what you pretend he hath done. Your In∣solency, reply'd Zingis with a Disdain∣full Smile, would be no dreadful Ad∣versary, neither would I use any great Precaution to execute upon certain per∣sons that which their Weakness doth always render easie to be done: But, my Lord, Would you raise a War in Tartary, after you have settled a Peace therein? No, continued Timur, with Eyes sparkling with Fury; because he knew that in the Princesse's Presence my Master's Respect was an Obstacle
to his Valour; but I will carry one in∣to the Bowels of the Monguls, on the Head of a Hundred thousand men, when by Undkan's Orders I have ob∣tain'd an absolute power over that un∣just Princess. They will oppose much less than a Hundred thousand men to your Irruptions; but you will not be the more terrible, and he who hath impos'd Tributes upon the Kings you know of, is able enough to impose a heavier Yoke upon the King of Ten∣dur. This biting Conversation would have come to a greater height, if Zingis's Discretion had not obliged him to retire, after he had respectfully saluted the Princess, who looked upon Timur with greater Scorn than before. At last, Madam, said the Son of Za∣mar unto her, You observe no more measures; your Aversion unto me ap∣peareth in all its Extent: but the King your Father, who hath once again pro∣mis'd
that he will never give you to any other but me, will call you to an account for it. Timur, answer'd Taxila with a resolute air, Although my Father's Promises make you con∣strain my Inclinations, you shall not be the happier for it. You have not labour'd to merit them, and it is not an Insolency like that which reigneth in your Heart, that can touch the Heart of Taxila: and you should have gone to work with submissive proceedings, and with a generous and uninterested Behaviour, and not have relied upon the Queen's Credit; but it is your Fortune you act for, and seeing the Crown of Tartary hath more power∣ful Charms than mine are, enjoy them, if you can, I will not be jealous, pro∣vided you leave me in Repose: it's evident enough that my Person is not dear unto you; the adventure of Poli∣sangi is a sufficient proof of it, and just now you have quarell'd before my
Eyes with a Prince that generously ha∣zarded his Life for the preservation of mine. These last Words rais'd a cruel Jea∣lousie in Timur's Soul: He was already perswaded that my Master lov'd the Princess, and now saw too plainly that he was also belov'd. You have paid very dear for the Obligation of which you speak, replied he, seeing that hap∣py Stranger being favour'd by a little good Fortune, hath made himself Ma∣ster of your Heart: but though War and Love do at the same time protect him, I hope the King will put a dif∣ference between us that will not be ve∣ry advantageous for him. Timur then went out and left the Princess in liber∣ty to meditate upon all that she had cause to fear from a man void of Ho∣nour and Generosity. She was considering her Misery, and Zingis was in the same Occupati∣on, when Timur went to the Queen,
and told her all that could animate her both against the Princess and my Ma∣ster: she gave a favourable Ear to his Complaints, and promis'd speedily to calm all his Troubles. For this end she began to Wheedle her Husband with all those affected Sweetnesses, that had so often surpriz'd his Weakness; She inform'd him that Taxila lov'd Zingis, and that contrary to his Word, which she ought to have respected, that disobedient Princess thought only of making the Prince of the Monguls happy, and easily incensing the Father against the Daughter, he protested un∣to her with Oaths, that the rebellious Taxila should never be Wife to any but Timur. Zamar not content with this first Advantage, was desirous to obtain a second; and sollicited Undkan, that he might humble Zingis, to render him his Tributary, as he had done the other Princes that were Vassals to their Crown. Seeing this was no easie At∣tempt,
Undkan rejected the Proposition, and by what he had seen the Prince of the Monguls do, he believed that no Power was able to conquer him. As soon as the crafty Queen had left him, he sent for the Princess Taxi∣la; and said unto her, looking stedfast∣ly upon her, I am unwilling to believe what I have heard concerning you: I am told that your Heart is engag'd, in spite of the Choice that I have made for you, and that you prefer the Prince of the Monguls to Timur. You might have known long ago my Resolutions in respect to your Establishment, and you have had leisure to prepare your Inclinations, if already they were not dispos'd to obey them. I have destin'd you for Timur since your most tender Infancy: He is a King, he is my Wife's Son, and if you have any foolish Ideas, resist them, or rather triumph over them, to please me, since no Law ought to be more powerful over you, than
that which obligeth you to obey me. I esteem Zingis as a young Hero, who may aspire unto great Things: but as to what concerneth you, I can, do no∣thing for him, having promis'd you un∣to another before I knew him. The Princess heard this Discourse which touched her Repose in the most sensible part, with a great agita∣tion of Spirit: She observ'd every word of it, and arming her self with a Resolution worthy of her Vertue, al∣though she had a particular Esteem for Zingis; My Lord, answered she, The most severe Judges could not find fault with me, and what he did for me, whilst Timur abandon'd me to a fatal Adventure, doth well deserve my Ac∣knowledgment. I will not alledge un∣to you the important Services which he hath so lately render'd to this King∣dom, but wilt only tell you, my Lord, That were my Heart absolutely free, it would never, incline to favour Timur:
You may Sacrifice me to his Ambiti∣on; my Respect oweth all things to you, nevertheless my Duty cannot o∣vercome my Aversion to Timur. Ah, my Lord, There are so many Prin∣cesses in Asia, or some other part of the World, able to render his Condition more happy. You are wise, interrup∣ted Undkan, with a moderation, which shortly after degenerated into Violence, and I am perswaded that you will love Timur as soon as he shall be your Hus∣band: So, Taxila, no more words, what I have promised, I will and ought to perform. In this manner did the King of Tar∣tary dismiss his Daughter; She be∣moan'd her self, she wept: but all were leagu'd against my Master, who had none for him, but the Princess and Al∣mundzar; the Prince of Brema having departed from Cambalu, at his return from the War, where he had gloriously Signaliz'd himself, the Cause of this his
suddain resolution being unknown. Axione an ardent Friend of my Ma∣ster's, told him all that had past, and the Grief that tormented the Princess: This did nothing but surcharge him with Affliction, his Love reproaching unto him all the Pains of Taxila. Zamar and her haughty Son, being assured of Zingis's Passion for the Prin∣cess, resolved upon the conclusion of her Marriage with Timur: To delay it, was to suffer these Fires to grow up, which were but too violent already, so that they thought upon nothing else. The Queen, being satisfied with the Promise that Undkan had made unto her, went to visit the Princess, and sa∣luted her with these sad Tidings. Ma∣dam, said she unto her, with a content∣ed air, After the Favour which it hath pleased the King to grant unto my Son, I cannot too much proclaim his Good∣ness, nor do enough, to testifie my Sa∣tisfaction: I know that you do not
joyn with me in desiring that double Alliance with which he honoureth us: but we will make so great Efforts to soften your Heart, that it will perhaps at last become favourable unto us. I see a trouble in your Eyes, that promi∣seth the continuance of your Scorn; we resent it with Grief: but, Madam, you spend it on constant persons, who will not be wearied with suffering. How great need had the Princess of Con∣stancy, not to make a noise. I am per∣swaded, Madam, answered She, with her ordinary moderation, that you owe only to your self that which you call a Happiness for Timur, and which ac∣cording to the Inclinations that Hea∣ven hath given me, can be none for me. Your perpetual Sollicitations force the King to constrain me; mean time, Madam, my Respect to him exempteth you from the Scorn you speak of, and of which I am not very capable. You know, Madam, that his Alliance exalt∣eth
you above all the Princesses of Asia, and that formerly you could only pre∣tend to be rank'd amongst the meanest of them. Must this Advantage be made use of by you to Sacrifice me? Can I love your Son in spite of my Heart; and if I love him not, would you ren∣der us both miserable? I have told him, and I repeat it unto you, that I will yield up all my Right to the Crown of Tartary to him, providing he do not ask of me a Heart, which I have never been able to give him. That which was most piquant in this Discourse, and which had escap'd from the Princesse's great Courage did not move Zamar, who had had time to prepare her self for all she could say. It would be too much, continued she, to abandon your just Claim to Timur; he is more reasonable than to expect it: But as he is not without Ambition, and is not satisfied with that mean Fi∣gure which we have made in the
World, seeing it is the King's pleasure, he will share them with you, and ex∣pect from his own Perseverance and your Equity, that Heart which you are not yet dispos'd to give him. For me, Madam, added she, saluting her, I will always walk with you as becometh an indulgent and affectionate Mother; and it is no small Token of my Esteem for you, when I offer you the most pre∣cious Thing I have. She went out and left the Princess in a Perplexity, which all Axione's Consolations could not les∣sen. The next Day Undkan communica∣ted to his most considerable Subjects, the Design he had to make Timur his Successor, by giving him the Princess his Daughter: The sincerer sort, who esteem'd nothing in Timur, because in∣deed there was nothing in him that merited their Esteem, did not approve the Choice: But the unworthy Flat∣terers whose Suffrages Zamar had
bought, applauded it, and they made up the greatest number. The Mar∣riage was published on the Morrow, and magnificent Preparations were made for it. Almundzar was one of those who did not declare for Timur, and Zamar who lov'd not that Favou∣rite of Undkan, put this upon account with her other Motives of hatred against him. It is impossible for me to express my Master's Despair, when he was told of this speedy Resolution: He found him∣self so much the more miserable that he could alledge nothing to the King of Tartary, but a Love posteriour to that of Timur. He knew that he was lov'd, and tasted the Sweetness of that precious Advantage; but he saw the lovely Taxila made subject to an abso∣lute Power, and upon the point to be Sacrific'd to him whom she hated. All his Thoughts were violent: although he should Arm all Tartary against him∣self,
by attempting against Timur's Life; he concluded that he had better perish, than leave him in peaceful Possession of Taxila. Things were arrived to that height, that the Princess was for∣bidden to see him; and this Prohibi∣tion did compleatly incense him, so that he went out of the Palace resolv'd to abandon himself to his Wrath. Pas∣sing through the great Place, he saw Timur accompanied with a small num∣ber of Attendants, and forgetting that not only he was at Cambalu, but al∣so in the view of Undkan and Zamar, beholding in Timur the Persecutor of Taxila, he advanc'd towards him with a terrible air. King of Tendur, said he unto him, You who design to carry a War as far as the Mogols, begin it at Cambalu against a man, without whose Assistance you would not be in a Condition to exercise an unjust Vio∣lence against the Princess of Tartary. It is by your Orders that I am prohi∣bited
to see her, and I will lose my Life, or you shall give me Satisfaction for this Injury. Timur was not prepar'd for so troublesom a Rencounter, and had no mind to fight: He would have put it off with a disdainful Answer. But Zingis who had his Sword drawn in his Hand, constrained him to put himself in a posture of Defence. Timur's fol∣lowers run in between them: but my Master's Valour had quickly dispers'd them, and seeing his unworthy Rival without other Defence than his Arms; Defend thy self, Traytor, said he unto him, and shew thy self this Day wor∣thy of Taxila, by giving some Proof of thy Courage. The Son of Zamar heard these Words, but was no less fearful than feeble; and my Master sent him to the Ground pierc'd with several Stroaks, without receiving any hurt by his Arms. Zingis would not retire after this A∣ction; but Almundzar, whom the noise
of the Combate had brought to the place, obliged him in the Name of the Princess to take care of himself, and the Night happily approaching, he made him be conducted unto a sure Retreat, which I alone knew. They carried Timur to the Palace, without any signs of Life: Zamar cry'd out dreadfully, and uttered horrible Imprecations against Taxila and my Master. Undkan order'd a diligent Search to be made for them; but Al∣mundzar had provided sufficiently for his Safety. He came to see him that very Night, and inform'd him of all the Preparations that were making against him, shewing him that there was an unavoidable Necessity for him to de∣part out of Tartary. My Master re∣sisted a great while; but Almundzar con∣vinc'd him, that though he staid at Cam∣balu, he could not see the Princess, that she would be in continual Alarms, and that for her quiets-sake he ought to go & wait
somewhere else, until this Storm was over-blown. Zingis yielded not but upon condition that he should see Tax∣ila before his Departure, and the next Night the faithful Almundzar introduc'd him unto her by a private way which he knew. Axione alone was in the Secret: Almundzar went out to watch that no body should Surprize them; and Zingis casting himself at the Prin∣cesse's Feet, lay there a great while without being able to express himself. What have you done, my Lord, said she unto him, raising him up? and what will be the Consequence of this last Effect of your Valour? What was I not obliged to do, to take you from Timur, Madam, replyed my Master, or at least to retard his Happiness. I know not, continued Taxila, whether Heaven may not sometimes pardon a violent. Action: but certain it is, that I cannot grieve for Timur's present Condition. Mean-time, my Lord, you must be
gone, you must resolve upon it, for as long as I know you are here, I shall be disquieted with perpetual Frights. Ma∣dam, reply'd my Master, If I had only my own Life to look to, I protest I would not depart from Cambalu; but seeing your Quiet is concern'd, I am ready to do any thing. In the mean time, my Princess, consider unto what Punishment he that loveth you with so much Ardour, is going to be exposed in the uncertainty of a long Absence. The proud Timur will be cur'd; my Arms have not been so happy as to put an end to his life. Ah! who will defend you against that Enemy, when Zingis is far from you? Suffer me to wait here, until I see what may be his De∣stiny, that so I may hinder yours from being miserable. No, my Lord, re∣ply'd the fair Princess, I will not be guilty of so cruel a Complaisance. O Heavens! I tremble as I speak to you, when I consider that the revengeful Za∣mar
is so near us. Suffer me to offer up Vows for you that are not disturb'd by Fear; perhaps Heaven will hear them: Whatsoever happen, believe that I love you. I do not offend Vertue in assu∣ring you of an innocent Tenderness, and if this can satisfie you, taste the Pleasure thereof entirely. Think for your Comfort, when you leave me, that though you depart from Taxila's Presence, yet you shall still abide in her Heart: and that not only her Quiet, but also her Reputation obligeth you to this Constraint. Yes, Madam, re∣ply'd the Amorous Zingis, I will de∣part, since you command me, and I will comfort my self with the precious Assurances which your Goodness hath given me: But how shall I behave my self towards the King your Father? Shall I defend my Life against him, if he As∣sault me? and will the Respect which I owe unto you, permit me to Arm my Subjects against the Tartars? Yes, my
Lord, answered the Generous Taxila, and if my Father become your declared Enemy, after the Obligations which he hath unto you, make use of your Forces and Valour, only spare his Life: It is his Person alone that I recommend unto you. Go, my dear Zingis, stay no longer in a Place so full of Danger. At these Words she held out her Hand to him, which the Prince respectfully Kissed, and without hiding her Tears from him, she received his Adieu, and in fine, obliged him to Retire. He took his Leave of Axione, who was no less Afflicted than the Princess; and after he had a thousand times Embraced Al∣mundzar, who had made all necessary Preparations for our Departure, we left Cambalu, and took the way to Molg. Our Voyage was very sad, and finding the King Dead at our Arrival at Molg; my Master, who lov'd him tenderly, received a terrible augmentation of Af∣fliction, and manifested the Goodness
of his Nature by the deep Mourning in which he continued a great while. His Subjects ravish'd to see him again, Swore an inviolable Fidelity to him; and some Months after his Arrival, not doubting but that he would be at∣tack'd, and Taxila having permitted him to defend himself, he visited all his Provinces, & past even unto the Desarts of Bargu, and Disciplin'd in a little time those People, that were never train'd before, teaching them the Art of War which he knew as perfectly as any Prince in the World. His Neighbours jealous of his Glory, would have di∣sturbed him; but in a few Months time he added some Provinces to his Domi∣nions, amongst which were Jek, Mo∣trik, and Melair. In this Triumphant Condition, being more sensible of his Love than of so much Glory, seeing that Tartary made no Advances against him, and believing that perhaps the face of Affairs there was changed, he dis∣patch'd
a magnificent Embassie to Und∣kan, to demand the Princess, but he was rejected, and treated as a presumptuous Person, Timur, as he had foreseen, was recover'd of his Wounds: He turned the Fury of his Despair against new E∣nemies, and was ever Victorious. But unable to live longer without seeing Taxila, knowing that she was yet free, by a secret Correspondence which he kept with Almundzar, he returned to Cambalu, with a Design to make the Princess consent to be carried away, or to die before her Eyes, if she proved obsti∣nate. Arriving at the Palace-Gate which was to be opened unto us, the Impatience of Zingis betrayed him; he spoke, Zamar heard him, and you know, my Lord, what she hath done against my Master. THUS ended Zerbin, and the King of Thibet, after having spent some time in Admiration of so Illustrious a Life, assur'd the Mogol that he had no less
Affection for his Master, than those that were most particularly acquainted with him; and returning to Almundzar, prai∣sed him for his zealous Fidelity to Zin∣gis. My dear Almundzar, said he unto him, What Methods shall we take to save the Prince Zingis? What shall we do against the cruel Zamar? As her Hatred is inflexible, and her Power over Undkan absolute, I see no way left to Triumph over her but by Force, and I know not where we can find Forces sufficient for an Enterprize of that Im∣portance. Whatsoever may happen, continued Philing, I will die before I suffer the King of the Mogols to perish: We must see Undkan, and once more try the ways of Sweetness; but if he persevere in his Cruelty, I will openly declare my self his Enemy. Almundzar approved of the generous Resolution of Philing, and assured him, that whatsoe∣ver he attempted for Zingis, he would still stand his Friend.
This Day past over very sadly; on the Morrow, the King of Thibet went to see Undkan, whom he found still Beleaguer'd by Zamar, and made the more hast, because he feared some se∣cret Cruelty; for they talked at Cam∣balu of Zingis's Death, as of a thing ab∣solutely certain. Zamar and Undkan feared the Pre∣sence of this Prince, who was neither their Subject nor Tributary, and who they saw did ever declare himself bold∣ly for Vertue. His Arrival put them out of Countenance, and Zamar was extreamly troubled at it: My Lord, said he to the King of Tartary, I don't know whether the Design that hath brought me hither this Morning, will have a favourable Success; but I pro∣test I never had a more pressing Interest, than that which I have in the King of the Mogols Life. It will be glorious unto you, my Lord, to Treat a Prince generously, who you believe hath given
you just cause of Offence: but it would be an eternal Shame unto you, to ex∣ercise an unjust Cruelty over him, ha∣ving so many Reasons to esteem him, and to look upon him as the Greatest a∣mong Men. No body is ignorant of the Services that he hath done you, and his Love for the Princess is the onely Crime you can accuse him of. But, my Lord, In the Dignity to which Heaven hath exalted you, consider what you owe to that of other Kings: Shall you be Powerful only to be Un∣just, and will you exercise that Power over an Enemy, who would not be in your Hands, but that he put himself in them; an Enemy all whose Steps are Glorious, and on whom the Eyes of innumerable Kingdoms are fix'd: that would be a ready way to confirm the Ideas which other Nations have of us: they look upon us still as Scythians; that is to say, People without Laws, with∣out Gods, and without Religion. Will
you imitate those barbarous Examples of Antiquity, which are deservedly e∣steem'd frightful Prodigies? And will you Sacrifice a great King for so light Reasons? These light Reasons, inter∣rupted Zamar, transported with Anger, will not pass for such in the Hearts of Mothers, as tender as I am, and he who attempted to kill my Son before my Eyes, and almost in my Arms, can ne∣ver be too severely punished for a Vio∣lence that hath cost him so much Blood, and me so many Tears. I am told, reply'd the King of Thi∣bet, that Timur was well accompany'd, when Zingis attack'd him, and even that the Rules of Generosity were not at all observ'd on this Occasion, seeing many Swords were at once turn'd a∣gainst one Man: And methinks I have also heard, that the King of the Mogols saved the King of Tendur's Life oftner than once in the Wars of Ung. My Lord, answered Zamar, You are so well
inform'd of all that concerns Zingis, that it seems you have kept a particular Correspondence with him; and that doubtless in our Dominions, and upon these Conjectures, we might justly—What, Madam, interrupted Phi∣ling coldly, Lay me in Chains as well as him, and add one Injustice to an∣other? 'Tis no matter from what Mouth I have learn'd the Miracles of his Life; it's sufficient that I am a very sincere and zealous Admirer of them. My Lord, said Unkan, The Queen speaketh as an enraged Mother, and you ought not to condemn her Resent∣ment. I have considered your Rea∣sons, but they have not convinced me; and it would be no less than to endan∣ger Vertue, to suffer these Men to live that disquiet Kingdoms, and without Reason defile the Palaces of Princes with Blood. I have received Services of Zingis, and Honour'd him as a Stran∣ger whom I judged worthy of my E∣steem;
but he, abusing my Easiness, remain'd at my Court, to delude a young Princess, and withdraw her from the Obedience which she oweth unto me; and pushing on his Arrogancy to a greater height, he assaulteth a Prince who is my Son, because he is my Wife's, and to whom I have destin'd my Daughter; and returneth incognito to Cambalu, to be introduc'd into my House, there to Plot secretly with the weak Taxila. What do I know but he hath laid Designs against my Life, and who will assure me of the Inno∣cency of his Intentions? In fine, I owe this Victim to my own quiet, and it's only to lose time in vain to sollicite his Liberty. I perceive, my Lord, an∣swer'd Philing, That his Ruin is sworn, and that you cannot be oppos'd in pla∣ces entirely subject to your Power. But of the Humour of which I am, I will never suffer this Cruelty without re∣senting it. Probably you never fear
the Wrath of Heaven, nor the Scorn of Men: but do you imagine that the juster part of this Portion of the World which we inhabit, will suffer you to immolate the Illustrious Zingis, without doing any thing for his Revenge? In∣dia, Persia, and China will be easily mov'd, and there wants only, added he, inspir'd by his Generosity, a Prince such as I am to excite them to it, and to bring into your Dominions a Storm that will soon overwhelm you. He went out after this, and seeing his Threats were far distant, Undkan and Zamar were more incens'd than fright∣ned at them. Their first Thought was to make him to be apprehended; but Almundzar, and some other Tartars in whom Undkan put Confidence, hin∣dered him from proceeding to that Ex∣tremity, representing unto him, that it would be to arm all the Powers of the Universe against himself. Zamar was not of this Opinion, but she was forc'd to yield.
The King of Thibet would once a∣gain endeavour to see the Princess: He was denied admittance into her Apart∣ment as formerly; but whilst incens'd with this Denial, he meditated upon Means to humble an unjust Power, the afflicted Taxila and amiable Axione lived in a sad Solitariness, and were on∣ly accompanied with dismal Thoughts. But what were the Thoughts of Zingis, so nigh Taxila, and yet so unable to discourse with her? Knowing his E∣nemies so well, he doubted not of his Misery; and the Idea of Death, which he had so often brav'd, was less tor∣menting to him, than his Absence from the Princess. Almundzar interest'd himself as a gene∣rous Friend in Zingis's Misfortunes: But how great soever his Credit was with Undkan, Zamar still got the better of him. He spoke boldly enough, to make himself be prohibited to speak more; and he had not so much as the
Consolation to be able to mitigate the Incommodities which the King of the Mogols suffered in Prison. Zerbin who still lay hid in the House of Zingis's ge∣nerous Friend, inform'd him, that his Master had Six hundred of the bravest Men in the World hid in several places about Cambalu, who would chearfully expose themselves for their Prince. Al∣mundzar resolved immediately to com∣municate these News to the King of Thibet, and was glad to see a Party en∣crease, whereof that Prince might be Head. There were even Tartars bold e∣nough to declare in Zingis's Favour a∣gainst Timur, whom they hated mor∣tally, and whose Rule they dreaded. Almundzar thought fit to hide his Zeal, that he might be more useful to the Princess and the King of the Mogols, and by this Policy he had the liberty to Negotiate with a great many consider∣able Tartars, who respected the Ver∣tue
of Zingis, and contemned the base∣ness of Timur, both which had appeared in so many Occasions. The King of Thibet, enrag'd with the second Denial he had received from the Princess's Guards, carried his Vexa∣tion along with him to Almundzar's house, to whom he made his complaints. You see, my Lord, answer'd the Tar∣tar, that all Things here are carried on against Honour and Justice; neither do I believe that in any other they would fail in the Respect that is due to a King, such as you are. My dear Al∣mundzar, said Philing, I would not per∣haps much resent Things of that Na∣ture, if I had only interests of Glory to look to; but I have those of a Lover to satisfie, and in me you behold the most Amorous of all Men. Of whom, my Lord, reply'd the astonish'd Al∣mundzar? of Axione, continued Philing, of that charming Damsel that is so dear unto the Princess, whom I have lov'd
these several years, and whom I will love Eternally. I know not, Almundzar, whe∣ther you have frequented her enough to know all her Vertue, which is in∣deed equal to her Beauty; and the obscurity of her Birth is recompensed by the Greatness of her Thoughts. This Effect of Axione's Merit doth not at all surprize me, added Almundzar, but that which astonisheth me, is, the man∣ner in which she came to Cambalu, and the abode she hath made here without you. It is nevertheless she alone that brought me hither, answered Philing, and for whose sake I have staid so long here. But, Almundzar, I must make you perfectly acquainted with so rare a Person, and the Passion that I have for her, in opening my Heart sincerely to you. Almundzar who was very desi∣rous to know Philing's adventures, pray'd him not to defer this Pleasure, and the King of Thibet who could not be more agreeably busied, than in speaking of Axione, did thus begin his Relation.
The History of PHILING and AXIONE. THE King of Thibet is none of the least considerable of Asia, whether you consider its Extent or Commerce: For though it be sur∣rounded with Mountains, the Indians and Chinois do often visit us. Our Towns are well Peopled, our Fields Fertil, and Magnificence is no stranger amongst us. I was but Six Years Old when I lost my Father, and Nine when the Prin∣cess Thamiriza my Sister and I were also left destitute of our Mother. These first Misfortunes were great, but our Age diminish'd our Sorrows, and made us quickly forget them. It would even be hard to tell you what we felt, and I confess that I have but a slight Remembrance of these my dearest Re∣lations
My Father had been entirely belo∣ved of his Subjects, and his Memory was still dear unto them: Never per∣haps was there seen a People more faithful to a young Successour, who neither knew his Fortune, nor what might disturb it. Among all those whom my Father had distinguish'd by his Favour, Hil∣dezar was the most powerful. There were even Alliances betwixt the Royal Family and his, and to him the Re∣gency was committed during my In∣fancy. He acquitted himself worthily of this Charge: His knowledge was vast, and his Courage great; He was Vigilant and Zealous, and the Face of Affairs was not chang'd under his Con∣duct. For me, I had Governours of great Merit, and Thamiriza had cho∣sen Women to wait upon her. Our ordinary Residence was at Ka∣chen: Hildezar lodg'd in the Palace; He had lost his Wise, who left him
one onely Daughter, who was Educa∣ted with no less Care than my Sister; and they placed about me several young Children of Noble Families, to render my Childish Occupations more agreeable to me. Hildezar at that time was but 35 Years Old: He was not free of Ambi∣tion, and seeing he had all the Power of Thibet in his Hands, he resolved to make me marry his Daughter. Hunt∣ing was his beloved and most frequent Divertisement; His Family was more numerous than mine, his Expences much greater, and his Train equally Splendid. 'Tis true, that one of Ten Years of Age requir'd no great Magni∣ficence, and it's as certain that my In∣terests were not neglected by the Re∣gent. He had for one Year been pos∣sest of all Authority in Thibet under my Name, by the Death of the Queen my Mother, and our Mourning being o∣ver, Divertisements shar'd our Time
with Exercises proper to form both the Body and Mind. All our Mountains are of very difficult access; there is ne∣vertheless very good Game, and Hil∣dezar who often Diverted himself with Hunting, suffer'd me sometimes to take a part, without exposing me to what is laborious in that Exercise. Having pick'd out one of the fairest Daies of the Spring, we went to one of the pleasantest Places that we could light upon, near Kachen, and travers'd the Hills a great while with greater Vigour than is usual in Children: Pas∣sing under some scatter'd Trees, whose Roots are bath'd with a small Rivulet, we saw a Spectacle that surpriz'd my young Heart, and made a lasting Im∣pression upon it. The Brook was swell'd with the Blood of many dead and dying Men, and a few paces off, we beheld a Girl of Six or Seven Years of Age, richly habited, and of a Beauty so extraordinary, that it astonish'd all
our Troop. She was weeping, and lifted up her Eies and Hands, not knowing from whom to ask Help. In this lamentable Condition, her Clothes were even stain'd with Blood, and ne∣ver could an Object more charming and more worthy of Compassion pre∣sent it self before us. Hildezar stopp'd; our Arrival made the Innocent Un∣known redouble her Cries, and fright∣ned with her Misfortune, she threw herself among our Horses-feet. I must acknowledge, Almundzar, that Love seiz'd upon me from that very mo∣ment, but I did not perceive it at first, and my Innocence made me mistake it for simple Compassion. Hildezar alighted from his Horse, and approacht the amiable Stranger: He is dead, said she, with a charming Innocency, in the Tartarian Language, but somewhat dif∣ferent from ours, My Father is dead: These cruel Ones have kill'd him, but he hath kill'd some of them also. Ah,
my Father, added she! turning her head towards the dead Bodies: Ah, my Father! I shall never see you more, and will die with you. Hildezar struck with Compassion took her in his Arms, and made her shew him whom she cal∣led her Father; but neither in him nor the rest could we perceive any sign of Life. After this, Hildezar himself carried the little Axione, for so she was call'd, to Kachen, asking Questions of her by the way; and all he learn'd was that Marzillus her Father, with those that accompanied him, had been attack'd in that place by these wicked Men; but she could neither inform him of her Country nor Quality, which, in all probability, was not mean. The sight of my Sister, and of Alzine Hildezar's Daughter, who were both almost of an Age with Axione, did a little calm her Sorrow, and in a little time she ap∣pear'd so Fair, that all our Court was
Charm'd with her. I never saw so much Grace, Sweetness and Modesty, as appear'd in the meanest of her Acti∣ons; and though she had past her first Years in a Vagrant Life, she had an ad∣mirable Genius, which was not cor∣rupted by the Defects of her Educati∣on: Her Reason out-running her Years, did much surpass that of persons that had attain'd to a much greater Age: She was Complaisant, without doing any thing that was mean, and observ'd a certain deference to the Quality of a King, which my Tenderness could not endure. My Sister lov'd her perfect∣ly: Axione liv'd familiarly with her, and we past the space of Five or Six Years with the greatest Sweetness in the World. Mean-time, Axione became so Fair, and I so Amorous, that I thought on nothing else but to See and Please her; I render'd unto her some little Services that engaged her Acknow∣ledgment: but being ever Humble
and Modest, she received them with Respects that my Passion could not away with. Axione, said I unto her one Day, after I had presented her with some Flowers, for which she returned as many Thanks, as if the Gift had been much more precious; you value sorry Presents at a very High Rate, but I can offer some unto you that are more worthy to be regarded. All that com∣eth from your Hand, my Lord, replied she, ought to be very considerable unto me, and a King such as you are, can never give sorry Presents to a Girl like me. Axione, cried I out, If some Flowers have obtained for me so obliging an Answer, what may I not expect from a Heart that is less unworthy of you, which I have given you a great while ago? Hitherto my Eies alone have told you of it, but I must now let you know it in another manner. Yes, Axione, I have given you that tender Heart which will prove faithful to you; and
if you are capable of Acknowledgment, it must be for this Present. The mo∣dest Axione blush'd, sigh'd, and look∣ing upon me with a touching air, but full of Grandeur and Majesty, the Hearts of Soveraigns ought not to ren∣der themselves so easily, my Lord, re∣plied she, nor should they be received with so little Precaution. Think upon what you were Born, and remember the Condition in which you found me; reflect seriously upon a Goodness that may pass for Weakness, and which I will not abuse; believe that I will ever respect in you the Dignity of a King, and a Merit, which perhaps, I am too sensible of. But, my Lord, believe also that the obscurity of my Life doth not vex me so much, as to make me desire to get rid of it by crafty Me∣thods. You have too much Wit, Axione, answer'd I, and would to Heaven, that you had as much Tenderness! What can the Obscurity of your Birth signi∣fie
against so much Beauty and Vertue that are in you? D'ye believe that I am one of those that alwaies offer Sa∣crifices to Fortune, and never to true Merit; I am contented with what I have, and would esteem my self more happy in pleasing you, than in being lov'd of the Greatest Queen in the World. Do not then prescribe Les∣sons unto me, which I esteem Cruel∣ties; suffer me to love you, and suffer it with pleasure: But all my Earnest∣ness was to no purpose, she still an∣swer'd as before; and all the advan∣tage I had was to speak, and to be heard, and when I protested unto her that it was not the Quality of a King that embolden'd me to take this liber∣ty, she seem'd better satisfi'd: but Al∣mundzar, when her Stature was form'd, and her Beauty compleat, I felt my Passion augmented, and found my self capable to sacrifice all for her. I was not the only person that lov'd
her in this manner; I had a terrible Ri∣val. Hildezar Regent of Thibet, of an advanc'd Age, Alzine's Father, who had acquir'd a great deal of Esteem in our Country, and amongst our Neigh∣bours, by his prudent Conduct, seeing the fair and vertuous Axione grow up, felt his Heart seiz'd upon by Flames of an extraordinary Violence: He la∣bour'd in vain to extinguish them, and that which he had done for Axione flat∣tering his Hope, he suffer'd a Malady to gather strength, which it was not possible for him to cure. He had remark'd by all my Actions the Love that I had for Axione; but he did not believe it so pure, and imagi∣ning that a young King cannot be with∣out Ambition, he hop'd that Time would fix my Inclinations on some o∣ther Object, and suffer'd his own to act freely. Axione had look'd upon him as a Fa∣ther, sent unto her by Heaven, and
whatsoever he did, she thought on no∣thing less than what he truly design'd. One Day when I was not in the Pa∣lace, Hildezar found Axione walking alone upon a Terrace, and making use of this Opportunity, when there was none to observe him. Stay, Axione, said he unto her, I have a Business of Importance to impart unto you: Axi∣one, who did not foresee what was to follow, smil'd at those words. What is it, my Lord, replied she? Is it con∣cerning the Obligations that I have un∣to you, and would you chide me for having fail'd in any thing I owe unto you? If you have any Obligation unto me, answer'd Hildezar, it is in your power easily to acquit your self of it, and it is this power which is yet un∣known you, that I would inform you of. As long as you were a Child, not feeling what I now feel with the same Violence, I abstain'd from telling you what was then above your Reason, and
I have since been restrain'd by a Fear, which a more absolute Power enableth me now to surmount. One that loves desperately cannot remain alwaies dis∣creet and reserv'd. This Declaration will surprize you: but, Axione, the knowledge you have of your own Beau∣ty, ought to have prepar'd you for it. Fear nothing from my Designs, they are full of Respect, and at the same time that I offer unto you my Heart, with an absolute Empire over my Will, I offer unto you also my Hand, and all that Fortune hath given me. Hildezar's Discourse struck Axione dumb: He sollicited her long for an Answer, before she was able to return one; at last recovering a little out of the Trouble which so unexpected a piece of News had caus'd in her; Is it possible, my Lord, answer'd she, that what you told me, is not of purpose to try me, and can there be any Truth in a Discourse of that nature? Can you
doubt of it, replied Hildezar, and can you suspect one of my Age of such Tricks? My Love to you must be ve∣ry ardent, seeing no Consideration can restrain me from declaring it. O, my Lord! cried out Axione, Wherein have I sinn'd against Heaven, that it should expose me to such a Misfortune? What! is this Misfortune so great, answer'd Hildezar, that you should be so much afflicted with it? Yes, my Lord, ad∣ded she, It is one of the most cruel Mis∣fortunes that could befal me; and af∣ter the Obligations that I have unto you, I would for ever abhor my self if I should contribute to distain your Glory. What would not people say, if You suffer'd Your self to fall in an Er∣rour, which the greenest Youth cannot render excusable? What Honour could my Alliance do unto You? Unknown to my Self and to all the World, per∣haps of base Blood and unworthy of Your Inclinations. Axione interrupted
Hildezar, That Modesty doth so set off the Lustre of Your Vertue, that it would augment my Love, if it was ca∣pable of any Augmentation: I see in You all that can satisfie my Ambition and Tenderness. Speak then positive∣ly. Well then, Hildezar continu'd she, I must be sincere seeing You desire it, and I must tell You, that this unknown Blood that swelleth my Veins inspireth me with so Noble Sentiments, that I will never do any thing until I be in∣form'd of my Birth. I feel it much bet∣ter than perhaps I shall ever know it. — It is not that which determineth You, interrupted Hildezar, and I owe unto another Cause that Resistance which filleth me with Despair. I am neither Young, nor a King: But, Axi∣one, I love You, and am able to make You very Happy? I have Power, do not constrain me to have Recourse to it. Philing is a Soveraign, but his Dig∣nity obligeth him to a great Alliance;
He amuseth You only with a fleeting Passion, for Love is much more short∣liv'd in the Hearts of Kings, than of o∣ther men. I leave you, and wholly depend upon your Answer, asking no∣thing of you but what is reasonable: He retir'd, and Axione remain'd alone, in liberty to reflect upon what she had heard. This Discourse made such an impression upon her Countenance, that it was easily perceiv'd, notwithstand∣ing the Care that she took to compose her self. I found her vex'd, full of Di∣straction; and in fine, in a condition that I have never before seen her in. What aileth you this Morning, Axione, said I unto her, You are no more Your self, and I cannot imagine the Cause of this Change. My Words roused her up a little; she assur'd me that nothing extraordinary had befaln her; but I read too well in her Eies, whom Love had made me study many Years, to be contented with this Answer. You
are not sincere, continued I; but if You hide any thing from the tender In∣terest that I take in You, You will be the most cruel Person in the World. My Lord, replied Axione, I ought not to sa∣tisfie You in what you ask of me; ne∣vertheless I perceive, I shall not be able to conceal it from You, but upon condition to moderate Your Re∣sentment. Know then, my Lord, that this Hildezar, whom Heaven hath made an Instrument to sweeten the first Mise∣ries of my Life, hath now done me the most sensible of all Injuries: There needed no more to make me compre∣hend Hildezar's Designs; and had it not been for the condition under which Axione made me her Confident, I would have made search for him to punish him. Hildezar is in love with You, replied I, and what will become of me, Axione, if You be favourable unto him? My Heart, added that fair Girl, is not very precious; but it is not to Hildezar
that my Inclinations have destin'd it. I am expos'd to his Discourses, and perhaps to his Humours — What? D'ye make no reckoning of my Autho∣rity, interrupted I? Dy'e think that my Love will suffer his to act in quiet? O my dear Axione! my Interest in this is greater than Yours; and You are too dear unto me, to suffer You to be im∣portun'd by a Rival; I am a King, and ought to be Master of all but Axione. You may extend your Dominion even over my Will, my Lord, replied she, seeing Your Generosity will never put upon me any thing that is rude; and besides, You are All Potent here. No, Axione, added I, I will never assume any Power where You are, but what You are pleas'd to allow me, for You shall alwaies Reign Soveraignly over me. Oh Heaven, continued that amiable Maid! Can it be possible that I should prove ungrateful to so much Goodness, and will You not one Day enable me
to testifie my Acknowledgment? I hope, my Lord, continued she, That my Indifferency, or rather Disdain qua∣shing Hildezar's Hopes, he will change his manner of acting; but if it fall out otherwise, I must change mine. Yes, Axione, replied I, and besides You must change Your Condition: Do not think that I will stick to make You Queen of Thibet: The Throne that I possess will never please Me without You; and if our Laws did permit me, I would offer it unto You without a Partner. My Lord, answered Axione, with Looks full of Gratitude, You ho∣nour too much a miserable Unknown, whom Fortune hath hitherto esteem'd unworthy of the least of her Favours. It would indeed be a very great One to possess the Affections of an Illustrious Prince, and to share his Crown with him: But, my Lord, I will never a∣buse so generous a Bounty; Your Glo∣ry shall never be soil'd with an Alli∣ance
like mine, and to prevent that Misfortune, I would abandon my self to the most cruel Miseries, and even give my self to Hildezar. What! shall it be said, that Axione is Queen of Thi∣bet, and that all her Dowry is a Descent unknown to all the World? I owe un∣to You, and I owe also to my. Self a perfect Manifestation of what I am; and if there be found, added she, with an extraordinary Majesty, any thing in my Life that is not unworthy of You, believe me, my Lord, there shall none be able to dispute it with You, and I would esteem my self too happy. O Heaven, cried I out, charm'd with Axione's Vertue! Could you have infus'd so Noble a Grandeur into an ordinary person? Ah, Madam! do not seek for any other Proof of what You are, than the Beauty of Your Senti∣ments: They render You worthy of all the Thrones of the World; Accept of mine, and do not torment me by too
modest and obstinate a Denial. My Lord, replied she, with a stronger Tone, It is an unalterable Resolution: I cannot tell whether I commit a Crime against Decency, when I confess unto You, that You have touch'd my Heart, and that of all that my Eies can be∣hold, nothing can be more agreeable to them than You; but I will willing∣ly commit this Fault, to testifie unto You, that the dearer You are unto me, and the more highly I esteem You, the greater Care I ought to have of Your Glory. She blush'd in finishing these last Words, and would by no means continue the Discourse. To satisfie her, I was constrain'd to neglect the Offence that she had recei∣ved from Hildezar, and to act as if I had never been inform'd of it. But my Eies being then opened, I saw but too well what past in the Heart of this pre∣sumptuous Rival: But I did not pene∣trate so well the Factions that he was
raising in Thibet, by the Authority he had acquir'd during my Infancy. As∣soon as he had discover'd his Thoughts to Axione, he took secret measures to ob∣lige me to Marry his Daughter, on whom I had never so much as thought, and of whom he never spoke to me. He engag'd all the Kingdom, and see∣ing till then my Education and Love had occupi'd me more than State-Af∣fairs, it was easie for him to insinuate into those who shar'd the Publick Cares with him, all that he was desi∣rous they should do. He told to eve∣ry remarkable person that had Credit among the People, That I, possest with a blind Obstinacy, abandon'd my self to the Love of the unknown Axione, and that I design'd no other Princess for my Subjects. Every one desir'd him to speak to me of it, condemning my Pre-occupation; but he refus'd to do it, and others were oblig'd to undertake the Business.
I did not at all suspect what their Oc∣cupation at that time was, and was much surpriz'd one Day, being upon the account of an Affair of great Im∣portance, oblig'd to be present at Coun∣cil, to which I seldom went, believing that my Presence was not alwaies ne∣cessary, when the most Venerable of those that compos'd this Assembly ad∣dress'd himself to me in these Terms: I speak unto you in the Name of all Your Subjects, my Lord, who entreat You by my Mouth to give them a Queen. Your Age is not far advanc'd, but Your Reason is; and this will tell You, that nothing can be more agree∣able to People, than to see their Sove∣raigns in a Condition to leave behind them a Glorious Posterity. This ma∣keth the King more Vigilant, and the Subjects better Disciplin'd. Unmarry'd Princes are for the most part without Interest, and that of a Family, engageth them to labour for the Glory, and ag∣grandizing
of Your Dominions. Re∣solve then, my Lord, to satisfie us, and do as several of Your Predecessors have done. Go not to bring from a Foreign Clime a Princess that could not prove very affectionate unto us. There are in Thibet Houses Noble enough to as∣pire unto the Alliance of their King: And even that Favour is due unto the Zeal and Loyalty of Hildezar. Alzine is able to reckon Princes amongst her Ancestors, and is not the first of her Blood that hath enter'd into the Royal Family of Thibet. This Harangue astonish'd me to such a degree, that I was at first unable to make any Answer. Choler seiz'd up∣on my Soul, and I look'd upon these Men as so many Enemies, plotting a∣gainst my Quiet, and I was particular∣ly incens'd against Hildezar, not doubt∣ing but that he was the only Cause of all that pass'd. In the end, composing my Countenance, which the Politick
Hildezar examin'd, I spoke, because I was oblig'd so to do. Botsar, said I to him that had express'd himself in the Words I have related unto you, I don't know from whom you have immedi∣ately receiv'd the Commission of which you have at present acquitted your self: but I assure you it is not at all a∣greeable to me. Who ought to in∣terest themselves more than mine own Heart in the Choice you desire me to make? and what man should be more careful of my Fortune than my self? You must needs look upon me as a weak Person, when you take the boldness to prescribe Rules to me, and determine the Objects of my Inclinations. I am neither so ignorant of the Laws of Thi∣bet, nor of those of all the other King∣doms of the World, but that I can re∣gulate my Actions with some Glory, and am able to choose a Wife for my self when it shall be time. My Lord, said Hildezar, seeing that I had lest off
speaking, you must not take it ill, if so many persons who look upon you as their only Good, do ardently desire to see you tied unto them by the Interest of which you speak. I have perhaps given them my Suffrage; but it was not I that propos'd Alzine, though, my Lord, she may well countervail an un∣known Maid, and would be more a∣greeable to your Subjects. Hildezar, interrupted I with a wrathful Look, You abuse the Consideration that I have for you: I am nevertheless clear-sighted enough to perceive that you are not so void of Esteem for unknown Persons; and you also might have seen enough of my Inclinations, to have made you more respectful and less daring. More∣over, I am a King, and pretend to be Master. When the People of Thibet are Opprest by my Injustice, it will be time for them then to complain against me; when I shall abandon them to their Enemies, then will they have
cause to upbraid me with Baseness; but hitherto they can charge me with no Fault, but I may justly reproach all of you, that you have fail'd in that re∣spect, which I will endeavour to make you observe in time to come. After this I went out full of Wrath, the Ef∣fects whereof I would have made these presumptuous Ones feel, but that I was afraid to give Axione the least cause of Offence. She read the Agitation of my Mind in my Eies, but I was not willing to inform her of the true Cause thereof, disguising it with some other pretext. Hildezar being incens'd against me for the interest of his Daughter, but much more for that of his Love, a dan∣gerous Malice succeeded in the place of the Affection that he had hitherto pro∣fest unto me: He esteem'd my Ruine necessary for the establishment of his Repose and Fortune; and seeing the Peace that reign'd among us, suffer'd
no Cloud to hang over us; he rais'd a War by pernicious Intrigues, not doubt∣ing but that I would run with Ardour unto the Places where I might acquire any Glory. He hop'd by my Death to ascend a Throne that had no other Heirs; and though Benzide and Othrize, two considerable Princes in Thibet, pre∣tended some Right to it, yet the Suffra∣ges he was assur'd of made him look upon them as no great Obstacle to his Designs. It was he then that wheedled that part of my Subjects into an In∣surrection, who inhabit the Frontiers towards India. Upon the first noise of this Rebellion, I resolv'd to act the part of a Captain and King. Hildezar was cold and slow, and did not appear ve∣ry forward in preparing for the War: His Creatures imitated him, but in spite of him, I saw my self very quick∣ly at the head of a considerable Army. Assoon as he saw me ready to be gone, he counterfeited himself sick, that he
might have pretence to remain at Ka∣chen. This was a cruel Necessity for me to leave Axione expos'd to his Im∣portunities. No, said I to her, when the time of my Departure was come, I will not abandon you to the Indis∣cretion of Hildezar; He is Master of all Power here, and my Misfortune hath swell'd his Authority. My Lord, replied she, seeing I am near the Prin∣cess, and seldom come out of her Pre∣sence, I do not think that I have cause to fear any thing, and it is not his Im∣portunity that disquieteth me; it is your Life, my Lord, which will be expos'd to rebellious Arms; it is you your self, it is that great Heart that burneth with a Desire to Signalize it self. Alas, my Lord, Sympathize with our Weaknesses, do not pursue too ar∣dently that Glory which will alwaies follow you, and in the heat of Battels forget not the Care you owe to the Pre∣servation of your own Life. This Mark
of Axione's Tenderness, whose fair Eies appear'd moist, touched me sensibly: That Life which I have Consecrated unto you, fair Axione, replied I, will not be expos'd to so many Dangers as your Goodness perswadeth you, but seeing you Ordain me, I will take Care of it, as of a Thing that you are not willing to lose. For you, Axione, I entrust you to your self; resist the Arrogancy of Hildezar, & at my Return resolve with your self to put an eternal obstacle in the way of his presumptuous Pretensions in giving your self to a Prince that li∣veth only for you. Go, my Lord, con∣tinued the fair Maid, whither the Ri∣gour of Fate commandeth you to car∣ry your Arms; and if I be Mistress of any of your Interests, assure your self that they can never fall into more faith∣ful hands. In this manner I took my leave of Axione, and having tenderly Recom∣mended her to my Sister, I went out of
the Palace, accompanied with Benzid, Othrize, and several other Persons of Quality. Hildezar, said I to that Tray∣tour when he came to receive my last Orders, you have been desirous to re∣main at Kachen; remember alwaies that I Reign there and reign justly, do not abuse the Power that I have suffer'd you to assume; render unto my Sister what you owe unto her Dignity, and above all respect Axione, all whose In∣terests are mine. Excite no new Broils, whilst I go to calm these that are al∣ready set on foot: I dare assure you that I will return speedily; Adieu. He answer'd me only with a Salutation, and I began to march, but not without anxious Apprehensions. I may boldly say, Almundzar, that I rush'd like a Torrent upon the Rebels: They were animated by no couragi∣ous Captain, and their Revolt being only an Effect of Hildezar's Treachery, I had no great Trouble or Glory to van∣quish
Men that were overcome at the first sight of our Standards. My Anger permitted some of them to perish for an Example to others, and how much soever I was inclin'd to Clemency, I could not without Resentment consi∣der, that they were the cause of my Absence from Axione. In the end, al∣most without the loss of a Man, or re∣newing the least Wound, though I did not spare my self, I had in less than three Months quieted all things. The Con∣quer'd submitted themselves to my Pleasure, and I took the way to Kachen, from whence I had received many Let∣ters, none of which acquainted me with any thing that could make me suspect the Misery that waited for me. But arriving at that Town, I neither found Hildezar nor Axione. The Traytour had carried her away, and how exact soever Thamarize had been in observing her, she could perceive nothing, and appear'd unto me desperate at the Ac∣cident.
Alzine her self, the innocent Daughter of so criminal a Father, pro∣tested that she had no hand in Hilde∣zar's Action, and couragiously offer'd her Blood unto me as an Atonement for the Offence I had receiv'd: I as∣sur'd her, as afflicted as I was, that not confounding her with the Traytor that gave her Life, I would have held her guiltless of all. In fine, Almundzar, with∣out staying at Kachen, I run through all Thibet, and even exposed my self to dis∣mal Wandrings in the howling Desarts of Xama, and after having consum'd a great deal of time in an useless Quest, I return'd to Kachen to settle Things for a longer Voyage, entrusting the Go∣vernment to my Sister, & leaving her to the Conduct of Benzid and Othriz in im∣portant Affairs, I departed from Thibet, unable to live without Axione. I saw almost all Asia; I met with Adven∣tures, which I do not relate unto you, because they have no direct Relation
to my Love, and after a vain Search of two Years, being in Tartary, and pas∣sing through a Forest, that pertaineth to the King of Ergimul, I found Hildezar at the Root of a Tree, pierc'd with se∣veral mortal Wounds, & in a condition worthy of his Treasons: He breathed as yet, and easily knew me: His Misery asswag'd my Anger, and I went to help him; No, my Lord said he, You ought not to lavish your Goodness for a Man that hath but too much abused it. I am Guilty, nor is it Death that ex∣torts this Acknowledgment from me, and it's a great while since a just Re∣morse hath executed Vengeance upon me for my Treacheries. This Death is too sweet for a Man that hath meri∣ted the worst of Punishments, seeing it permitteth me to ask Pardon of my Master. At these Words he would have made an Effort to raise himself up∣on his Knees, but I hinder'd him, and ask'd News of Axione: He told me
with a mournful Sigh, That he had been almost two Years separated from her: That after he had made her wan∣der up and down a long time, he was assaulted in Tartary, by persons that car∣ried her away. That after that he had search'd for her to no purpose, and that the same Robbers had now left him in the Condition in which I found him, because he knew them, and endeavour∣ed to make them confess what they had done with Axione. After that he breath'd his last, and having caus'd my Followers to cover his Body with a little Earth, I came straight hither, where in the end, I unexpectedly found Axione. I made my self known to Undkan: I have ever continued to see Axione; she loveth me, I am cer∣tain of it; but her severe Vertue will not permit her to consent to my Hap∣piness, till she know her self perfectly. she inform'd me, that Hildezar carried her very privily and by a subtle Strata∣gem;
that he did not shew himself to her till long after their departure from Kachen; that he had conjur'd her to pardon his Love, that made him sacri∣fice all for her; that she reproached him bitterly with his Treachery; but that nothing could make him alter his Resolutions; and that in the end, She was violently taken from him in Tar∣tary, and sold to some Tartars, who gave her to the Princess Taxila. Philing left off speaking: Almundzar admir'd his Generosity, and Axione's Vertue; Afterwards returning to the Interests of Zingis, they discours'd of the Troops that he had about Cambalu, and of the measures that were most proper to be taken, to avert the Mis∣fortune that threaten'd the Life of that famous Prince. In the mean time, Timur the Author of all the Sufferings of so many Noble Persons, was not altogether free of a restless Anxiety himself, and though the
Man in the World whom he hated most was upon the Point of being Sa∣crific'd unto him, having as much Love for Taxila as he was capable of, he could not live out of her Sight, and knew well that if he dar'd to present himself before her, he would doubtless hear nothing that would please him. Za∣mar, who lov'd him even to Idolatry, saw his Melancholy with Grief: Why do ye languish, Timur, said she unto him, all Things conspire together for your Felicity, and there is no Crown in Asia equal to that which you shall pos∣sess? What more can be done to satis∣fie you? After so much Care that I have taken, will you alwaies shew me a gloomy Countenance? Madam, re∣plied Timur, These Motions are not vo∣luntary, and it's against my Will that you perceive them: You have done but too much for me: My Gratitude can never rise high enough; but if my Ambition be contented, I feel my Love
alarm'd. Too constant Lover of Tax∣ila that I am, I must either deprive my self of her Sight, or expose my self to her Reproaches! Ah, Madam! How do I deserve to be lamented? and how uneasie do I find my self in the heighth of my Prosperity! Rather say that you are weak, interrupted the Queen of Tartary, and that you deserve real Mi∣series, seeing you torment your self with imaginary ones: Suffer our Ene∣my first to perish, and afterwards make your self Master of Taxila. 'Tis no matter whether or no you obtain her Consent; Undkan's Authority will re∣move these Obstacles. In fine, My Son, I will have you to Reign over the Tartars, and there is nothing but I will do to effectuate this Resolution. Go see that ungrateful Taxila, whose Disdain I bear with only upon your account, and in the mean time, I will press the King to put Zingis to Death. The Son of Zamar instigated by such
a Mother, left her and went to the Princess, to whom he alone had ac∣cess. Taxila, who had not seen him since her Disgrace, was so moved at the sight of him that she had almost lost her Understanding: To follow his Mother's Advice, he had laid aside his Sadness, so that he appear'd before her full of a bold Arrogancy. Madam, said he, One would have hardly be∣liev'd, that such a Person as you had been capable to draw exil'd Enemies into Tartary, and even into the King your Father's Palace; and without reck∣oning my Interest, you had others pow∣erful enough to have disswaded you from such a Correspondence. As moderate as the Princess was, she lost all Patience at those Words: Tho' I had committed something that ob∣lig'd me to make Reparation, replied she, it should never be to the King of Tendur (a vile Slave of his own Vanity, and his Mother's Passions) that I would
justifie my self. This is indeed to Treat me as a Prisoner, to carry your Inso∣lency to the place to which I am Con∣fin'd: Cannot the Aversion for you that Nature hath inspir'd me with sa∣tisfie you, unless you augment by Pro∣ceedings full of Injustice and Presum∣ption? Go, pretended King of Tendur, go to the Feet of the cruel Zamar, and sollicite the Death of Zingis; but know, that into whatsoever Condition your common Fury may reduce him, he shall be ever dearer to me than my Life. I would never perhaps have said so much, if he had not been miserable; but in the present state of our Affairs I have no Measures to observe; and all my Tenderness is but a mean Recom∣pence for what he hath done, and now suffereth for me. At these Words Tax∣ila went into a Closet, where she shut her self up; and Timur full of Rage and Confusion, said a thousand Things to Axione without Respect or Reason. She
answer'd him with a great deal of Wit and Courage, and did not swerve in a Point from the Princess's Sentiments, which raised the Fury of the Son of Za∣mar to such a heighth, that he return'd to his Mother, to bawl against Taxila, and hasten the Death of a Rival, whom he could not endure to see pre∣ferr'd before him. Undkan so ardently sollicited by per∣sons that had all Power over him, was quickly perswaded to a fatal Resolution. Almundzar, whose Affection to Zingis's Interest made him a watchful Spy over all their Actions, perceiv'd what past in Undkan's Mind, and went to Advertise the King of Thibet of all. Then keeping no more measures, they dispatch'd Zer∣bin to assemble the Mogols that lay near Cambalu, and Almundzar took the same Care for the Tartars that had declar'd in Zingis's Favour. The King of Tartary desirous to act with some form of Justice, lest he
should draw upon himself the hatred of all the Earth, believ'd that it would be esteem'd a Crime great enough to condemn the King of the Mogols, that he was surpriz'd in the Night-time at the Gates of his Palace, in a design to enter into it. Zamar made choice of the Judges, who according to her Instiga∣tions condemn'd the Illustrious Zingis to lose his Head within three Days. When the Sen∣tence was pronounced, he was nothing mov'd: But the King of Thibet and Almund∣zar, upon whom Generosity had so power∣ful an Influence, trembling for Horrour and Anger, resolved to lose all or save Zingis. They acted with so much diligence and se∣crecy, that they quickly form'd a strong Party, whom they dispers'd through the Twelve Suburbs of the City of Cambalu, to appear in Arms, when it should be time, and rescue Zingis from Ʋndkan's Guards. King Philing made no scruple to declare him∣self Head of his Defenders: He owed no∣thing to Ʋndkan, and did not violate any Right, in resisting one that endeavoured so barbarous an Act of Injustice. The Noise of Zingis's Death reached the Princesse's Ears, who repented but too late, that she had irritated the Jealously of Timur. She remained in the dismal expectation of that Misfortune, shedding Tears in abun∣dance
with her dear Axione; and that fair Maid more touch'd than ever before she had been, felt a Grief not much inferiour to that of Taxila. The Day appointed for the Death of the King of the Mogols being come, the Streets were crouded with a multitude of People in the Morning. He was to lose his Life be∣fore the Palace; and it was easie for them that design'd to save him, to conceal them∣selves in a Cround composed of all sorts of per∣sons: The Scaffold was erected before Za∣mar's Apartment, that from her Chamber Windows she might taste the Pleasure of that Spectacle. Ʋndkan took his Place with Zamar, Timur, and the Kings of Ʋng, Ten∣guth, Cerguth, and Ergimul, worthy Slaves of the Tartarian Queen. The People beheld with Astonishment this Assembly of Sove∣raigns in an Occupation so unbecoming their Royal Dignity; whilst the afflicted Taxila groan'd, or rather was ready to expire in the Arms of Axione. Zamar who saw her Revenge ready to be executed, tasted the Delights that a barba∣rous Soul usually sindeth in cruelty: The weak Ʋndkan suffered himself to be drawn away by the same Motions, and the unwor∣thy Timur, that declared Enemy of Vertue, prepar'd himself to behold the Victim that
they were going to sacrifice to him, as He∣roes would dispose themselves to the most generous Exploits; that is to say with a con∣tented Mind, and a confident Countenance; and the Four Kings bound to Zamar's Chair, serv'd for an Ornament to this unworthy Triumph. Not only did the King of Thibet, Almund∣zar, and some other Tartars bolder than the rest, murmur against so black an Attempt: Amongst the People and Souldiers were found some equitable Souls, sensible of the Merit and Innocency of Zingis, and who on∣ly wanted Head to declare openly in his Fa∣vour. He was brought from the Gaol about Noon, that the Sun might light the Solem∣nity: His Guards caused him to mount a Chariot that waited for him, and to add Disgrace to Cruelty, the Executioner having tyed his Hands, plac'd himself beside him. The contented Zamar look'd upon all this without changing Colour: Her Courage made all those that surrounded her tremble; and many remembring they had seen him in those Rencounters where he had acquir'd so much Glory, bow'd down their Eyes, and sigh'd mournfully, to behold so great a Man fall by so deplorable a Blow. Never had he appear'd with more Grace and Majesty than
in this unfortunate Condition: His Hands that had chain'd so many Kings, bore their Fetters without shrinking; he despised the Shame, and lifting up his Eyes to the Hea∣vens; O, Taxila! said he aloud, I offer my Life to you as heartily as I would have done the Empire of the Universe, if it had been in my power: Receive it as a certain Proof of my faithful Affection, and remember Zingis. The Chariot in the mean time advanc'd, and every where might be seen a Deluge of Tears: The Men excited one another to save Zingis, the Women begg'd his Life, and even the Children gave marks of Tenderness. They drew near to the great Place before the Palace, and the Croud divided themselves at a place where the Street grew broader, to make way for the Chariot, when the King of Thibet stopp'd it. He would not suffer Al∣mundzar to take up Arms, that he might have occasion to act afterwards. Zerbin alone was with him, and upon the first Signal they gave, the Mogols and Tartars oppos'd the Passage of the Guards. This so unexpected an Obstacle astonished all the People: Zingis himself was surpriz'd with it. The first thing the King of Thibet did, was with one Blow of his Sword to cut off the Head of him that was to do the same
Office to the King of the Mogols, and to un∣tye the Hands of that valiant Prince. My Lord, said he, presenting him with Arms, If you dye to Day, you shall not dye unaccom∣panied, and it shall be in a glorious manner. Receive this Service from a Man, who for being unknown unto you, is not the less in your Interests. Zingis took what Philing gave him, and saw himself quickly in a condition to carry Terrour through all: He struck the Tartars therewith by his supernatural Acti∣ons. Philing imitated him valiantly. Zerbin surpass'd himself. The Mogols seem'd to be so many Heroes; and the Tartars, who after what they had done could hope for no safety but from Zingis, did immolate their Coun∣try-men that favour'd Zamar's Design. In stead of one Head that should have faln that Day, Rivers of Blood cover'd the Streets of Cambalu. Ʋndkan not fearing this Surprizal, had thought a part of his Guards sufficient to secure Zingis, and had not arm'd the old Bands of Souldiers that remain'd in he Sub∣urbs; and in a few moments Zingis's Party cut in pieces all those that resisted them. But with what Eye did Zamar, Ʋndkan, and Timur behold this Rebellion? Pride and Anger had almost stifled the Queen. Ʋndkan was agitated with several Passions at once, and the cowardly King of Tendur grew pale
for fear, not doubting but that he would be oblig'd to expose himself to Zingis's Valour, which he had so often experimented. Zamar to no purpose excited the Tartars with Cries and Promises, the feebler sort fled, and the bravest durst not advance. The Kings them∣selves whose Submissions made her so haugh∣ty, stood unmoveable without attempting any thing. What, said she, beholding them at her Palace-Gate, in the presence of five other Kings, shall a daring Criminal triumph over the Laws and our Authority, and per∣haps load us with the Iron that he is freed from? O mad Fortune! how great is thy Fury and blindness this Day? These Words covered those that heard them with confu∣sion: but she had not the power to inspire them with Courage. Ʋndkan whose Safety was interested in this Affair, as well as his Glory; and who notwithstanding the num∣ber of his Years, was perhaps the bravest of all these Kings, went out, and the rest fol∣lowed him: they sent Orders to the Soul∣diers to advance, and led on those that were able to bear Arms in the Palace. As Zingis and Philing were at the point of making themselves Masters of the Place, the Pre∣sence of Ʋndkan rally'd those that sled; but his Blood was quickly frozen when he beheld the Prodigies that these two Kings per∣form'd.
Zingis knew him, and might have easily turn'd against him that admirable Va∣lour, that had before done him so great Ser∣vices; but respecting him who had given life to the Princess, he turn'd his Sword else∣where, when he saw a Knight that had joyn'd his Party some moments before, lift up his Arm to kill Ʋndkan. The generous Zingis not contenting himself to have spar'd his Per∣secuter, would yet defend him against his own Friends, and opposing himself to the va∣liant Man that fought on his side; Stop, who ever thou art, said he to him, and do not de∣file thy Arms with the Blood of Taxila's Fa∣ther. Ʋndkan was no more surpriz'd at this Action than was the Unknown, to whom Examples of Vertue were familiar. All the World remark'd the proceeding of Zingis, and Philing was so charm'd with it, that his Af∣fection for so great a Man augmented. The King of Tartary retir'd amongst his Men pale and trembling, and in the mean time the old Band of Souldiers, who were Quarter'd in the Suburds, as we told you before, and who had time to make themselves ready, came pouring in on all sides. Assoon as the cow∣ardly Timur saw them appear, he shouted for joy, and advanc'd at their Head; but how dear did his boldness cost him! Zingis who had appear'd so moderate in respect of the
Princesse's Father was not so in respect of an insolent Rival; but violently leaping up∣on him; Thou shalt dye, without possessing Taxila, said he, and thy Eyes shall not be Witnesses of the death of Zingis. A Shower of Blows followed these Words, and the Son of Zamar fell down lifeless at the Feet of the King of the Mogols: His Fall overwhelm'd the Heart of his Mother, who encouraged him from the Windows, with all that Grief and Rage hath most violent. She blasphe∣med Heaven and Men, and even revil'd her Husband, falling into Convulsions, that be∣token'd the cruelty of her Passions. Whilst Zingis, Philing, Zerbin, the Un∣known, and the Mogols, with a part of the Tartars, compleated the Victory: Almund∣zar seeing the Princesse's Apartment without Guards, run thither and found her frighted at the noise which she heard, without know∣ing the Cause thereof. Ah, Almundzar, said she to him! Is the King of the Mogols dead? No, Madam, answered the Tartar, and I hope you shall see him shortly in a Condi∣tion to put an end to all your Alarm? Then he related to her all that had past; and seeing she was no Lover of Blood, the Death of Ti∣mur did not please her, how great soever the Advantage was that she receiv'd by it. But of all that which touch'd her in Favour of
Zingis, nothing had so great an Influence up∣on her as the glorious Action, which had af∣forded the Tartars so great a cause of Admi∣ration. O Heaven! said she, If Zingis per∣secuted and ready to succumb under the pi∣tiless Sword of his Enemies, defendeth the Father of Taxila against those whom Gene∣rosity arm'd to save him from the Fury of Ʋndkan, what doth not she owe to so strong Marks of so pure a Love? Axione being in∣terested for her Lover, and for a Prince whom she tenderly lov'd, reassumed Hope with the Princess; and they redoubled their Vows. Fortune had entirely declar'd against Za∣mar: The loss of her dear Timur was follow∣ed with the Death of several thousands of Souldiers. The King of Cerguth, Tenguth, Ergimul and Ʋng fighting faintly with∣out Valour and Courage, perish'd by the Arms of Zingis and Philing, and the Tartars that came from the Suburbs, were constrain∣ed to give back. Zingis had no design upon Ʋndkan's Crown. Seeing that Prince stunn'd with the Disor∣der re-enter his Palace, he embrac'd the King of Thibet, with whom the affectionate Zer∣bin made him acquainted, and after having said unto him all that a just Acknowledg∣ment can dictate to a generous Heart, he
turn'd toward the valiant Man that had fought with so much advantage, and seeing his Head discover'd, he knew him to be the Prince of Brema: Then it was that their mutual Embraces express'd their Friendship. Zingis prais'd the Mogols and Tartars that had serv'd him, with all the affection that their Valour oblig'd him to. His Friends advised him to go into the Palace; but whatsoever Impatience he had to see Taxila, he judg'd that out of respect to her he ought not to leave Ʋndkan, and retir'd to the same House where he had lain sometime absconded. Phi∣ling and Omir accompanied him thither, and Zerbin took care of the remainder of the Mo∣gols. But scarce had they been two Hours in that place, when Almundzar came to seek them. Come, valiant Princes, said he to them, with immoderate transports of Joy, come and enjoy the Fruits of your Valour; you have no more enemies to fear: Fury hath exe∣cuted upon Zamar, what your Arms have done upon the rest; She is dead, and Ʋndkan, freed from the Bondage in which her Artifices had enthral'd him, recalleth that Vertue which she had banished out of his Soul, and with ardent Breathings desireth a Reconciliation with you. These Words which inspir'd them with Hopes of an agreeable Revolution, did not at first find a perfect belief in those to
whom they were address'd; but in the end, they were oblig'd to give Faith unto them, and follow Almundzar to the Palace. Peace was already re-established there; all the Peo∣ple made Vows for Zingis; there were none found lamenting for Zamar, and much less for her wicked Son. Coming to Ʋndkan, Zingis found there the Princess, and Philing the charming Axione: The King of Tartary with open Arms recei∣ved the King of the Mogols, and that Prince humbled himself respectfully to receive his Embraces. Will you forget the Cruelties that cover me with an eternal Shame? My Lord, said he to Ʋndkan, and can you pardon me for what the unjust Empire, that a Wo∣man had usurp'd over my Weakness, hath made me commit against you, notwithstand∣ing the many Services that you had so gene∣rously render'd unto me? By your first Acti∣ons you merited the Crown to Tartary, and all that you have added unto it; and by pre∣serving my Life for the sake of Taxila, you deserve also that Princess: I give her unto you, Zingis, and with her Tartary, and all that is subjected to my Scepter, being sensible of no other Pleasure than in seeing you two Reign together. At these words he took the Princess by the Hand, who full of Joy receiv'd that of Zingis. My Lord, said he to Ʋndkan,
Your Goodness surpasseth infinitely my Hopes and the Merit of my Services. I receive with all due respect the precious Advantage of be∣ing united to the Princess: but for the Crown of Tartary, I will not joyn mine to it, but to the end that I may make you Master of both. Reign my Lord, Reign in Peace, and receive my Homages. No, no, interrupted Ʋndkan, I have been King too long, since I have been guilty of so great Injustice in that quality: whilst I Reign in you, you shall Reign for me, and I will reap from thence both Pleasure and Glory. Then he asked Pardon of the King of Thibet, prais'd his Generosity, and was per∣fectly reconcil'd to him. But casting his Eyes upon the Prince of Brema, who had not yet chang'd his Habits, he knew him to be that terrible Man against whom Zingis had de∣fended him. He was somewhat mov'd at the sight of him; but the rising Vertue, which begun to chase from his Soul all that ap∣proach'd to Vice, would not permit him to entertain any Resentment. He embrac'd him then as he would have done a Son: The King of the Mogols would not suffer you to take Vengeance on me, Omir, said he unto him, and I will not find fault with one that attack'd me in so just a Cause. Omir answer'd with a great deal of submission. Almundzar received also new Marks of Ʋndkan's Friendship, and
this King spoke with much sweetness to all those that took Arms for Zingis. Mean-time Love triumph'd, and Zingis and Taxila perceiv'd it mutually in their con∣tented Eyes, and received from one another the most tender Assurances thereof. Philing told Axione all that he had suffered during a few Days absence, and conjur'd that scrupu∣lous person to be somewhat less fix'd in her Resolutions, and to yield at last to make them happy. She thanked him for what he had done for Zingis; and after this first In∣terview, the Princes having received some slight Wounds that had need to be look'd af∣ter; went out together with Almundzar: They were not considerable enough to oblige them to keep their Chamber, and they pre∣par'd themselves to visit the Princess, when the Prince of Brema spoke in this manner to the King of Thibet: I know not, my Lord, whether what hath happen'd unto me in your Dominions will draw upon me your hatred: I have commit∣ted a Fault, and yet cannot be a Penitent. The Princess Thamarize is at Cambalu; it is I who brought her hither; but when you shall hear my Reasons, you will perhaps par∣don me. This Discourse astonish'd Philing: He did not doubt but Love had been the principal
Agent in the Affair; and seeing he had not a Heart dispos'd to condemn that Passion, that had so great an Empire over him, seeing the Prince of Brema's Worth, and knowing the Service that he had done to Axione. What∣soever you have done, my Lord, replyed he, I am perswaded that my Sister is oblig'd to you, and I being so, in so touching a manner, believe that I am incapable to condemn you: But since Thamarize is at Cambalu, let us see her quickly, that she may receive the Embra∣ces of a Brother that hath always dearly lo∣ved her. Philing and Zingis would have accompa∣nied Omir; but Almundzar pray'd them not to stir, and he went with that Prince to seek Thamarize, whom they immediately brought to Ʋndkan's Palace: The Brother and the Sister gave to one another all the marks of a tender Friendship. Zingis saluted the Prin∣cess of Thibet, whose Beauty he admir'd, and Ʋndkan hearing of her Arrival, came to see her, that he might shew the greatness of his Respect for Timur, and would himself lead her into an Apartment whither Taxila and Axione also came. As soon as Thamarize had saluted the Princess of Tartary, she received Axione with open Arms; and she received her Caresses with a respectful tenderness. The King retir'd, and all the Company being de∣sirous
to be inform'd how Omir and Thama∣rize were come together, the Prince of Bre∣ma, with the Princesse's permission, spoke in this manner to these Illustrious Persons. The History of OMIR and THAMIRIZE. THere are none but know that I have been unhappy from the Cradle; the Son of a Prince Conquer'd and Subdu'd by the King of Tartary's Arms, without For∣tune, having lost all in that Revolution; and without hope to re-establish my House, un∣less by my own Courage, and the assistance of my Friends. Ʋndkan did not neglect my Education; and I must own my self oblig'd to him, in that I was brought up as the Son of a King: but having attain'd to a more reasonable Age, Timur's Insolency made me perceive that I was only a Slave, he always treating me as his Inferiour. I bore all a great while, not knowing what to resolve upon. The Arrival of Zingis into Tartary stay'd me there, by rea∣son of the Affection that I bore to him: we made our first Campaign together; but at our return from the War, not being able to live under a Power which Zamar's Authority
and Timur's Credit render'd unjust, I de∣parted from Tartary without acquainting any with my Resolution, and first visited the un∣fortunate Place where I first saw light: Such sad Objects serv'd only to afflict me; I de∣scended towards the South, and insensibly came into the Kingdom of Thibet. I arriv'd at Kachen a little after the King had left it: Sadness reigned over all; those that govern'd the State taking advantage of the King's Absence, and of the small Experi∣ence that the Princess had in these great Af∣fairs, minded their own Profit, and usurp'd too great an Authority. The first time I saw Thamirize was in the Temple, where she was performing her De∣votions: Her modest and melancholy Air render'd her Beauty All-potent over my Heart: I perceiv'd even then that I was be∣ginning to fall in love, and I had not the force to resist this Disposition. Having seen her a moment, I burn'd with a desire to see her again: but how could I have Access to her? Philing's Absence made the Court soli∣tary, and the Palace inaccessible to Stran∣gers. I was constrain'd then to expect from Fortune the Occasions of satisfying my ri∣sing Passion. The Idea of Thamirize never forsook me; I return'd into the Temple, but because it was publick, she came thither but seldom.
I learn'd, after a small abode at Kachen, that since the King's departure, the Princess liv'd retired: that Men had no access to her, not those even of the greatest Quality, that she spent her time in Reading, Walking, or some other Occupations of that nature. They whom I came acquainted with made a Por∣traicture of her Humour, and charm'd me; they told me that she was Generous, Pitiful, of an easie Access to those that had Business with her, witty in Conversation, and inca∣pable of doing an Injustice: She had seve∣ral Maids of Illustrious Families about her, and this little Court, so severe to our Sex, inspir'd my youthful Fancy with a design as odd as bold, but the only one that gave me Hopes of Success: being of convenient Fea∣tures, I resolved to cloath my self like a Wo∣man. They wear their Habits somewhat loose in Thibet, I caus'd some to be made pro∣per for a Person of Quality, by means of a Girl whom I acquir'd, and who was faithful unto me. There was none but would have been deceiv'd with this Disguise, even those of my most familiar Acquaintance, there be∣ing nothing forc'd in my Actions, and my Face might have past for that of a handsome Maid. Over-joy'd that I had faln upon this Stra∣tagem, I resolved quickly to make an Essay,
and in two Days having perfectly accustom∣ed my self to act the Maid, I was shewed the way to the Palace-Garden, into which my Cloths easily obtain'd for me a permission to enter. I walked there a great while alone; but at last Thamirize who was wont to come thither daily, came at her usual Hour, and past by near the place where I was: I saluted her respectfully; she return'd my Salutation with an extraordinary Goodness; and after she had walked some paces off, the Idea of my unknown Face striking her Imagination, she asked of the Maids that followed her, whether any of them knew me: They all an∣swered in the Negative, and it being the will of Fortune, that the Princess should find something in me not unworthy of her Curi∣osity, she sat down, and order'd one of her Maids to entreat me to come to her: I o∣beyed with a great Agitation, and Thamirize took it for a sign of Modesty, that which was only the Effect of my Love. Do not take it ill, said she unto me, with a graceful Sweet∣ness, that I am desirous to know you: Your Meen is able to pre-occupy all those that see you, in your Favour; I wish I could be use∣ful to you to testifie that I speak sincerely to you. These obliging Words pierc'd to the very bottom of my Heart, and filled it with a very
sensible Joy. I was indeed inform'd, Madam, replied I, that you was a Princess as Generous as Fair; and that the Misfortunes of my Love would certainly be remedied by your Goodness, if I could once appear before you: I was Born in Tartary, Madam, and Educa∣ted at Cambalu, with the Princess Taxila, be∣ing of a Quality that procur'd me that Ho∣nour. Certain deplorable Misfortunes oblig'd me to leave that Court, and Heaven con∣ducted me to Thibet, where I abide, that I may evite greater Evils; unknown to all your People, without Protection, and with∣out Friends, I have already past some sad Days here: but, Madam, they will be hereafter more pleasant, and the Happiness that I have this Day received, will make me forget all my past Pains. Thamirize looked upon me attentively all the while, I spoke, and offer∣ing her hand to me with an Air full of Good∣ness; I am sorry, said she to me, that For∣tune hath been so ungrateful to your Merit, as to expose you to any cross Adventures: but at the same time, I am glad that she affordeth me an Occasion to assist you. You may abide with us, and nothing that dependeth on us shall be wanting to make your Life easie. I cast my self at the Princesse's Feet, trans∣ported with Love and delight; and having thanked her for the Favour she did me, I en∣tertain'd
her with a recital of my Adventure, as my Fancy at that instant dictated to me, still keeping within the bounds of probabili∣ty, and told her that my Name was Irmise. This was the success of my Stratagem of Love: I abode in the Palace among Thamiri∣ze's Maids, and forgot no Precautions that might serve to conceal my Secret, and to con∣tinue me in a quiet possession of the Advan∣tage that I enjoyed. In a little time I acquir'd a considerable rank in the Princesse's Friend∣ship; she gave me a thousand innocent marks thereof, and seem'd delighted to hear me talk: but my greatest trouble was to hide my Love, which received new augmentati∣ons every moment: I had this advantage in my Happiness, that it did not excite any Envy against me, and that all Thamirize's Maids were my Friends. Alzine the Daughter of one Hildezar a Fugitive, and the cause of the King's Absence, did often bewail her Father's Crime before the Princess, who inform'd me that it was Axione who had obliged their Bro∣ther to leave his Kingdom, and she was not a little joy'd, when I told her news of that lovely Axione. My greatest care was not to abuse the Princesse's Goodness, by allowing too great a liberty to my Eyes: I shunn'd her Presence at those Hours that Decency forbids us to see
Women in; I never went to her Chamber till she was dress'd, and came out of it al∣ways before they put her to Bed. In this manner then I past my time the first Month; but I could not expect to remain still without trouble. The absence of the King and Hildezar, who was the most considerable after that Prince, swell'd the Courage of seve∣ral persons, that dared not to pretend to any thing before. For believing that neither of them would ever return, and seeing the Princess destin'd to Reign after Philing, O∣thrize and Benzide, who were of the quality of Princes, appeared in love with her, and declar'd it openly. The King had judged them capable to give advice to Thamirize, the youngest of them being above 30 Years of Age at his departure from Thibet, recom∣mended unto them the State, and a Sister whom he dearly loved, and they made a ty∣rannical use of this Recommendation. Though Thamirize was desirous to shun all Men, these two had Priviledges that she could not oppose: As soon as they knew one another to be Rivals, Jealousie set them at odds; they had both Pride and very little Merit; and a Soul so delicate as that of the Princess could not be touch'd in their Favour. For me, I soon perceiv'd that their Love was interested and void of respect. They had
heard of my Adventures, and seeing the Cre∣dit that I had with Thamirize, both of them endeavour'd to gain me to their side, and en∣treated me to promote the Interest of their Loves. As they both made the same Harangues unto me, I return'd to both a like Answer. My Lord, said I to Benzide, who was oldest, and as I believ'd, wisest, the Princess is too judicious her self to ask Advice of me con∣cerning your Proposals: but though she should do it, and address her self to me, I would send her back to consult her own Heart and Reason, which are alone capable to regu∣late the Sentiments of such a Person as she: But seeing you honour me with your Confi∣dence, permit me to tell you, that of the hu∣mour I take her to be, declared Lovers will meet with no good Reception from her, espe∣cially in the King's absence. Philing replied, Benzide will never return to Kachen, and the cause that carried him hence will doubtless prove his ruine: It is not that which per∣plexeth me, and all the cause of my disquiet, is, that I am ignorant of the difference that Thamirize putteth between Othrize and me. I believe, said I, that she putteth none at all. Well then, continued Benzide, not well satis∣fied with me, I must make a difference, and I hope shall be able enough to do it. He left me, and the Princess perceiving that he went
away vox'd, approach'd to rescue me out of a thoughtfulness into which this Discourse had put me. Are you my Rival, Irmise, said she to me smiling, and hath Benzide been making a Love-declaration to you? Ah! how would I be obliged to your Beauty, if it had freed me from his Importunities: I am only Benzide's Confident, Madam, answered I; He solicites me to promote his Interest with you, and wisheth that I could render him a∣greeable unto you. My dear Irmise, replied she sighing, I fear Benzide and Othriz will per∣plex me sadly. Nor was this Fear groundless, and never two ambitious Men push'd their Timerity to a greater height. For me, I liv'd with more equitable but no less disquieting Desires: The Beauties of Thamirize flatter'd the present time, but they gave me no Hopes for the future. I was guilty of deceiving her by a criminal Artifice; and however pure my Intentions were, I had cause to believe that she would not leave my Fallacy unpunished. After I had satisfied blindly the first motions of my Love, these Reflections rack'd my Soul; the least look of the Princess alarm'd me; I still fancied that she read the Truth in my Heart, and that she had discover'd my Sex. This plung'd me into so profound a Melancholy, that I was often in a doubt whether I should declare my Crime,
and expose my self to her just Indignation, and receive the Punishment that I merited, or banish my self from her, and preserve my Crime eternally secret. These Agitations made a great impression both on my Body and Mind. Thamirize who lov'd me, percei∣ved this alteration with Grief. Irmise, said she to me, one Evening, when I was alone with her, I am thinking on you, though I believe you do not think on me. It is doubtless the ill Fortune that brought you into Thibet, that inspireth you with that Melancholy, which I cannot see without trouble, and which I wish I was able to remove at any rate. Ma∣dam, replied I, Since you have sweetned, or rather fix'd that cruel Fortune, which crost my tenderer Years, it is impossible that I can be one moment without thinking on my Ob∣ligations to you. Alas, Madam! I am far from being guilty of the Crime of not think∣ing upon you, and if you had never another to reproach me with, I would perhaps be less disquieted. I blush'd in pronouncing these words. Thamirize perceiv'd it, and look'd upon me fixedly; but not comprehending any thing of the mystery: I do not believe, replied she, that any thing can make you pass for guilty in my esteem: But, Irmise, speak sincerely, and if you desire my satisfaction, tell me why you languish? If there appear∣eth any Fire in your Eyes, you look as if you
design'd to hide it. I never surprize you but sighing; you sometimes look up to Heaven in a suppliant manner; you seem'd diligent in serving me at the beginning of our ac∣quaintance, and now methinks my Presence troubleth you. You are free here, and I did not give you a Sanctuary with a design to constrain you: But, my dear Irmise, added she smiling, and stretching out her hand ob∣ligingly to me, you must discover your Mind to me. I believe you are in love, and that some Illustrious Tartar possesseth that Heart, in which I am desirous to have a little room. During this Discourse I was a hundred times tempted to declare my self, but considering that Thamirize would then perhaps shew me as much Severity, as she had hitherto done Sweetness, I imprison'd my Love once more, and endeavour'd to compose my self. If any one had a larger share in my Heart than the Princess of Thibet, answer'd I, I would never perhaps have seen her, and be∣ing of the humour I am of, I could hardly leave the place where I was staid by so strong a tye. I do not say, continu'd I, that my Soul is altogether void of Tenderness, and that is perhaps the cause of my languishing Groans. I don't doubt, said Thamarise, more perplex'd than before, but you are capable to make a good choice, and upon this account, I promise to be always favourable to him that hath the
Happiness to please you. And what would you say, Madam, replied I, You that have so much Reason and Wisdom, if you found a Girl resolute enough to love, and so bold as to own it. I would not condemn her for a Free∣dom that I had forc'd her unto, answered Thamirize; and seeing there may be a lawful Tenderness, I would not esteem her the less. Since you approve in me, replied I, a Passion which so many condemn; one would be tem∣pted to think that a Prince worthy of you by his Merit and Person, might one Day have the Honour to touch you. 'Tis true, continu'd Thamirize with a modest Blush, that I do not feel my self incapable of loving an extream lovely Object; and you see, Irmise, see∣ing I love you, that I am not insensible. Ah, Madam! cried I out, The Love with which you honour me, would not satisfie an amorous Prince; and I know some that would not be contented with it, as precious as it is. Seeing you have travell'd through Paths that are as yet unknown to me, added the Princess, you are able to give me a Lesson: But, Irmise, since it is not in favour of Benzid and Othrize, that I design to make use of your Skill, we must expect some other occasion. I was not sorry that I had found a pretext to cover my Melancholy: I suffer'd Thami∣rize to believe that I was in love, and after this discourse she ask'd me no more questions.
About this time the two Rivals redoubled their Importunities, and began to form Par∣ties under-hand in Thibet: On this Occasion it was that I admir'd the inconstancy of the People. Thus Philing had only left Kachen for a Voyage, his ungrateful Subjects no sooner saw he was gone, but they flatter'd the Ambition of the two Usurpers, declaring that they would not live without a King, and that the Princess to Reign alone, the hope of Re∣ward embolden'd interested Souls, and Tha∣mirize's Lovers had but too many Abettors. They had managed their Plots so closely, that we could not foresee what happen'd: These two Men inspir'd by the same Interest, acted in the same manner; and one Morning when the Princess was in the Garden with her ordinary Train, that is to say, some of her Guard and her Maids, we saw Benzide ap∣proaching at the Head of many armed Men, with as proud an Air as if he had been march∣ing on some glorious Expedition; and Othrize appear'd on the other side with an equal num∣ber of Persons, and a like Arrogancy. Ah, Ir∣mise! said the Princess unto me, What is the cause of the coming of these Princes to Day, and what do they seek for with so many ar∣med Men and Souldiers? I had already gues∣sed at their Design; I did not doubt but that they intended to make themselves Masters of Thamirize's Liberty, and being resolved to
perish for her sake; be not frighted, Madam, replied I, Heaven doth not protect Violence, and you are not so far abandon'd to their Fu∣ry, as you perhaps fear. As I finished these Words, they both drew near to the Princess: but it was not to her that they spoke. What come you to seek for here, said Benzide to Othrize? And what Business do you pretend here, replied the last? I perceive that both our Designs are the same: Let us fight for Thamarize, since it is by Arms that we must decide our quarrel. Then did they begin to let fly at one another, with more fury than skill; and as long as they exercised their Valour in this manner, I remain'd an useless Spectator of their Combat. But Othrize more happy than Benzide, laid him along at his Feet dan∣gerously wounded, and putting his Enemies to the rout, run to seize upon the Princess. Then it was that I begun to feel what I was, and no consideration could retain me. Will you suffer your Princess to be captivated, said I to the Guards, and will you not rather dye, than shew your selves so base and treacherous? Othrize's Party was strong, for he had lost few Men, and Thamarize had but a small number of her Guards with her: but not contenting my self with animating them by Words, but desirous to give them an Example, I laid hold on a Dead-man's Sword, and notwithstanding that my Habit cumber'd me, I fought with
an ardour that astonish'd the Princess. He that had often fought for indifferent Interests with some Advantage, could not be slow in defeat∣ing Thamirize's Enemies, who full of Fear, and surrounded with her Maids, look'd upon that which she esteem'd a Prodigy. The Guards believ'd that it was an Aid miracu∣lously sent from Heaven, and bestirr'd them∣selves with the greater Bravery: I shed a great deal of Blood; this could not be done without losing some of my own, and coming up close to Othrize, I wounded him in several places; but as he fell pierc'd with my strokes, his Party yielding to the Valour of the Guards, one that was full of Affection to Othrize be∣ing mortally wounded and mad to find him∣self in the Agony of Death, came behind me and thrust his Sword quite through my Body. This grievous Blow sent me to the Ground also, and the Earth that receiv'd my Body, made the Sword that stuck in it fall out. The Princess saw her self without a Pro∣tector and Enemies both at once; Compas∣sionating my Misfortune, and believing my Death contain, she run through dead and dy∣ing Men, and finding me in a condition wor∣thy of her Tears, she shed them in abundance. Irmise, said she unto me, my dear Irmise, Why did you precipitate your self into Danger? If my Repose be purchas'd at the rate of your Life, I shall never enjoy it with Delight. I
am not worthy of Life, answer'd I, with a feeble Voice, and the Blood that I give to a∣tone for my Crime, is not sufficient to wash it away. Withdraw, Madam, think on your own Safety, and leave the unhappy Omir Prince of Brema, who that abus'd your Good∣ness, but dyeth adoring you, and who never would have done you any Offence, if he had not lov'd you too ardently. I could not speak any longer; Thamirize believed I was dead, and, as she since told me, was more sensible of Grief than Anger. Benzide & Othrize were dangerously woun∣dep, but not kill'd: Their Creatures took care of them, and by the Princesse's order I was carried into an Apartment of the Palace: E∣very one was astonish'd, when they were in∣form'd of my Sex; but of all those that were in the Princesse's Interests, not one endea∣vour'd to incense her against me. She complain'd highly of the Violence of the two Princes; but seeing they had pre∣occupied the Spirits of the People, and ere long were out of all danger, and in a condi∣tion to begin their Persecutions afresh; Her Words were in vain, and she saw that the baseness of the people would abandon her to their Ambition. My Cure went on more slowly, because I suffer'd more: They doubt∣ed even at first whether I could escape. In the mean time my restless Anxiety was very cru∣el:
I did not see the Princess, and I could not perswade my self, that she had any more In∣terest in me, but I was very carefully tended in the mean time. When I was altogether out of danger, and in a condition to entertain a Discourse, Tha∣mirize came one Evening to the Chamber where I lay with her Maids: I did not ex∣pect her, and I never was so much mov'd. When I had saluted her as respectfully as the present posture I was in could permit me, she sate down, and after some moments of silence; You have deceived me, my Lord, said she, and a more furious person than I would doubtless have made a noise if they had recei∣ved such an Offence: but you have served me, and I am willing to forget so great an Injury in consideration of so considerable a Service. These are my Sentiments, my Lord; but how can I justifie my self to the Publick? Who can believe that you have liv'd disguis'd in the Palace without my knowledge? And what will the King my Brother think of such an Adventure, when he shall be in∣form'd of it? Ah, my Lord! How much Vexation would you have spared me, if you had been more circumspect. All that the Princess said was so full of E∣quity, that it could not but inspire me with a true Remorse: She saw in my Confusion that I was a suppliant Criminal; I dare say
nothing in my own justification, Madam, an∣swer'd I when she had left off speaking; I am guilty, and will suffer without Complaint all the Punishments to which your just Re∣sentment may condemn me. They that are acquainted with the Power of Love, will per∣haps have some Indulgence for me, but I can expect none from you, and I must dye for your Satisfaction. What cause soever of Vex∣ation you have given me, interrupted Thami∣rise, I demand no such Reparation. Live, my Lord, and think only on your Departure from Thibet, where I can suffer you no longer with∣out shame. And you are not revengeful, in∣terrupted I next, in choosing for me a Punish∣ment so great as that of Absence. If you will condemn me to it, I must obey, but it will cer∣tainly kill me; since that I might see you, I adventur'd even to offend you, it is beyond all doubt that my Life is bound up in that Plea∣sure. After all, Madam, I will notwithstand∣ing be gone, and at this very moment, if my Strength would permit me. No, no, my Lord, replied the Princess, with a less imperious Air, recover your Health first, and when that is done, we shall determine the time of that Departure that disquieteth you. She left me after these Words, and pass'd the Night pretty calmly. The Sight of the Princess had such an In∣fluence upon me, that in a little time I left my
Bed, and then my Chamber: but in another Figure than that of a Maid, notwithstanding the Fury and Jealousy of Benzide and Othrize. I went to see the Princess trembling, and she seem'd to be so full of Confusion, that the trouble that I had occasion'd to her, gave me a new Vexation. The Habit they had brought me was handsom, and set me off to the best advantage: I had a great deal of Love, Fear, and Respect. This was a happy moment for me, and Thamirize granted to my ardent Supplications a Pardon, without which it was impossible for me to live; and though she did not Treat me as she had done Irmise, I was nevertheless well satisfied. They who saw me abide in Kachen, and were of the party of my Rivals, believed that really the Princess had had a hand in my Dis∣guise. But Othrize and Benzide openly decla∣red themselves my Enemies, and publickly swore my Ruine. They had seen me defend my Life so well that they had no mind to at∣tack me without advantage. In the end, my Lord, their Factions were so powerful, and their Parties grew furious to that height, as to pretend to force the Princess to make a Choice. It was to no purpose to represent that the Royal Authority was encroach'd upon in Philing's absence; her Words were too weak a Bridle to restrain so ungovernable boldness, and the two Princes agreed, that for whom
Thamirize should declare, should remain peaceable Master of her Person and Kingdom. She resisted a great while; but what could she do in a general Revolt? I offer'd to dye in her Service; and when you are dead, said she unto me, Shall I be less unhappy. Well, Ma∣dam, said I, I believe an Advice which you may perhaps judge interested, but is nevertheless very sincere. Intrust your self to my Respect; let us depart from Thibet: let us go into Tar∣tary, where the King your Brother will have doubtless found Axione; and after we have put you in a secure Place, it will be casie for us to come and punish your unworthy Sub∣jects. Thamirize started a thousand Difficul∣ties which my Reasons surmounted; and in spite of the great number of Spies that watch'd over her, I look so just and happy measures, that we escap'd out of Kachen with∣out any trouble, and afterwards got out of Thibet, bringing along with us only one of the Princesse's Maids, and twenty Men for a Con∣voy. By diligent Pains, and different Paths we enter'd into Tartary; the Princess bore with courage the Fatigues of a long Journey, and Yesterday in the Evening we arrived at Cambalu, where hearing of the Tragedy that was like to be acted, I immediately determi∣ned to expose my Life for that of Zingis. Be∣hold, my Lord, said Omir to Philing, I have told you my Crime, and the state in which we left Whibet.
The Brother of Thamarize did tenderly embrace her Lover, & thank'd him in expressions full of gra∣titude for what he had done for her: The Commo∣tions in Thibet did not much disquiet him, being perswaded that Benzide and Othrize whom he knew, would destroy one another. Omir charm'd with his happiness tasted perfect joy at the feet of Thamarize, who now suffer'd without Constraint and Affection to appear that was autho∣riz'd by the King her Brother. All Zingis's thoughts run upon Taxila, and Philing still in vain solicited the obstinate Axione to make him happy. Ʋndkan recover'd from his Fury, look'd upon the Death of Zamar and that of Timur, as Effects of the Justice of Heaven: Finding himself then freed from the Empire of the proud Queen, he repented of his Weakness, and renouncing these Grandeurs which had only serv'd to enable him to execute his Injustice; his only desire was to abandon them to Zingis and Taxila, for whom he was then sensible of a true Tenderness. Whilst the three satisfied Lovers entertain'd the three fairest Persons of the World, with what they felt for them; the careful Almundzar was razing Zamar out of the remembrance of Ʋndkan, by Dis∣courses full of Vertue. The King of Tartary order'd Preparations to be made with a Royal Magnificence for the Solemnity of the Marriage of Zingis and Taxila, and the Ce∣remony of their Coronation. Six Diadems were in one day added to the Crown, and the Valour of Zin∣gis promis'd a great many others. Almundzar was agreeably occupi'd with these Cares; and one Day as he was in the Place before the Palace, where he was causing to erect a splendid Triumphal Arch, in lieu of the unworthy Scaffold, that a little before
was to be seen in that Place; he was accosted by a Man, whose Meen surpriz'd him. He was Old but Venerable. My Lord, said he unto him, Since all the Power here is in your Hands, it is to you that I address my self, to obtain for me a moments Audi∣ence of the King of the Mogols, to whom I must impart matters of very great Importance. Almund∣zar full of Zeal for all that concern'd Zingis, car∣ried the old Stranger without delay to Taxila's Chamber, where the King of the Mogols was with Philing, Omir, Thamarize, and Axione. As soon as the old Man had cast his Eyes upon the last of them, he appear'd Planet-struck: Great Gods, cry'd he out, transported with Joy! it is then true that you restore unto me that Princess whom I lost in Thibet. O Axione! O Zenelie! Who would have said that ever I should see you again? His Exclamation surpriz'd this Illustrious Com∣pany: But the Stranger continued thus, and ad∣dressing himself to Zingis; My Lord, said he unto him, This fair Axione, whom you behold, is the Princess Zenelie your Sister, who was taken away violently from the Queen your Mother, by a Troop of Robbers of the Tartarian Mountaineers, in a cer∣tain Voyage that she made: But I must demonstrate this Truth unto you in a more orderly method. I am a Mogol, my Lord, born a Subject to the King your Father, and serv'd the Queen in one of the principal Charges of the House: I follow'd her in the Voyage I spoke of, which the languishing Condition of her Health oblig'd her to undertake. She would carry the young Princess along with her, for she could not endure to be separated from her: in traversing a Forest, these cruel Men, in number much surpassing us, forc'd us to yield to them, and took Zenelie away with them, whom they were easi∣ly
able to carry off. The Queen was over-whelm'd with Grief, and I with several great Wounds: I be∣wail'd her Misfortunes, and upbraided my self with Weakness. As soon as I was cur'd, I made a Vow to take no rest till I had found Zenelie; and leaving the afflicted Queen, I visited all the Places where I believ'd I might hear News of the Ravishers of Ze∣nelie. More than two years past over in this manner, and I was inform'd by Fame of the Death of the Queen of the Mogols: I wander'd about still, ha∣ving no Family at Molg, and one Day, more happy than the rest, I rencounter'd in Thibet the Captain of these Robbers that had carried away Zenelie, and that Princess her self with him. I easily knew her; but she did not retain any Idea of me. I ask'd that Robber what he pretended to do with a Child that was none of his. He answer'd me with Disdain, and several times call'd her Axione. Wearied with speaking to him in vain, being then as well accom∣panied as himself, I fought him, and we reduc'd one another into such a condition, that Axione a∣lone remain'd standing. Se was then in the seventh year of her Age. There arrived a great many per∣sons on Horse-back, who in all probability carried away Axione or Zenelie. For me, I lost my Senses, and lay long in that condition: but some men that liv'd in the bottom of the Forest, where they kept some Flocks, came to the place where I was, and finding me yet warm, carried me to their Cave. I was there more than six Months before I could stand upright; having only the advantage of some Sim∣ples for my Cure. I was even constrain'd for want of Strength, to live many years in that Desart: I Insensibly accustom'd my self to it. But when Time hadre-establish'd me in better Health, I forsook the Forest, in which my Weakness had buried me so
long. I search'd, I run through a thousand places; but at length, hearing that there was at Cambalu an unknown Maid call'd Axione, I came hither, I have seen her, and I find that she is Zenelie, so like the Queen her Mother, that one cannot observe the least difference between them. Then Metaphanes shew'd them a Picture of the Queen of the Mogols, which he had still preserv'd; and although it had been done for Axione, it could not have resembl'd her more perfectly. All the Circumstances of her For∣tune corresponding exactly with that of Zenelie, no body doubted but that she was the Princess of the Mogols. Zingis embrac'd a thousand times this ami∣able Sister, who return'd his Caresses with tender∣ness, Taxila and Thamirize testified their sensible Joy to Zenelie by all that could express it; and Phi∣ling transported, threw himself at her Feet. Zingis assur'd him that she was his, and the young Princess did not contradict this Illustrious Brother. Ʋndkan was inform'd of this Discovery, and Me∣taphanes told him the particulars thereof. In the end, Joy resounded over all the Palace, and the wish'd for time that was to unite these six persons, was come. That great Day was pompously solemniz'd: Ne∣ver so much Splendor and Riches appear'd at one time. The Temple where the Ceremony of the Marriage was to be perform'd, was crouded with an infinite number of Tartars and Strangers. Philing and Omir bore up the Mantle-Royal of Zingis, and Zenelie and Thamirize that of Taxila. The Scepters and Crowns were plac'd on a magnificent Throne, and after these happy Lovers were united together in an eternal Bond, Ʋndkan with his own Hand Crown'd Zingis and Taxila. Afterwards the new Emperour Crown'd Philing and Omir, and the Em∣press
Taxila perform'd the same Honour to Ze∣nelie and Thamarize. The People without ceasing repeated the Names of Zingis and Taxila, and Plea∣sures ended the famous Day. Ʋndkan would no longer undertake the Charge, or retain any marks of his Dignity, leaving all in the hands of persons that so justly deserved these Honours. Not long after they were inform'd, as Philing had foretold, that Benzide and Othrize had perish'd in their Di∣vision, and Ambassadors from Thibet came to assure Philing that his Sublects remain'd constant in their Allegiance to him: He stay'd in Tartary at Zingis's desire; as did also Omir with the Title of King of Brema. Zingis enlarg'd very much the Limits of Thibet, and testified by his Liberality to the Princess his Sister, how dear she was unto him. Ʋndkan dy'd not long after, and was lamented, for the last of his Actions had abolish'd the Remembrance of the rest. In fine, Zingis founded the most puissant Em∣pire in Asia, and render'd his Name so Famous, that all the Universe was fill'd with it: He subdued In∣dia, Persia, and all that is between the Tigris and Volga. Philing and Omir shared in his Glory, and follow'd him in his happy Expeditions. Almundzar was consider'd according to his Desert. Metaphanes dy'd for Joy, having seen Zenelie Queen of Thibet. Zerbin receiv'd the Recompences due unto his Fide∣lity, and these Princes full of Days and Honour, left behind them a numerous and glorious Posterity. FINIS. ADVERTISEMENT. THere is lately Printed, A Present for the Ladies; being an Historical Vindication of the Female Sex: By N. Tate. To which is added, The Character of an Accomplish'd Virgin, Wife, and Widow; In Verse.
