M224 11871479 50145
Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, That Hubart Bourk, and John Macnamara, have hereby leave given them, to Print and Publish their respective Informations or Narratives con∣cerning the Popish Plot formerly by them given in at the Bar of this House. JOHN BROWNE Cleric. Parlimentorum. By Vertue of the Order above mentioned, I do ap∣point Randolph Taylor, near Stationers-Hall, to Print this my Information; and that no other person or persons do Print the same. JOHN MACNAMARA. Decemb. 14. 1680.
THE INFORMATION OF John Macnamara, Gent. Touching the POPISH PLOT IN IRELAND: Carried on by the Conspiracies of the EARL of TYRONE, And others his Confederates, To deliver up that Kingdom to the French King, and Establish the Popish Religion therein. Being all Matter of Fact, delivered upon Oath to His Ma∣jesty, and both Houses of Parliament, in Novemb. 1680. LONDON. Printed for Randolph Taylor, and are by him sold at his House near Stationers-Hall, Anno 1680.
To the Right Honourable ANTHONY Earl of Shaftsbury. May it please your Lordship, THere is no question to be made, but that the Grand Enemies both of His Majesties Person and Government, did believe that their Party had been sufficiently prevalent in England to have tram∣pled upon Persons, whom they had render'd friendless and impoverish'd in Ireland. Where Authority had made a League with Greatness, and cover'd all it's faults; as if the Earl of Tyrone could not be Guilty, because he was a Person of so high a degree Kindred, Friends, Relations, Tenants and De∣pendants all assisted Him; but the Detectours of his Conspiracies, had not one Patron to take them into his Protection. England they soon found
deeply apprehensive of the Dangers that threatned one of the fairest Kingdoms of the British Monarchy. And certainly it could not choose but be an Extraordinary Consolation of their former discouragements to meet with, here, so many Eminent and worthy Patriots, Personages of chief renown and Dignitie, so readily giving ear to, and so judicially weighing and examining the discoveries of their Loyalty. For my own part, it was not only known to me, for It was known to all the Christian World, how con∣spicuous your Lordship had alwaies been for your indefatigable Zeal, and Vigilance over the safety of His Ma∣jesties most Sacred Person, and the welfare of the whole Extent of His Dominions. This I observed to be the reason why so many of His Majesties Loyal En∣glish Subjects made their Addresses to your Lordship. And if I among the Irish am not the first that have pressed to implore the Countenance of your Lordships favour, it was only the want of a happy Opportunity to
render my self capable of so high an Honour. To which if now I pre∣sume to aspire, I hope it will prove an argument, that I firmly intend to maintain and justifie my Information, and therebyin some measure to make my self worthy of that Noble Title of being. My LORD, Your Lordships most humble, most faithful, and most obedient Servant, John Macknamara.
THE INFORMATION OF John Macnamara, Gent. THis Informant saith, that in the Year 1676. one John Brenan, who was then lately come from Rome, was made Archbishop of Cashell, Waterford and Lismere, by one Plunkett, who by the Autho∣rity of Rome, pretended to be Primate of Ireland, the said Brenan producing Bulls from the Pope to the said pre∣tended Primate for that purpose, together with several other Bulls brought over at the same time by the said Brenan, of which Dean Powre, the Earl of Tyrone's Kins∣man informed this Informant, as hereafter shall appear. In the year abovesaid this Informant observ'd the tu∣multuous Gongregations of Priests and Fryers, who re∣sorted to Knock-house, a House of Entertainment, three Miles Westward of Waterford. This Informant took extraordinary notice of it, as being not a thing so usual; insomuch that being in company with several of the said Priests, in the said House, and that at several times; but especially with the aforesaid Dean Powre, who was nex in dignity to the said Brenan, this Informant began to enquire the reason of their Meetings so publick and so frequent in time of Persecution. The said Powre made answer, That he would satisfie this Informant as to that, next Patron day, at Resk; which happen'd to be upon the Lady-day following, and within a few days after the
proposal of the Question. Accordingly this Informant met at the time and place appointed, and there receiv'd the following satisfaction. For the Congregations be∣ing gather'd together to confess and receive the Sacra∣ment, after the Popish manner, one Edmund Poore, a Je∣suit, preached a Sermon, the substance of which was, to let the Congregation understand, that they had an indulgence from the Pope of Rome granted them, and li∣berty to eat flesh on Wednesdays. But in the conclusion told them, that there was a consideration for which so great a Priviledg as that was granted; which the Priest of every Parish had orders to give in charge to his Pari∣shioners at the time of confession. Sermon being done, the Priests fell to the exercise of their main duty, which was to confess the Congregation, and this Informant being then one of that Religion, made his Confession to the aforesaid Dean Powre. Now at the time of his Confession, the said Dean gave this Infor∣mant in charge as followeth, That he should not divulge to any person whatsoever, on pain of mortal sin and damnation; and as he would be thought worthy of the holy Sacrament which he was to receive, what he should impart to this Informant; upon which this Informant promised him he would not With that he proceeded thus; That the aforesaid Indul∣gence and Liberty was granted upon this account, That who∣ever was in a capacity to help and assist the Holy Cause in the present Designs, and which had been in hand for a long time, might have the benefit of the aforesaid Indulgencies, which was a pardon of sins for many years. He further added, That the Clergy of Ireland were to have the benefits and pro∣fits of the Tythes, accrewing out of each Parish, with the Gleabes and Monks Lands and Appurtenances be∣longing unto them, which the Hereticks had wrong∣fully possess'd for a long time. That great preferments were intended for others; and that the French King, and the rest of the Popish Confederates, together with the
assistance of his Holiness the Pope, did intend imme∣diately to invade the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and then proceeding, we do not doubt, said he, but by the assistance of God to bring our design to pass in a short time, and to wash the hands of Hereticks out of the Estates of our Ancestors; for that the Duke of York gives full consent, and is of our side, besides that we have the assistance of the Earl of Anglesey, and several other Per∣sons of Quality in the Kingdom of England for whom we are to have instructions to celebrate several hun∣dreds of Masses, which he the said Dean had according∣ly ordered all the Parish Priests to do within his Titular Jurisdiction. After which time this Informant obser∣ved, that there were several Masses said; particularly for the welfare and prosperity of His Royal Highness the Duke of York, and of the Earl of Anglesey, in several places of the said County of Waterford; and in some of those Congregations, this Informant has prayed him∣self for the said persons, according to the directions of the said Priests and Dean. The said titular Dean more∣over said, That the Earl of Anglesey being assisted by the Duke of York, did endeavour that the Parliament should not sit, to prevent the persecution of the Roman Catholicks. And this Informant further saith, That in the year 1677. the Earl of Tyrone produced unto this Infor∣mant a Letter sent over by Captain Daniel Macnamara, setting forth, That what he expected from His Ma∣jesty, (meaning the French King) was granted; and that Captain Garrett Fitz Girald, one of the French Cap∣tains, was sent over with the Articles of Agreement, which were concluded on by the French King, being all according to his Lordships desire, which was, that his Lordship should raise a thousand Men in the County of Waterford; to which purpose the French King had sent
his Lordship a Commission, under his Hand and Seal, to be a Collonel of Horse; and blank Commissions, to be dispos'd of as his Lordship thought convenient, together with the said French King's Propositions, which were, That his Lordship would be satisfi'd to have the Coun∣ty and City of Waterford, to be his Lordships lot and share for his good service. And further said, That if his Lordship did deserve it, he would make him Lieutenant General of his Forces in that Kingdom. This Informant further saith, That in the same year, before that the said Earl made this Informant privy unto this said Letter, the said Captain Garrett Fitz Girald, by whom the said Message was sent, lodged at the said Earl's house for one mouth, and that this Informant was several times in the said Captain's company, both at Wa∣terford and Caraghmore; and that the said Captain did present the respects and service of the said Capt. Daniel Macnamara to this Informant, as from a person of his familiar acquaintance; and also told this Infor∣mant, that he the said Capt. was sent over by his King, meaning the French King, with a Message to the Right Honourable Richard Earl of Tyrone. This informant further saith, That the said Capt. Fitz Girald desir'd this Informant to let the Brother of this Informant go along with him the said Capt. into France; and that he would get him an Ensigns place in the French King's Service. This Informant inform'd the said Earl of that proffer made to this Informant's Bro∣ther, but the said Earl made answer, that he should not go, in regard he the said Earl did not know how soon an opportunity might fall to prefer him to as good a place in his Native Country. This Informant further saith, That the said Captain Garret Fitz Girald, when he saw his time, went away
from the said Earls house in disguize, after he had end∣ed his business with the said Earl, and took a Ship im∣mediately for France. This Informant further saith, that Capt. Daniel Mac∣namara came out of France some time before, and this Informant meeting with him in the City of Waterford; after his the said Captains Landing, went into one Mr. Goodricks house in Waterford, to give the said Capt. his welcom into Ireland, as being one of this Informants Re∣lations and Name, where he fell into a discourse with the said Capt. what his occasions of coming over were at that time. The said Capt. told this Informant, that he was sent over by the French King, unto the Earl of Tyrone, and from thence he would go to the County of Clare, and County of Linmick, and deliver his Message there, and would immediately take shipping again at Dingleicuse, and told this Informant withall, he should see an alteration of the world very suddenly. This Informant further saith, That in the same year 1677. a friend of this Informants, whose Wife had then a Child of this Informan is at Nurse, had a difference with another man, which occasioned a quarrel between them, upon which they both falling to blows, this Informants friend beat the other person, who thereupon got a Warrant of the Peace against his Adversary, from one Andrew Lynn Esquire, which as soon as this Informant heard of, he went to another Justice of the Peace, one Mr. Bradley, being a friend of this Informants, to pro∣cure a Superfedeas of Mr. Lynn's Warrant. The said Mr. Bradley presently took this Informants word for the Appearance of his Acquaintance, and discharged him from the Warrant above mentioned; and having so done, took this Informant side, and then gave him an Oath of Secresie, in reference to the Plot intended, and
design'd in Ireland by the Earl of Tyrone, and the rest of the Confederates agianst the King's Majesty. At which time he imparted to this Informant, that the Earl of Tyrone had receiv'd a Commission from the French King, to be a Collonel of Horse in the County of Waterford, and that he the said William Bradley was to be his Lieu∣tenant Collonel, and desir'd this Informant to provide himself with Horse and Arms, and to procure as many as he could of those he durst to trust; and that this In∣formant should have a Command of a Captain under the said Earl and him. Whereupon this Informant did provide himself, and spoke unto John Follio, James Finicon, and Denis Macnamara, to provide themselves with such necessaries as were requisite for that purpose, informing them also, that Mr. Bradley had imparted several matters of concernment unto this Informant; and thereupon this Informant furnish'd them all three with Arms, but to the said Denis Mac∣namara gave both Horse and Arms. And this Infor∣mant also did accordingly impart the same matters to the said John Folio, John Finicon, and Denis Macnamara, who being afterwards sent for by his Grace the Lord Lieutenant and Council, did confess the same during this Informants Confinement; and that too before this Informant had liberty to speak with them, or they with him, being then kept close Prisoner from any one of the King's Evidence. This Informant further saith, That after the aforesaid William Bradley did impart to this Infor∣mant the aforesaid Treason, this Informant met with the Earl of Tyrone upon the Lands of Saveston in the County of Waterford, with two of his Men, viz. Thomas Powre his Gentleman, and Garrett Mac Teege his Fowler; and another whose name is Luke Powre; this Informant having in company with him one
William Powre, and Boetius Clancy, being then abroad a hunting with their Doggs. The said Earl, knowing this Informant at a distance, called to him, upon which this Informant went to his Lordship. The said Earl then taking this Informant from the company, asked him, whether Mr. Bradley had imparted to him any matter of Secrecy? This Informant replyed, he had. Thereupon the said Earl told this Informant, that he must be very private, and discover it to none but those he was very well assured of. After which, the said Earl drew a List out of his pocket, and shewed this Infor∣mant a Roll of the names of several persons that were to be superior Officers, both in the County of Waterford, County of Corks, County of Kerry, County of Limrick, and County of Clare, which this Informant took special no∣tice of, and knew several of the persons; and amongst the rest, the Earl entred this Informants Name with his own Pen and Ink, in the List; the said Earl tell∣ing this Informant he had his Commission sent him from the French King under hand and seal, to be a Col∣lonel of a Regiment of Horse in the County of Water∣ford. And further added, that there was hardly a County in Ireland, wherein persons were not appointed and com∣mission'd by the French King for that purpose. Among the rest his Lordship named, in the County of Limrick, Collonel Peirce Lacy, and the Lord Brittas, Sir John Fitz Girald, David Fitz Girald, and several others. In the Coun∣ty of Clare, John Macnamara, and several others. In the County of Kerry, Sir Turlo Mac Mahoon, and several others; and others in the County of Cork. And for the County of Waterford, the said Earl of Tyrone nam'd him∣self to be Coll. of Horse, Mr. Bradly to be his Lieute∣nant, Quarterm after Ely for his Major, and Mr. John But∣ler senior, to be one of his Captains, having at the same time in his hand a List of the Names of several others. The said Earl saying, they were to raise several hunderds
of Men in every County, and that the superior Officers were to meet, on purpose that they might return an exact Account of their Forces to the French King. Which being done, and all things ready, the said King would land man thousands of his own Men upon the Coast of the River Shamion; and as soon as they were landed, the next business was to march to the City of Limrick, with a Party of 500 Men, divided into two parts; the one Party to enter the City by Candle-light, and that at several Gates; in which Attempt, such as best knew the City were appointed to set upon the Guards, and keep them in play, while the other Party, which was to be hard by the City, came up to their relief, the Body of the Army being order'd to follow, with all the speed imaginable. By which means, said the Earl, we do not question but to possess our selves of the City, and King's Castle, and to expel all the English very sud∣denly. And indeed, said the Earl, 'tis the providence of God to bring this downfal on that unjust King, the Duke of Ormond, and his Children, that wrong'd me in so high a nature, upon the account of Villiars. Therefore, said the Earl, go home, lose no time, but make your selves ready; for we know not how soon occasion may require your assistance, and speak to as many friends as you can, which accordingly this Informant did, and provided Horse and Arms for the same purpose. After Discovery made hereof by Hubert Bourke as you may read in his Information, who partly knew of these proceedings, the said Hubert, upon his Discovery, was bound by Recognizance to prosecute the said Earl at the next Assizes at Waterford; but for want of this Informants and other testimonies; and for other Reasons mention'd in his Examination, he was forc'd to absent himself from the Assizes, unto which he was bound, as is before mention'd.
In reference to which, this Informant saith, that in the month of August, in the year 1677, when the Earl of Tyrones Trial was to be at Waterford; when Mr. Hubert Bourk was also to prosecute the said Earl, the said Mr. Bourk preferring a Petition to the Judges of Assize, and setting forth therein, that he wanted his Witnesses, which were able to make out more than he could; naming Mr. Tho. Sampson, Mr. Ed. Ivie, this Informant and some others, one Robert Powre was sent from the said Earl to this Informant with an ex∣press from the said Earl, that this Informant should not appear in Court, for fear of being called in que∣stion upon the same account. This Informant there∣fore absented himself for the space of that day, until such time as there was intelligence brought him by Mr. Boetius Clancy, that the said Bourk was run away. Upon which, this Informant repaired to Waterford, and kept himself private for some time, but sent word to the Earl of Tyrone, that he this Informant was in the said City. Upon which, the said Earl sent one Edmund Powre to this Informant desiring him to come to his Lodging, which this Informant ac∣cordingly did, where he found the said Earl and the Judges of Assize at Dinner at that time. Thereup∣on, this Informant coming to the Chamber-door, desited the man of the House, who was one Mr. Fish, to inform his Lordship that this Informant attended without. Upon delivery of the said Message to the said Earl, one Captain Tho. Powre, one of the said Earls Relations, was sent to this Informant, to let him know, that it was contrived by the said Earl, and ad∣vised by the said Judges, that this Informant should not come near the said Earl for that time, for fear notice should be taken of it by some persons tha
were in Court, and that it was directed by the said Judges, that this Informant should go to Caragh∣more to the said Earls house, where the said Earl would have a private conference with him upon the whole Business, which accordingly this Informant did, and after his coming to the said Caraghmore, this Informant sent word by Major John Butler, to the said Earl, that he this Informant was there ready to attend his Lordship. Upon which, the said Earl ordered a back door, leading to his pri∣vate Garden to be opened, by which this Informant was ordered to go in to the said Garden, to∣gether with the said Major. John Butler. After a little time, the said Earl entred at another door, and after some Ceremonies, asked this Informant, whe∣ther he the said Information gave any Tolleration to the said Bourke, to produce him this Informant as a witness? To which this Informant made an∣swer, no. Why, said the said Earl, Mr. Bradley swore to me at Mathew Hores House, that you did, or else that Mr. Bourke could never have known so much as he does. To which this Informant swore a∣gain, that he never did; but that he had courted Mr. Ivie, being this Informants Tenant, to trappan Mr. Sampson which was the said Earls late Steward, and that the said Ivie had engaged to contrive the matter so, as to bring the said Sampson to Keale in Craghs house at Kilmacthomas, and there to make him drunk, and that he the said Ivie would make him confess that he knew nothing against the said Earl, in reference to any Plot, that when the said Confession was to be made, Mr. Pierce Powre, Mr. William Powre and this Informant, were to be in a private Room next adjoin∣ing to hear and make information of the said Samp∣sons Confession. Whereupon the said Earl was very well satisfied, and commending the said contrivance, said that Bourk had not the wit to prosecute him with∣out
the assistance of the said Sampson. However to prevent any further danger, said the Earl. I would have you write unto the said Bourk, and bring him to some composition. This Informant made answer, that he knew not where the said Bourk was. Where∣upon the said Earl told this Informant, that he was at Gurtens in the County of Kilkenny, and that he heard that the said Bourk had a design for England, to apply himself to the King and Council therefore to prevent that mischief, said he go home, and write a Letter im∣mediately to him; and let the Contents of the Letter be, that you have urgent occasions with him, and that you must of necessity have some private conference with him. According to the said Earls instructions, this Informant went home, and writ a Letter to the said Bourk, desiring him to come to this Informants house: but the said Bourk refused so to do. Nevertheless, this Informant understanding afterwards by a Messenger sent by the said Bourk, where he was, being then re∣moved from the aforesaid Gurtens, whither the Earl had said he was retir'd, This Informant went to Wa∣terford, and there meeting with the said Bourke, court∣ed him so long to go with him to this Informants house, that after many perswasions, the said Bourk con∣sented to go along with this Informant. Of which, two days after, this Informant went and gave notice to the Earl. Whereupon, the said Earl gave this Informant these following Instructions. That this Informant should endeavour to get the said Bourke to confess that one Squier Villiers, Capt. Nichols, Mr. May, Mr. Bradley and Peter Anthony were the persons that had hited him the said Bourke to accuse the said Earl; and that if he would acknowledg the same, and give it un∣der his hand, the said Earl promised he would give him the said Bourke a Farm well stockt, together with a considerable sum of mony, and would save him harmless from any danger that could ensue.
This Informant in answer to the said Earl, know∣ing that the said Mr. Bradley was concerned in the Plot, asked his Lordship the Reason, why he should go about to bring the said Bradleys Name in questi∣on? The said Earl made Answer, that Mr. Lyn, his very good friend, and Mr. Bradley had contrived it so, that if Bourk did acknowledg the same, the said Mr. Bradley should confirm what the said Bourk should say, and that he the said Earl should bring his Action of Sandalum Magnatum, to the vallue of 40000 pound against the rest. After which the said Earl appointed Major John Butler and Mr. John Ronan, to meet Mr. Bourk and this Informant at Cariginure Mill, being also an Alehouse. And that this Infarmant should appear as the said Bourks friend, and the other two for the said Earl, which accordingly we did. There we had a long conference about the busi∣ness; but the said Bourk being very obstinate, refu∣sing to concur with our desire, though we proffered him the said Farm and Stock and a thousand pound to boot, We broke off, and the said Major Butler and Mr. Bourk went along with this Informant to his House that night. The next morning the said Major But∣ler departed with an Account to the said Earl, that we could not bring the said Bourk to any compositi∣on. Upon which the said Earl immediately petiti∣oned the Lord Lieutenant, that whereas the said Bourk, according to his Recognizance, had not ap∣peared to prosecute him, that there might be some course taken therein. Upon which, there was an Or∣der granted for apprehending the said Bourk, who thereupon was taken at this Informants House, and carried to Dublin by the Pursivants, and examined the reason of his absenting himself from the Assizes,
where he was bound to prosecute the Earl of Tirone. He answered, that he wanted the rest of the Wit∣nesses, and being examined who they were? he said, there waned Mr. Sampson, Mr. Ivy and this Infor∣mant with several other Witnesses, upon which the said Sampson and Ivy were sent for, and appeared; and upon their appearance gave in an Information against Quartermaster Ely, John Ronan, Major John Butler, Dawrence Sulivin, this Informant and seve∣ral other persons. Upon which Information, a Let∣ter missive was sent for the aforesaid persons toge∣ther with this Informant, and directed to Quarter∣master Ely, notwithstanding he was accused. The said Quartermaster having received the Letter, immediately repaired to Caraghmore to the said Earls House, and shewed him his Order, upon which the said Earl sent Tho. Powre his Gentleman for this In∣formant: But this Informant being not at home at that time, the said Thomas Powre followed this Infor∣mant to Waterford, where he found this Informant in Company with the High-Sheriff of the said County and one Squire Welsh, a Relation and correspon∣dent of the said Earls, and told this Informant his Message, and that he must immediately repair to Ca∣raghmore, for that there were Orders from Dublin for this Informant and the aforementioned persons to appear there, and answer a Charge laid against them by the aforesaid Sampson, Bourk and Ivy. Upon which the said Squire Welsh, Son to Sir Robert Welsh now or late living in this City of London, begg'd of this In∣formant to appear for the said Earl, with promises of great rewards for so doing, which this Informant promised he would do; the said Wealsh afterwards being one of the Grand Jury for the Trial of the said Earl. But this Informant having sent his Horse
home that night by his Servant, told the said Earls man that he had never a Horse to go along with him. Upon which the said Earle's man procured a Horse for th Informant. In our journey to Caraghmore we met with one Jasper Grant, that had been a Captain of one of his Majesties Men of War, who told this Informant that the said Earl had employed him the said Grant to speak with this Informant, and to go seek him where ever he could find him, and further said, that if this Informant did appear for the said Earl in Dublin, he would reward him at a high rate. This Captain was also afterwards admitted of the Jury for the Trial of the said Earl. This Informant further saith, that after he arrived at Caraghmore at the said Earls house, the said Earl to∣gether with the said Quartermaster Ely, took him in∣to the Garden; and there did engage this Informant not to discover any kind of thing that he knew, and swear to the contrary of having any knowledg of any Treason, & that Father Robert Powre, the Titular Dean, would give an Absolution to the said Informant for so doing, for that it was not a sin to swear any thing to save a mans Life; and further told this Informant that Judg Keating and Sir John Davis were the said Earls great Eriends, and would stick close to this In∣formant, and gave the said Informant Letters to be delivered to the said Judg, which were to Invalidate the Testimony of the aforesaid Bourk, and which this Informant delivered accordingly, and found that what the said Earl said was true; for during the time that this Informant denied the Treason, and kept it undiscovered, the said Judg did Act for him as much as he could; so that at night after the Council was up, the aforesaid Quartermaster, Ronan, Sulivan and this Informant went to Sir. John Davis, being Se∣cretary
of State, and one of the Earls great friends, all the while that this Informant was of the said Earls Partie; who gave us the aforesaid Witnesses a full Account of what was done against us every day in Council. This Informant further saith, that the said Earl, at this Informants coming to Dublin, exchanged one of his Gueldings with Mr. Michael Roe, because this In∣formant should ride the said Roes Horse, for fear that there would be notice taken of this Informants riding the said Earls Horse; and gave this Infor∣mant mony to bear his expences to Dublin, with promises of greater rewards for appearing for him; and withal, admonished this Informant in what dan∣ger he was if he should discover the said Treason, as well as the said Earl, which very much terrified this Informant and kept him from making any Discovery for a long time. This Informant further saith, that the said Quarter∣master Ely, after the Commitment of this said Infor∣mant into the Pursivants hands by Order of the Lord Lieutenant and Council, was with him every day, charging this Informant not to discover, for his Life, the said Treason, for that if he did, he would cer∣tainly be hang'd; and gave this Informant money to bear his charges till the said Earl could furnish him this Informant with more. And this Informant further saith, that one John Powre Esquire, a Relation of the Earls, together with Mr. Cowdal and Mr. Roe, proferred 700 l. se∣curity for this Informant, during his Confinement, and brought this Informant a Petition to prefer to the Lord Lieutenant and Council, wherein they had ordered this Informant to move that the said security might be taken, with Reflections upon the Kings
Witnesses in a high nature; which this Informant kept, but never preferred. And further saith, that being alone in the Condition that he was, this In∣formant made his Addresses by Prayer to Heaven, to direct him the said Informant, being then at a stand, whether it were better for him to Discover the Treason or to Conceal it, for the guilt lay so heavy upon this Informant's Conscience, that he was in as much fear of himself, as of those that were most concerned But at last, and he believes it to be the Effect of his Prayers, God put it into his mind, that in was the truest way to discover what he knew. Upon which this Informant gave in this his Information concerning the Plot, and his knowledge of such Persons as were to be Command∣ders in the Army intended to be raised by the Earl of Tyrone, and William Bradley Esq for the use of the French King. This Informant further saith, that at what time he went to the said Earl to give him an Account of what this Informant and the rest had done with Bourk, when they were ordered to tamper and make a Composition with him, the said Earl of Tyrone shewed this Informant a Letter from his Fa∣ther in Law the Earl of Anglesey, Signed Anglesey, and which the said Earl averd to this Informant, to be his own Letter and Subscription, wherein this Informant read, that the said Earl of Anglesey, had made so many Friends in England and Ireland for him the said Earl of Tyrone, that there was no need to fear what was laid to his Charge, and that he had spoken with the Duke of York about In∣terceding for him, which the Duke had promised he would do.
This Informant further saith, that the Earl of Tyrone did imploy several persons whose names were James Powre, Richard Powre, William Powre and Owen Whelam, formerly a Tory, and one of the said Earls followers, with several others, to steal Horses from several parts of the Kingdom for the service of the Army designed and promised by him to be raised, to joyn with the French Kings For∣ces, which were expected to be Landed in Ireland. In pursuance of which directions of his Lordship, the said persons did accordingly steal several Hor∣ses of good value out of several parts of Ireland, and brought them all into the County of Water∣ford, to the number of thirty or thereabouts, which by order of the said Earl were distributed among such persons as were by him engaged in, and privy to his design. Particularly, some to Willi∣am Finch, the said Earls menial Servant and a Pa∣pist, some to one Mr. John Welsh, Nephew to the said Earl; some to this Informant, some to Mr. William Dobbin, and some to Mr. William-Brad∣leys Servant John Labor, which by the Order of his Master he received at Raghneskdoig, and some to John Powre of Clonmel. But some of the own∣ers of the said Horses making pursuit after their stollen goods, and apprehending by Virtue of a Warrant some of the Persons who had stollen their said Horses, they were by Sir Thomas Osborn Committed to the Custody of one Patrick Kar∣ney, then High Constable, and one of Mr. Willi∣am Bradleys Fosterers, to be by him Conveyed to the Goal of Waterford, from whence they were to be removed to Maroborough Goal in Queens County. Whereupon, the said Mr. William Bradley under∣standing that the said Persons were Apprehend∣ed,
and as he knew well upon what account, be∣ing doubtful least they might betray the Business, immediately wrote to the said High Constable, his Fosterer, to set those Persons at liberty. Upon which, the said High Constable, in the way to Wa∣terford, notwithstanding he had a sufficient Guard of Six petty Constables and others Assistants, gave liberty to the Felons in Custody to make their escape upon a couple of the stollen Horses that were led along with them, bridled and saddled for that purpose. For doing of which, he had the engagement of the said Mr. Bradley, and the said Earl of Tyrone to save him harmless. Wherein they were as good as their words; for the said High Con∣stable being questioned at the next Assizes at Wa∣terford, the said Earl and Mr. Bradley, by their great interest in the High Sheriff, who was then that very William Dobbins already mentioned, who had some of the said Horses in his Custody, and being a Con∣federate provided the High Constable such a Jury that he was soon acquitted: besides that the Judge of the Assize, the Lord Chief Justice Keating was no less the Earl of Tyrones friend, then the High Sheriff. And this Informant further saith, that after this Informants appearing against the Earl of Tyrone in the City of Dublin, John Folio and Mr. Denis Mac∣namara, being in the company of this Informant, those Felons (of which mention hath been alrea∣dy made) did acknowledge the particulars aforesaid. Whereupon this Informant together with one Mr. Edward Ivie, went to the Lord Chancellor of Ireland, for Advice how to procure a Warrant for the apprehending the said Felons. But in the In∣terim of time, the Wife of Richard Powre, one of
the said Felons, went and Inform'd the forementi∣oned William Dobbins, High Sherif of the County of Waterford, that the said Felons did intend to ap∣pear against the said Earl of Tyrone. Upon which the said Dobbins, with the assistance of one Cap∣tain Morrice, a friend of the said Earls, procured a Warrant to seize upon the said Felons, before this Informant should do it himself. Which was done, and they Committed to Newgate in Dublin; which this Informant no sooner understood, but he, toge∣ther with Mr. Hubert Bourk, went to the said Per∣sons in Newgate, who acknowledged before this In∣formant and Hubert Bourk, that they were commit∣ted to prevent the appearance against the Earl of Tyrone and Mr. Bradley, and that they had the same matters to inform, if they could be admitted their Liberty. At the same time, this Informant and Mr. Bourk, being with the said Felons at the same Conference, the aforesaid Mr. Dobbins and Cap∣tain Morrice came into the next Room, and sent for the said Felons out of this Informants Compa∣ny, and there concluded an Agreement with the said Felons, that they should not appear against the Earl or Mr. Bradley, upon Consideration, that the said Dobbins and Morrice should clear them out of Goal, and obtain their acquitment from the Crime laid to their Charge. Which the said Felons did acknowledge to this Informant and Mr. Bourk the next Morning. The truth whereof appeared, for that the said Persons were immediately Bailed by the said Dobbins and Morrice, and so discharg'd out of Goal. This Informant further saith, that although he cannot make the Information himself, yet he be∣lieves he may be able to bring sufficient Testimony
of the quantity of Arms and Ammunition that was received by Mr. Bradley upon the account of the Earl of Tyrone for the service of the French King, and where they were by him Concealed, till occa∣sion should require. And this informant further saith, that being in the City of London in April last past, to complain of his own grievances, and the miscarriages of the Irish Jury in the acquittal of the Earl of Tyrone, his Majesty and the Council were pleased to order him back again, to make out before the Lieutenant and Council in Dublin what he had here made known, which accordingly he did, viz. That the Major part of the said. Jury were the Relations and the De∣pendents of the said Earl of Tyrone and Mr. William Bradley, pickt and cul'd not only out of the proper County, but out of several other remote parts and places of the Kingdome. During which time, for a∣bout a quarter of a year, he was not only exposed to the Malice of his Enemies, but also to very great ne∣cessities, without any Allowance or Consideration from the Lord Lieutenant. Whereas on the other side a poor and needy Scotchman coming in and pre∣tending a Sham-Plot of the Presbyterians, and deny∣ing the Popish Plot, was immediately kindly enter∣tain'd and cherished, and well Rewarded for his pains Which said Scotchman came also at the same time to this Informant, and endeavoured to perswade this Informant to joyn with him, and desist from Pro∣secuting the Papists, saying, it would be far more advantagious to this Informant so to do than to Prosecute the Popish Plot, in regard it was not minded, as being an Affair wherein the Duke of York was concerned. However in a short time after the said Scotchman gave them the slip and run away.
This Informant further saith, that in the same year, 1677. at the time when William Bradley Esquire, imparted to this Informant the Design which was carried on by the Earl of Tyrone, and the said Mr. William Bradley, together with the rest of the Confederates, the said Mr. Bradley gave this Informant to understand, that the French King would send Ammunition and Arms to fur∣nish the Army design'd for the Service of the said French King in Ireland: and that there were several persons in Ireland, appointed for receiving the same; and that among the rest, he the said Mr. Bradley, was appointed for one; and that he did expect the said Arms very speedily, together with the Ammunition promised. He also said, that the Roman-Catholick Clergy, both in En∣gland and Ireland, made it part of their business to write Letters both to Rome and France, and had their Agents abroad in those parts to solli∣cit and procure the raising of several thousands of pounds as well in Italy as in France, to furnish and supply the wants of such as were employ'd by the Pope, the French King and the rest of the Confederates. And that the said Arms should be landed in the Creek of Ballirone, which lay within half a mile of his House, between the Ci∣ty of Waterford and the Town of Dungarvan, which is also a Seaport-Town. This Informant further saith, that at the time of his Conference with the Titular Dean of Wa∣terford, Robert Powre by Name, he told this In∣formant, that one Dr. White was employed as an Agent betwixt the persons concerned in Ireland and the Pope, to give the said Pope an accompt
how Affairs were carried on, and in what Conditi∣on the Kingdom stood. The said Titular Dean al∣so further said, that there was hardly a Province in Ireland, but there was one or other employ'd for that purpose. This Informant further saith, that about two years since, the Earl of Tyrone did acknowledg to this Deponent, that one James Lavalline, who was to murther the King, was sent over into Ireland to be there secured from being apprehended; and that the said Earl did receive Letters to that purpose from his Highness the D. of York; upon which, he forthwith sent the said Lavalline to his Kinsman Mr. John Powre to be there kept private. This Informant further saith, that the persons concerned in this Conspiracy for the County of Wa∣terford, were the Earl of Tyrone, William Bradley, Esquire, Quartermaster Ely, Mr. John Butler, Paul Strange, Richard Powre, Peirce Welsh, John Powre, VVilliam Powre, Peirce Powre, Edmund Powre, VVilliam Fits. Gerrald, Michael Row, Richard Manswell, John Folio, James Fumigan, Denis Mac∣namarra, John Lahor, and this Informant, with seve∣ral others. In the County of Limerick the Lord Brittas Bourk, Collonel Peirce Lacy, John Harly, Sir John Fits-Gerrald, David Fits Gerrald, and several others. In the County of Cork, VVilliam Fits-Gerrald, VVilliam Barry, James Barry, Theoby Roch, David Coudon, Denis Mac Cartie, Teige Mac-Cartie, and se∣veral other.
In the County of Kerry, Sir Tirlagh Mac-Mahon, Daniel Mac-Conor, Teige Mac-Conor, John Sulivan, Derby Sulivan, Daniel Sulivan, and Garret Skack, with several others. In the County of Clare, John Macnamara, Tirlagh Obrian, with several others. FINIS. ARRATA, P. 9. l. 2. read for 1677. read 1679. & l. 26. for Fish, read Frith.
