P3296 08202926 41073
A Case of Conscience propounded to a great Bishop in Ireland, Vizt. Whether after Divorce, the innocent Party may not lawfully Marry. With the Bishop's Answer to the QUESTION: AND A Reply to the Bishops Answer. And also some Quaeries, Whether the Silencing of Godly Ministers be not near of kin to the killing of the two Prophets, Revelation the 11. chap: By George Pressicke of Dublin. He that justifieth the Wicked, and he that condemneth the Iust, even they both are an abomination to the Lord. Proverbs 17.15. Printed for the Author in March, 1661.
To the Reader. Christian friends, YOu may understand by what followes that I propounded a Case of Conscience to a great Bishop in Ireland, by way of petition; but had a very slight Answer: whereupon I went to my Chamber, and writ to hm a large Letter, wherein I did hint to hm that I had not written and printed three Books against Anabaptists and Quakers to be put off with such an Answer as he had given me; and  urge him from that Text 1 Peter 3.15. that I did conceive he was bound in conscience and duty to God, to answer to the Question, which I desired might be in writing: which after he had read, he gave order I should come to his house and he would answer it; which I dd, and drew up the substance of my Petition and Letter into certain Questions and Ar∣guments; which hereafter followeh, together wih hi Answer, and my Reply to hs Answer. And seeing I could have no further satisfacti∣on, I thought good to put all in Print to publike view, that he under∣standing Reader may consider and judge, That if I should take anoher Wife (as I do intend for any thing I yet know to hnder me) whether there be not sufficient ground of Scrpture for me so to do, besides the example and practice of oher Churches, Reasons and Arguments shewed to prove the lawfullnesse thereof. And if one or more be otherwise minded, I may say as Peter and Iohn said in another case, Acts 4.19. Whe∣ther it is right in the light of God, to hearken unto you, more than unto God, judge ye▪ so I say, wheher should I be concluded by one or some few Mens opinions, contrary to the Word of God and the prctice of Proestant Churches, and so be lyable to continuall tempta∣tions all my life long, or take that liberty which the Word of God and former Proestant Churche hath allowed, that I maye escape Satans snares, and have a remedy against my owne Corruption, Iudge ye. Thus I leave ll to your charitable constructions, and am according to that measure I have received, A lover of the Truth George Pressicke.
A Case of Conscience propounded &c. vizt. whether a Man whose wife hath forsaken him seven years and five months without any just cause, and will not be reconciled; and he having satisfied the Law so far that by his Ma∣jesties Reference to two Bishops in London) he hath a Divorce under the Bishops hands, whether he may not lawfully Marry. Mr. Pressicke to the Byshop. Right reverend Father in God, I Have accordng to my weak ability drawne up the chief Heads of my petition and Letter into a more orderly Forme than before, that your Lordship may with lesse trouble conder of it, and God Almighty direct you therein. And first, If the Law of God say, 1 Cor. 7.15. If the unbelieving will depart, let him depart a brother or a sister is not under Bondage in such cases: but if in such a Case the innocent party have not liber∣ty to marry, he must needs be in bondage still. 2. If the Law of the Land allow, that if a Husband or Wife forsake one another seven years, and be not heard off, the inno∣cent party may marry; then why may not I much more have lber∣ty to marry, whose Wife hath forsaken me seven years and five months: for what more benefit have I of her, than if I did not her whethe she were ded or lving▪ yea more, I have a Dvorce under two Bishops Hands by a reference from his Majesty: and
though it be not in Forme according to the Canon-Law, (fo that had been many years silenced) but having his Majesties Royall Assent, (from whom the Canon-Law receives it's vigo and strength) doth supply that defect, as if it had been done by the Canon-Law. 3. If both the Law of God, as 1 Cor. 7.15. and secondly if the Law of the Land (according to the practice of the Church of England as above) the benefit of which cannot in equity be denied me, there being no Law as your Lordship said to compell a wife to perform the duty of a wife. and thirdly (which is more) I having a Bll of Dvorce. And fouthly the example and practice of the Church in Germany in the like case, who allowed Galeatius to marry because his wife refused to co-habit with him, as mine hath refused to co-habit with me, then why should I be hndered of my lawfull liberty more than ohers. 4. If there be no Law to compel a wife to her duty, as your Lordship said there is not, and if there be a Law to restrain the husband from his lawfull lberty, which the Word of God allowes hm, and according to the practice of other Churches as above: then whether is that Law that restrains him (if any such Law there be) whether is it a just Law according to the wod of God, or whe∣ther is it not rather against the word of God; and is not that Law (if there be any such) a setting of their thresholds agaist Gods thresh∣olds, and their Posts by Gods Posts; Ezek. 43.8. compared with Isa. 29.13. heir fear towards me is taught by the precepts of men. Fo such a law would destroy an Ordinance of God, that is, Mar∣riage and Pocretion, and one end fo which man was ceated, that is, That the wife should be in subjection to her huband, as the Church is to Christ. Ephes. 5.24. But if this lberty be denied him, then must the husband be in subjection to hs wfes humour, though she be a whoe o an Infidell and of never so perverse a spi∣rit, he must be kept in bondage, and laid open to all temptations, if not a necessity of sinning. 1 Cor. 7.4.5. If it be objected that nothig but whoredome can divorce as some have ignorantly said. 5. To that I say that though there are other lawfull causes of
divorce besides whoredome; yet except the Bishops made that di∣vorce between me and my wife, upon the account of my wifes being a whore in Scripture-sence, as I writ to them before they made that divorce, the Bishops must needs fall under the breach of that Scripture, Math. 19.6. Those whom God hath joyned toge∣ther, let no man put asunder. for there can be no divorce from bed and board, (as some call it) but it is absolutely against that Text: Except it be with consent for a time, (1 Cor. 7.5.) to give them∣selves unto prayer; and come together again, lest Satan tempt them for their incontinencie. But this divorce between me and my wife is not of this nature, and therefore contrary to the word of God; except it be upon the account of her whoredome in Scrip∣ture-sence: for neither the consent of the Parties, nor the consent of the Bishops can make that lawfull, which the word of God saith is unlawfull, Mat. 19.6. Those whom God hath joyned together, let no man put asunder. 6. Now that she is a whore in Scripture-sence I prove is thus, Iudges 19.2. the text saith, The Levits wife played the whore againt her husband, and departed from him four full months. but my wife hath departed from me seven years and five months; if the Levits wife had actually played the whoe, she should by the Law have been stoned to death; Levit. 20.10. neither had it been lawfull for him to have taken her againe, Levit. 21.7. and 1 Cor. 6.16. He that is joyned to an harlot is one flesh. therefore it is con∣ceived that the Levites wife departing from him without his con∣sent, it is in Scripture-sense whoredome; for she ought to have been in subject on to her husband, as the Church is to Christ. Ephes. 5.24. This truth is further confirmed by comparing this with Prov. 2.17· where a harlot is descrbed to be one that for∣saketh her husband, and forgetteth the covenant of her God: some Margents say, she forgetteth the promise of the marriage covenant; Ier: 3.3. compared wth the 20 verse, Thou hadst a Whores fore-head, as a wife treacherously departeth from her husband: these three Texts prove sufficiently that a wife forsaking her hus∣band is a whore in Scripture-sence. So that from the union that is between Christ and his Church,
Eph. 5.32. we may gather that as forsaking the Lord is called harlotry, Isa. 1.4. compared with the 20, 21. They have for∣saken the Lord, how is the faithfull Citie become an harlot. even so a wife forsaking her husband is in Scripture-sence whoredome: and God threatens to punish both with one and the same punishment, Ezekiel 16.38. I will judge thee as women that break wedlock and shed blood are judged. and breaking wedlock and shedding blood are both the sins of her that was my wife. To conclude as Christ himselfe said, Therefore whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them. I beseech you consider it as if it were your case, what you would have others do unto you; and trouble not your selfe to answer, but grant me a Lycense to marry, whch if you do, yet it can be no President to others to follow, for no mans condition doth paralell mine. First, in regard of my wifes obstinacy these seven years and five months, notwithstanding all lawfull means that hath been used to eclaime her, and in that respect she is wose then most whoes are; for few whores do altogether deny their husbands, though they company with other men as with their husbands. Secondly, in her indeavouring to murther me, by stabbing at me with a knife, and cutting me in the face. Thirdly, I have suffered twenty five dayes imprisonment by Charles Fleetwood, for taking hold of my wife, and desiring to talke with her but one quarter of an hour, to know if she could shew any reason why she dealt so with me: besides she procured my imprisonment in London for 1700 pound, when I owed not one penny. Fourthly, I have a Bill of divorce by vertue of his Majesties reference to two Bishops, and under the two Bishops hands: all which considered, granting me a Lycense to marry can be no president for others to follow. Novem: 12th. 1661. Your Lordships most humble and unworthy servant George Pressicke.
The Bishop's Answer. Mr. Pressicke; I Have perused your Paper and I am still of the same judgement I was; they who expound Scriptue accoding to ther own private fancies doe often change, but they who expound it in the same sence which was delivered to the Catholique Church with the Scripture, can hardly vary fom themselves. To the first objection I acknowledge the words of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 7.15. If the unbelieving depart, let hm depart; a brother or a sister is not n bondage in such cases. But there is a difference b∣tween the marriage of Infidels and the marrige of Christians▪ the marriage of Infidels being only a civil Contract and may be dssol∣ved by consent, the marriage of Christians is moeover a gne of the Mysticall union between Christ and his Church, and therefore indissolvable. secondly, You plead the law of the Land which alowes a woman to marry after her husband hath been seven years absent: but you mistake the Law, for if the huband be known to e living, seven∣teen years absence wll not make it lawfull for the wife to marry again; take an instance Mr. Mole was absent above twenty years in the inquisition, for his religion, yet his wife did not, she could not marry again. The reason of your mistake is this that if a man be not heard off in seven years, the Law presumeth that he is dead, and death dissolves the bond of marriage; yet if it appear that the fomer husband was not dead, he ought to be restor'd to his wife notwithstanding her second marriage. thirdly, You prove nothing but presume that since you have the law of God and the law of the Land for you, the precepts of Men cannot comptroll the law of God, but you erre every way, for you have neither the law of God for you nor the law of the Lan, but both the law of God and the law of the Land are exresly aganst you: he saint Marke chap. 10. verse 11. Whosoever shall put away his wife and marry another, committeth adultery against her. the words
are generall and admit no evasion: hear saint Luke chap. 16. v. 18. Wosoever puteth away his wife and marryeh another, committeth a∣dulery; aed whosoever marryeth her that is put away committeth adul∣tery. here is no restricton nor exception, indeed saint Mathew seemeth to have an exception Mat. 5.32. Whosoever shall put away his wife saving for the cause of fornication, causeth her to commit adul∣tery; and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced, commiteth adul∣tery. and Mat. 19.9. Whosoever shall put away his wife except it be for fornication, and shall marry another, committeth adultery: which two places have both the same sence. The exception, if it be an exception, and not rather a pure negation, extendeth it selfe only to the divorce, not at all to the second marriage: he that utteth away his wife without the cause of fornication, maketh her commit adultery: but if he put her away for fornication, she is the culpa∣ble cause of her own adultery, not he that puts her away justly: but having put her away, whether he may lawfully marry again without sinne, saint Mathew saith nothing, but saint Marke and saint Luke speak expresly that he cannot: yet even this place of saint Mathew (howsoever understood) speaks directly against your second mar∣riage, for you do not so much as pretend that your wife hath com∣mitted adultery▪ and therefore by the undoubted consent of the three Evangelists you cannot marry again. To this of the three Evangelists, adde likewise the testimony of St. Paul, Rom. 7.2, 3. The woman which hath an husband is bound by the law to her husband so long as he liveth, but if the husbad be dead, she is loosed from the Law of her husband. So then if while her husband liveth she be marryed to another, she shall be called an Adul∣teresse. St. Paul knew no way to dissolve marriage but by death: the same he saith, 1 Cor: 7:39. The wife is bound by the Law as long as her husband liveth but if her husband be dead, she is at liberty to be marryed to whom she will. and if we weigh the force of St Pauls argument exactly, we shall find it to be this, That as the bond of the Law could no way be dissolved whiles the Law lived, that is, was not abrogated, notwithstanding any prevarication inter∣ceding; so the bond of marriage is indissolvable so long as life lasteth, notwithstanding any interceding fornication. To con∣clude this point, he that marrieth her that is divorced or put away either justly for fornication, or unjustly without fornication,
committeth adultery: for if it was justly for fornication; then she was the nocent person, and could not marry agan; and if it was unjustly without fornication, then the divorce was void, and she still continued wife to her former husband: howsoever it was, whether justly or unjustly, it can be no adultery, except the bond of the former marriage were dssolved. Another place we have to the same purpose, 1 Cor: 7.10, 21. Unto the married I command, yet not I, but the Lord, let not the wife depart from her husband; but if she depart, let her remain unmar∣ried, or be reconciled to her husband; and let not the husband put away his wife. Either St Paul speaks of such a woman who had no just cause of separation, or of one who had: but he cannot be under∣stood to speak of one who had no just cause of separation, for then he would not, he could not have said, let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled at her choice, but let her be reconsiled and returne to her husband. St Paul did not, could not permit any unjust Dioces, contrary to the expresse Word of God. It is plain therefore that he speaks of one who had just cause to depart; and yet St Paul commandeth in the name of the Lord, that such an innocent person should remain unmarried. To these plain testiminies of holy Scripture, we may joyne the evidence of right reason. If married persons could so easily un∣marry themselves by the consent of boh parties, and much more by the nister practises of one party? what a Doore would this open to perjuries and subordinations, to the slanders and defla∣mations of innocent persons, whilest men pursued their own lusts under the cloke of justice? what division and what ruine would this bring upon families? what a curse would it be to poore child∣ren, who (many times without their own faults) must loose one of their naturall parents, and get a step-Father or a step-Mother in their place? This Conclusion (Mr. Pressicke) is evidenced to us by the wod of God, by the light of naturall reason, that marriage ought to be kept sacred and undissolvable. It hath been long observed as a Nationall sinne of this people, to have been over easy dissolvers of true marriages, upon slaunderous, or pretended Prae-contracts wanting all ground but lust and perjury: and therefore I do give you the same Counsaile which I take God to witnes I would take
my selfe if I were in the same condition. Seeke once more to be reconciled to your wife, and forget not to pray God to change her heart: if you cannot prevail, then follow St Paul's command or rather God's command by St Paul, to remain unmarried. You complain of this as a grievous burthen, but you consider not that many holy Saints and Servants of God have lived much longer under the same Crosse that you have done, and altogethe without their own faults. Some have had their Spouses imprisoned for 30 or 40 years together for conscience sake, as I told you formerly of Mr. Mole: some again have had their husbands made slaves by the Turkes, and detained from them as long as they lived: some have been smitten with an incurable disease (presently after Mar∣riage) inconsistent with the duties of the marriage-bed: what must they doe in these cases and many more of the same nature? Pre∣sently marry again, God forbid! This is a better remedy, that is, by fervent and frequent prayer to begge the guifte of conti∣nency of God: if we prevail not, it is because we pray amiss. If it be not a crosse which we have pulled upon our selves, but which God himselfe hath imposed upon us we have his promise, that he will hear u, and help us: let who will whisper to you other thoughts, Mr. Pressicke this is your remedy. In your fifth Paragraph you run into one or two errors more, that every ordnary divorce is forbidden as a breach of Gods com∣mand: What God hath joyned together, let no man put asunder, Mat: 19.6. and that there is no other cause of divorce but for∣nication. For first, that Text (Mat: 19.6.) is understood properly of dissolving the bond of marriage, (as you would have it) for eve, & not of lesser separations made out of prudence or piety for a time. Secondly, there are other causes of divorces, besides foni∣cation, as when one married person shall seek to poyson or make away the other, or to starve them, it is very lawfull to seperate them out of prudence to prevent murther. Judge whether this be not your case or no? and when the one person is continually inticing the other to Heresy or blaspheming; or soliciting him or her to sinne against God: in such cases also such a temperary Divorce is lawfull, as no man that understands himselfe will deny. In the 6 and 7 paragraph, you endeavour to prove your wife
a whore in Scripture-sence, because she is departed from you, but you mistake every way. For first, in all pobablity the Le∣vites wife did more then depart from him; and though a Levite might not marry a known whore, yet being married, he might pardon, conceal, or connive at her lewd courses. But this is no∣thing to the purpose, for this adultery or whoredome fo which a man may put away his wife, is not the spirituall whoredome, that is, Idolatry; nor civill whoredome, that is, desertion of her husband: but carnall whoredome, whereby the bond of Marri∣age is dissolved, and the innocent party acquited for the future from all Conugall duties. But to imagine that she who only de∣serts her husband, and she who takes another into his bed, are both alike guilty of the breach of wedlocke, and both to be pun∣ished with the same punishment, as you say in the 7 paragraph, is ridiculous. In the conclusion of your discourse you plead for liberty to mar∣ry, and urge 4 reasons for your selfe, which if they were all true, signify nothing, as to that purpose for which you urge them. Suppose she have been so long absent; suppose she cut you in the face; suppose she were an occasion that you were imprisoned 25 dayes; suppose you have a Divorce under two Bishops hands, upon a reference from his Majestie; yet there is a great difference between a temporary divorce, and a perpetuall dissolution of marriage. What you plead for your selfe I have seen, what your wife hath to plead for her selfe I do not know; but if every thing be as your selfe say, I cannot give way to your second marriage, whiles your old wife lives, without contradicting the Commands of our Saviour delivered by three Evangelists, and one Apostle: and therefore I must commend you to your proper remedy, that is, prayer, hoping that you will never thinke more of wedding, whilst your old wife lives, but bear your Crosse with patience which Christ hath laid upon you. November 16th. 1661.
Mr. Pressicke's Reply to the Bishop's Answer. Right reverend Father in God, I Beseech you once more to hear me with patience, what I have further to say: I have received your Lordships Answer to my paper, and I do humbly conceive it will admit of some Exceptons as followeth, In the first place, you say (and that truly) that they who expound Scripture according to their own private fancies, do often change: but they (say you) who expound it in the same sence which was deliverd to the Catholique Church, with the Scriptures, can hardly vary from themselves. To this I humbly reply, that you do not declare who you mean by the Catholique Church that we should seek the sence of Scrip∣ture from: whether the Church of Rome, or the Protestant Church, joyntly or severally, or who else we must take for the Church: and therefore I will deliver my opinion which I think is not a private fancy. By Catholique Church I understand all the true Beleivers that hath been from the begining of the world, is now, and shall be to the end of the world, of which Catholique Church I am one: and to this Church the Scriptures was given, and none can understand the sence and mind of God in the Scriptures, but such as God doth reveale it unto by his spirit, 1 Cor: 1.9. As it is written, eye hath not seen nor ear heard, neither hath it etred into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. But he hath revealed them to us by his spirit: and we hve not received the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God, that we might know (observe the words) that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God. But the naturallman receiveh not the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishnes unto hm: neiher can he know them, because they are spiritully discern∣ed. and Mat: 10.27. No man knowes the Father, save the Son, and e to whom the Son will reveal him. I do with all my heart and soul reverence learning, because I find the want of learning in my selfe: and we are debtors to those that have translated the Scriptures into our Mother-tongue: yet such as have naturall
learning, and understand the originall Tongues may be in a na∣turall estate, and in that respect the Apostle saith, they cannot know the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishnes unto him; because they must be spiritually discerned. But I say he is a good Scholer that hath learn't his Lesson of Christ: and it matters not who is the scholer so that Christ be the Schoolmaster: I have never read that Christ doth speak to his Children or Scho∣lers only in Hebrew, Greeke, or Lattine, but he hath and doth declare his mind and will to them in English, and other Lan∣guages as well as in the originall Tongues. I hope ths is no ex∣pounding of Scripture according to private fancy: for it is plain Scripture, if the Scripture be right translated: if it be not, the fault is not mine. To the first objection you own the words of St. Paul, 1 Cor: 7.15. If the unbeliever depart, let him deprt: a brother or a sister is not in bondage in such Cases: and you say there is a great difference between the marriage of Infidells, and the marriage of Christians: the marriage of Infidells being only a civill con∣tract, and may be dissolved by consent: the marriage of Christi∣ans is a signe of the mysticall union between Christ and his Church, and theefore (you say) undissolvable. To this I reply by plain Scripture, and agree with you that the marriage of Infidells is dissolvable, if but the one party be an Infidell, and refuse to co-habit with the husband or wife, as 1 Cor: 7.15. and at verses 12, 13. If a husband have an unbelieving wife, or a wife an unbelieving husband: if the unbeliever be pleased to dwell with the believer, the believer ought not to put the unbeliever away. and though my wife be an unbeliever, and is departed, yet I have waited 6 years, &c. for her returning, before I got a Bill of divorce: and the Text saith▪ if the unbeliever depart, a brother or a siter is not in bondage in such cases: and you have granted that the marriage of Infidells is dissolvable by consent, and she gave her consent to the divorce: therefore by your own words the bone of marriage is dissolved between her and me: for this is my case, my wife is an Infidell or unbeliever, and hath departed from me above 7 years and 5 months: I did not put her away, but she put her selfe away, and by her departing she put me away from her as. Marke 10.12. But St Paul saith, If she
depart, let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled to her huband. 1 Cor: 7.11. the reason is because she is the nocent party, there∣fore she must remain unmarried or be reconciled: but St. Paul doth not say let him remain unmarried, o let hm wait 7 years, as I have done, or 17 years to see whether she will be reconciled to her husband or not; but he saiah expresly, ver: 15. if she de∣part, he is not in bondage in such cases: this is plain Scripture. But what greater outward bondage can there be (if he have need of a wfe) than to be restrained from marriage, or in what sence can any man take that Scripture, a brother or a sister is not in bon∣dage in such cases. I humbly conceive that to say as you do in another place, that he is freed from all conjugall duties towards her, it is neither the meaning of the Text, nor is the plaister broad enough for the soare: for if she desert him, and will not come at hm, nor suffer him to come where she is, what conju∣gall duties is he like to performe towards her? it is impossible: therefore the text must have another meaning, which I conceive must be this; she breaking the bond and covenant of marriage, and will not be reconciled in so many years, she being an Infi∣dell and giving her consent to that divorce, it doth dissolve the marriage, as your selfe said before, and sets me free to marry as St. Paul saith, a brother or a sister is not in bondage in such cases: if you say she is not an infidell, she hath been baptized and is a Christian, I say no, she is no Christian that walkes in practice as my wife hath done. Indeed I must say that so long as persons do outwardly hold and embrace the Christian faith, in Charitie we are bound to esteem them Christians, untill they manifest something to the contrary in their conversations: but when they break their faith and covennt, and all both humane and christian bonds, as my wife hath done, and will not be admonished nei∣ther by Ministers no christian friends, but all Scripture and counsell hath been rejected by her, and she wittingly and mali∣ciously acting against the light of her owne conscience, it is no breach of charity to esteem such an one an Infidell or unbeliever while they so walke: for such an one cannot be said to be a belie∣ver in any other sence then the Devill is said to believe and trem∣ble: for if she did believe in any other sence, she durst not act so contrary to the rule of Scripture in breaking faith and covenant
with God and her husband; she cannot be said to be a christian, for believers were first called christians at Antioch: they wer first believers, and then called christians: but some Ministers have said she is worse then an infidell, for Infidells act ignorantly, and she acts against knowledge. I grant also that the marriage of Christians is a signe of the mysticall union between Christ and his Church; but that such a marriage is undissolvable, I thinke by what you have said it doth not appeare: fo to the third Objection you grnt that a wife may be divorced fo fornication, and I thinke I shall by Scripture make it appear, that beng divorced for fornication, the inno∣cent party may lawfully marry. To prove ths, the best way to expound Scripture is to compare Scripture with Scripture: now Marke 10.11. it is said, Whosoever shall put away his wife, and marry another, commiteth adultery against her. and Luke Whosoever putteth away his wife, and marrieth another, commiteth adultery: and whosoever marrieh her that is put away from her husband, com∣mitteth adultery. these Texts you say admit of no evasion, ex∣ception; nor restriction: but compare them with Mat: 19.3. and they wll yeild another sence. The Pharises came unto Christ tempting him, and saying unto him, is it lawfull for a man to put away his wife for every cause. Christs answer seems to in∣clude, as if he should say no, it is not lawfull for a man to put away hs wife for every cause: for if you do, both he that puts her away for every eause, and marrieth another, and he that marrieth her that is put away for every cause, both of them com∣mitteth adultery: this I conceive to be the true meaning of both these Texts, the putting away for every cause, and marrying another is to commit adultery: and Moses (saith he) verses 8, and 9. Because of he hardnesse of your hearts, suffered you to put away your wives for every cause: but I say unto you, that whoso∣ever shall put away his wife except it be for fornication, and marry another, committeth adultery. but without all peradventure, these Texts thus compared together, holds forth to us, that if the di∣vorce be for fornication, and not for every cause, if he marry another, he doth not commit adultery: for likewise Mat: 5.32. whosoever shall put away his wife except for the cause of fornication, causeth her to commit adultery: If he put her away for every cause,
but if she be put away for fornication, she is the cause of her own adultery, and he is no adulterer if he marry another, is included in these words, except for fornication, in all the three Evange∣lists: for there cannot be a contradiction between one of them and another, speaking all by one spirit: therefore one Text must be compared with another to find out the true sence, and I think it is very clear as above, being thus explained by Mat: 19:3. I conceive it very clear that being put away for fornication, and not for every cause, the innocent party may lawfully marry without sin: and I do humbly conceive that it was upon this ac∣count that the old Lord Primate Docter Usher and Docter Martin did seperate Mr. Richard Lingart and his wfe after they had 2 or 3 children, and presently after while the old wife was living he married the Organists widow of St. Patrick's, and was after Arch-Deacon of Meath: all this I can make good. And I humbly conceive from Marke 10.12. compared with the 1 Cor: 7.15. that it is as cleare that a wife putting away her husband, and departing from him, and will not be reconciled, the husband may as lawfully marry, as if he had put her away for fornication, and ought not to be kept in bondage. Marke 10.12. If a womn put away her husband and be married to another, she committeth adultery: but the Evangelist doth not say that if he marry another, after she is departed and hath put him away, that he committeth adultery, and St. Paul saith abolutely that he is not in bondage in such cases: the reason I conceive is because the wife ought to be in subjection to her husband and not he in subjec∣ton to her: and therefore the putting him away, and will not be reconciled doth alter the case so as to set the husband free: a brother or a sister is not in bondage in such cases. For God know∣ing mans weaknes, and requiring that man should be holy in body and mind, and God knowing Satans sleights and continuall temptations, seeking whom he may devour, it cannot in reason be imagiened that God would have a man left in such a folorne condition without a Remedy, through the perversnesse of a whore or unbeliever: it doth not stand with the bounty and goodnes of God to man: it is also against naturall reason, and contrary to Scripture, (Ephes: 5.24.) that saith, As the Church is in sub∣jection
to Christ, so let the Wiues be to their own Husbands in every thing: but if in such cases the Husband be not set free to marry, then must some Husbands be in subjection and bondage to the hu∣mours of whores, and some to infidells and unbelievers: and she that was my wife is both in Scripture-sence, and I think sinns in Scripture-sence are of the deepest dye: adde also to this that I have a bll of Divorce, which all considered together, I see not but for all that is yet said against it, I may lawfully marry. You say, and that truly, I have not hitherto so much as preten∣ded that my wife hath committed actuall adultery. I reply, the reason why I have not, is want of proofe: for it is a hard matter to prove one a whore though she were never so guilty, but there is as strong presumptions to perswade she is so as possible may be: As first, before she left me, when I told her she did not respect me as a wife ought to do a husband, she said that she looked upon me but as she did upon other men, and no o∣therwise: which is suspicion enough, to put no difference between her husband and other men. Secondly, it hath been taken no∣tice of by severall that told me, that when she was not imployed in her calling as Midwife, she did frequent the company of those that were reputed for whoedome, the vilest persons in the Citie; and they would sit and drinke Sacke, and jeare her husband. 3ly. She hath been observed to goe in evenings to places suspected for un∣cleanesse, and those that did observe it teld me. Fourthly, it is reported by many in this Citie that about the beginning of June last, when she was carried in a Horse-litter into the County of Armagh (where she stil remains for any thing I know) she had a French disease upon her: these things added to the former rea∣sons and arguments of Scripture, I thinke what I plead for cannot in reason be denyed me; but it is just and equall in the sight of God and Man that I should have a Lycense to marry. To return to the second Objection, the law of the Land (you say) I mistake: for if the husband be known to be living, if it were se∣venteeen years, the wife may not marry; and you instance Mr. Mole was absent 20 years in the Inquisition. Reply, I say that in equity the benefit of the Law of the land should be allowed me, for what difference is there between being absent 7 years, and not heard off: and to be absent 7 years, if there
be no law (as your Lordship said) to require the Delinquent party to her duty, or what benefit hath the one innocent party of their husband or wife more than the other: therefore there is as much equity the one should have liberty as the other. As for Mr. Mole his condition and this we speake of, are much different; for Mr. Mole would have come home if he might, and she that was my wife might have come home, and was much sought to for to come, and she would not; therein the case alters. And Galleatius be∣ing in the same condition that I am, as to the absence of his wife, yet not altogether in the same manner, for he left his wife, and my wife left me, and I have a Divorce and he had none, yet the Di∣vines in Germany allowed him to marry anothe: and therefoe I still affirme (till better reasons be shewed to the contrary) that both the Law of God, and the example of the Church in Germany, and the practice of Dr. Usher and Dr. Martin towards Mr. Lingart here in Ireland, are all for me that I may lawfully marry: and if there be no law to require a wfe to performe the duty of a wife, nor to punish her for her disobedience, I see not how there can be any Law [in equity] against me, to hinde me from marriage. To come again to the 3 Objecton: you bring Rom: 7.2, & 3. verses. The woman which hath a husband, is bound by the Law to her husband as long as he liveth; but if the husband be dead, she is loosed from the law of her husband: so then, if while her husband liveth, she be married to another, she shall be called an adulteress. and 1 Cor: 7.39. The wife is bound by the Law as long as the husband liveth. Reply, I humbly conceive [under favour] this Argument will not hold out weght in the ballance of the Sanctuary: for if she were put away justly for fornication, then the marriage is dissolved, as I shewed before out of the 3 Evangelists, that which I thinke will carry it though you say marriage cannot be dissolved. Well, she being justly put away for fornication, he that marrieth her committeth uncleannesse with her, because she was an Halot: What know ye not, that he that is joyned to an hurlot is one body, for two saith he shall be oe flesh: [1 Cor: 6.15, 16.] and shall I take the members of Christ and make them the members of an Harlot, God forbid! If she were put away unjustly for every cause, as it seems then they used to make private divorces without Lycense from either Magistrate or Minister; and herein though she were in∣nocent
as to the cause of divorce, yet she was blame-worthy and guilty of sin, in not appealing to the Governours of the Church or Commonwealth, or to both for justice, and they ought to have re∣lieved her, and required the husband to performeth duty of a hus∣band to her, and not have suffered the Land (by such unlawfull se∣paration) to be polluted: and her neglect of this, and submitting her selfe to an unlawfull private Divorce, makes her & him that marrieth her, both guilty of uncleannesse. But this is not my condition, it is farr different from such proceedings: for I have to my hazard both of life and lberty used all possible means to reclaim her since she left me, but to no purpose, and I have been restrained of my liberty for 25 dayes together, for contending against such private separations: and I have ap∣pealed both to Magistrates and Ministers, when the times and persons were so corrupt that I could not have justice, untill the Lord brought home his Majesty, to whom I made my plaint and case known, who upon the reading of my petition gave His Roy∣all Assent that two Bishops should order the matter according to justice: and they considering her long absence, and that the man hath no power over his own body but the woman, and that she had broke the bond of wedlocke in departing so long, and defrauding her husband of due benevolence, which by the bond of marriage she was ingaged to, 1 Cor: 3.3.4.5. and that at that present before them she refused to be reconciled; whereupon the two Bishops gave me a bill of Divorce according to 1 Cor: 7.15. If the unbeliever will depart let her depart, a brother or a sister is not in bondage in such cases: and Marke 10.12. If a woman shall put away her husband, and be married to another, she committeth adul∣tery: which doth imply, as the Text above doth, that he is not in bondage: so that if he upon that account marry another, he doth not commit adultery, because she denies the duty of a wife: and God did ordain that man should not live alone, but should have a helpe meet for him: and therefore if a wife that should be a helpe to him, to keep his vessell in holinesse and honour to God, if she break her Covenant with God and with her husband, shall I be kept in bondage after all this, and the Scriptures say in such cases a man is not in bondage. I pray you is it not contrary both to the Law of God and man, and naturall reason that I
should suffer for my wives trangression; if she commit murther, must I be hanged for her murther: or if she commit adultery, must I do pennance all my life after, to live out of a married condition for her adultery or separating her selfe from me, though I have never so much need of a wife; this were a sad pennance indeed for her whoredome. But perhaps you will say she is not a whore, I say she is in Scripture-sence, if she be not otherwise; and Scrip∣ture-sence is the best sence, and best proofe to prove a whore by: for it is very well knowne that according to the Lawes of Men, it is a very hard taske to prove a woman to be a whore: but I have shewed you enough before to perswade reasonable men that she is no lesse. I hope the Scriptures shall not be streched like Cloth upon tenter-hookes to keep men in such cases still in bondage: God is more gracious than men, to bnd such heavy burthens, and lay them upon mens shoulders, which themselves will not touch with one of their fingers. You say further from the 1 Cor: 7.10, 11. that St Paul cannot be understood to speak of one who had no just cause of seperation; for then he could not have said, Let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled to her husband. Reply. I humbly conceive these words will bear another con∣struction, moe agreeable to other Scriptures: for you speak of just cause of separation, for which she should remain unmarried, or be reconciled; but do not tell us what that just cause might be: if you mean her Husbands fornication or adultery, then the Scrip∣ture tells us plainly in the 3 Evangelists explained by Mat: 19.3. that upon a lawfull divorce, she needed not to remain unmarried: for being divorced for her Husbands fornication, she might marry; because she could not (upon that account) return again and be re∣conciled to him, but in so doing she should sin, by making the members of Christ the members of an Harlot: 1 Cor: 6.15, & 16. therefore it must be some inferiour cause of separation, as some rash or unadvised act, for whch she mght depart for a time, and remain unmarried untill her husbands rage or anger were past, and they reconciled again. And I do humbly conceive, that where a Text will bear a double construction, it is most agreeable to the mnd and will of God to expound it in that sence, that in observing thereof pesons may be preserved as much as may be fom tempta∣tions
to sin▪ rather than to expound it in such a sence as by obser∣ving thereof persons shall be laid open to most horrid temptations to sin: and I do verely believe that the late Lord Primate and Dr. Martin did seperate Mr. Lingart and his wife upon this account; which Mr. Lingart about 3 or 4 months after married another wife, while the first was living; which if it had not been lawfull to have been done, I presume those precious servants of Jesus Christ Dr. Usher and Dr. Martin would not have suffered it to have been done. In the next place you say it is evidenced by right reason that if persons could so easily unmarry themselves, what a doore it would open to perjuries, subordinations, and slaundees of innocent persons, &c. Reply. This is as if Children should not have bread because sometimes Doggs snatch it from them. Shall the Children of God be debarred her lawfull lberty for fear the Children of Beliall should draw false Conclusions from sound Principles: or shall in∣nocents be punished with transgressors for company. If my case were weighed in the ballance of right reason, I could not be denied my desire: how have I pursued all lawfull means that could be in∣vented and procured (Doctors of Divinity, and Ministers, and Christian friends) to perswade my wife to own me as a Husband, and she would not, nor shew any reason but her own will: and I have shewed your Lordship (in my other paper) four severall rea∣sons, that if I have a Lycence to marry, yet no wicked person can make my condition a president for them to follow. I grant as you say it is evidenced by the Word of God and the light of naturall reason, that Marriage ought to be kept sacred and undissolvable; it ought so: but if one party break the Bond, it is against the Word of God and the light of naturall reason, that the innocent party should be punished all his life long for the Nocents transgresion. What you say of Mr. Mole or others comes not near my case: for as I said before they would have come home, if they might; and my wife might have come if she would, and has been as much solicited to come as might be, and this was Galleatius case, his wife would not come at him, for which the Divines in Germany suffered him to marry while the first wife was living. To my fourth Objection you are silent, which was to this effect that seing it doth appear for any thing that is yet said against it
that according to the Word of God, that he whose wife commite adultery, and he whose wife departeth from him and denies the duty of a wife, as mine hath done ths 7 years and 5 months, may lawfully marry: and I have shewed you that Dr. Usher and Dr. Martin did allow it, and the Church in Germany and New-England hath allowed marriage in such cases: then I say if there be no law to compell a wife (deserting her husband) to her duty, nor to pu∣nish her for her disobedience, and if there be any law of men to restrain the Husband in such a case from marriage, then whether is that Law that restrains him a just law, according to the Word of God? or whether is it not rather against the Word of God, and the practice of other Churches: and a binding of mens Consciences to insupportable burthens? and whether is not such a Law (if any such there be) a setting of their thresholds against God's thresholds, and their posts by his posts Ezek: 43.8. compared with Isa: 29.13. Their fear towards me is taught by the precepts of men. Indeed I know not of any such Lw, my study hath been more in Divinitie, neither did I ever know where to get a Booke of Ca∣nons to acquaint my selfe with that Law: but it seems strange to me if amongst all the Canons there be none to punish a Husband or wife that refuseth to performe the duty of a Husband or wife. To my 5 Argument, you say I run into one or two errors more, viz: That every ordinary Divorce is forbidden as a breach of Gods command, What God hath joyned together, let not ma put asunder: Mat: 19.6. and that I say there is no other ause of Divorce but only fornication. Reply. This heavy charge of one or two errors, I shall easily wipe off; for I do not say there is no other cause of Divorce but fornication; for I said in my other paper, and I say in this, that an unbelieving wife departing from her Husband, and denying the duty of a wife, and will not be reconsiled to her husband, it is cause of divorce as well as fornication, if the Scripture may be believed before private fancy. 1 Cor: 7.3, 4, 5, 11, 15. If the un∣believer depart, a brother or a sister is not in bondage in such cases. Nay I thinke it is no false Exposiaon to say further, that whether she be a believer or unbeliever, if she depart, and persist in it, and will not be reconciled, it is cause of divorce; otherwise the Apostle would have said a brother or a sister is not in bondage in
such a case, in the singular number, in case of the unbelievers deparring: but he saith A brother or a sister is not in bondage in such cases; speaking of more cases than one: which may well be understood not only of an unbelieers departing, but in the like case of a believers departing, if she continue obstinate and un∣reconcilable, a brother or a sister is not in bondage in such cases. Further you say that Text Mat: 19:6. is understood properly of dissolving the bond of marriage for ever, (as you say I would have it) and not of lesser separations made out of prudence or piety for a time. I said before and I say still that except the Bishops made that Divorce between me and my wife, upon the account of my wifes being a whore in Scripture-sence, o else upon account of her departing and not performing the duty of a wife, one or both, as I writ to them of the lawfulnes of such a Divorce, and of the Germane Divines allowing the like to Galeatius, before they made ths Divorce: I shewed these reasons why I desired it, or else to have my wife to lve with me, which she before them did refuse. I say excet they made this Divorce upon this account, whch you say dssolves marriage for ever, the Bishops must needs fall under the breach of that precept, Those whom God hath joyed together, let no man put asunder: fo this divorce cannot be undetood (as you Lodship speaks) of lesser separations for a time, but of a perpetuall Divorce: for the Bishops bound us in five hundred pound Bonds apeece, that we should not owne one the other, not one the others estate; and bd us to take leave of one anoher as if one of us were going to the grave: therefore it cannot be understood of a lesser Divorce for a time, but of a perpetuall dissolution of marriage for ever, or else the Bishops stand guilty of the breach of that precept, Mat: 19▪ 6. Thus, both ac∣cording to the Word of God, and the Lawes of men, I mean the Bishops and His Majesties Royall assent, the bond of marriage is dissolved; what hinders then but I may have Lycence to mar∣ry: and whereas I say there can be no divorce from bed and board (as some call it) except it be with consent for a time, and come toge∣ther again, least Satan tempt them to incontinecy. 1 Cor: 7.5. but it is absolutely againt this and that precept Mat: 19.6. and 1 Cor: 7.3, 4, 5. I beseech you let not this be condemned for an error which is justified by Scripture. For your distinctions of tempo∣rary
Divorces and lesser seperations & divorces of prudence and piety, I find no such distinctions of Divorces in Scripture; and I dare not pinne my faith upon any mans opinion without Scrip∣ture-proofe: I pray you bear with my plainnesse, for I have read in an ancient Author, that one Lay-man bringing Scripture to prove his assertion, was to be preferred before a whole Counsell that decreed things without warrant from Scripture: and I read of no such Divorces in Scripture, except it be for every cause, Mat: 19.3. and that Christ himselfe condemns as unlawful. And if any married persons should be so desperately wicked as to endeavour to kill, or poison or intice to Heresie or Blasphemy, or the like, the Magestrates by Law may take order and secure the innocent party, without making Divorces not warrantable by Scripture, and which oftentimes proves a bane to the innocent party, and binds him to more bondage then the Nocent. To the 6 & 7 Arguments where I prove my wife to be a whore in Scripture-sence, you say I mistake: for it is probable the Levites wife did more then depart, and though a Levite might not marry a known whore; yet being married, he might pardon, or conceal, or connive at her lewd courses. Reply. I conceive it not so much as probable that she did any more than depart without his consent, that was enough: for the Seripture mentions not that she did any more, for which she was called a whore: for if she had been an actuall whore she should by the Law have been stoned to death, Levit: 20.10. neither had it been lawfull for him to have taken her again, Levit: 21.7. and I say he could not pardon nor connive at her lewd courses so as to take her again: 1 Cor: 6.13, 15, 16. The body is not for fornication, but for the Lord. What, know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ? shall I then take the members of Christ and make them the members of an harlot, God forbid! What, know ye not that he tht is joyned to an harlot is one body, for two (saith he) shall be called one flesh. These Scriptures shews plainly, that if a believers wife playes the Harlot, he ought not, nor cannot (without grievous sin) joyne himselfe to her again: for in so doing he dishonours Christ and makes his members the members of an Harlot. Now if such an innocent party have not liberty to marry, then is he (for his wifes sinne) in perpetuall bondage all his life after, except he will
joyne with his wife again, and so make the members of Christ the members of an Harlot: but as for my wfe, if I would, she would not owne me as a Husband: I desire it may be better condered of for to say, that neither for civill whoredome [as you call a wifes deserting her Husband] nor carnall whoredome doth free the hus∣band no further then from conjugall duties, is such a distinct on as I am assured is not suitable to Scripture, Grace, and Believers pri∣viledges: those that thus deal with men, do as much as in them lyeth to provoke them to incontinency: but as I said before Dr. Usher & Dr Martin dealt not so with Mr. Lingart, for without doubt if either the wife desert her Husband, or play the harlot, for they are both one in Scripture-sence, the innocent party may lawfully marry rather than burne; and those that hinder such, must answer for their sinns, if they transgresse; and all men have not the gift of continencie. Then you that to imagine that she who deserts her Husband, and she who takes another into his bed, are both alike guilty of the breach of wedlock, and both to be punished with the same punish∣ment, as you charge me to say, it is you say ridiculous. Reply. My Lod, if you look back upon my paper again, you will find it is your mistake and not mine: for I do not name car∣nall whoredome, of a womans taking another into her Husbands bed; but this I aid, that spirituall whoredome, forsakng the Lord, and that which you call civill whoredome, a wife deserting her Husband, God threatens to punish both with one and the same pu∣nishment, Ezek: 16.38. and if this be ridiculous to speak in Scrip∣ture language, I know not how to please men; but the Apostle hath taught me, that if I yet seek to please men, I should not be the servant of Christ: Galat: 1.10. But now being put to it I wil say something to the Charge: I do conceve that Blasphemy and spi∣rituall whoredome [which is forsaking the Lord] being sinns com∣mitted immediately against God, are as great sinns, if not greater then those sinns committed against men, suppose it to be carnall whoredome or other: and if so that spirituall whoedome be as great a sin as carnall whoedome, and a wife deserting her Hus∣band to be punished with the same punishment, that spiri∣tuall whoredome is to be punished with; then a wife de∣serting her Husband ought to be punished with the same punish∣ment that carnall whoredome is punished with, be it Divorce,
or what else, except you will make carnall whoredome a greater sin then spirituall whoredome, and I thinke this is not rediculous: for a wfe departing, and wll not be reconciled, it is a breach of wedlocke, because the Husband hath not power over his own body, but the wife: and she ought to render him due benevolence: yea, it is such a sin as God will punish with the same punishment as he doth spirituall whoredome, Ezek: 16.38. I will judge thee as women that break wedlock, and shed blood, are judged. You grant that the marriage of Christians is a signe of the mysti∣call union between Christ and his Church: then I say from this union (Ephes: 5.32.) we may draw this Conclusion, that a wife forsaking her Husband, and will not be reconciled, it is in Scrip∣ture-sence Harlotry or whoredome, as forsaking the Lord is called spirituall whoredome: Isa: 1.4. compared with the 21. They have forsaken the Lord, How is the faithfull Citie become an Harlot. so a wife forsaking her husband, and forgetting the Covenant of her God, or promise of Marriage, Prov: 2.17. is there called a Harlot: and Ierem: 3.3. compared with 20. Thou hadst a whores forehead, thou refusedst to returne, as a wife treacherusly departeth from her Husband. Now thus to depart (as mine hath done this 7 years and 5 months) is a breach of wedlocke, Cor: 7.3, 4, 5. for she ought to be in subjection to her Husband as the Church is to Christ, Ephes: 5.24. by the mysticall union that is between Christ and his Church, which marriage is a signe of: but here I shall forbear to proceed any further, for I think I have made it clear enough to any indifferent man that may read it, both by Scripture and sound Arguments, that I ought to be set free and have Lycense to marry, which I hope your Lordship will grnt me; otherwise I shall humbly beg your Lodships Rejonde, to know what further reasons can be alledged against me, I remain Novem: 27 1661. your Lordship most humble and unworthy servant George Pressicke.
Having proceeded thus farre, and sent him my Reply, about a week or ten dayes after I went to him, to know if I should expect any further satisfaction to the Question, but received none: for with a frowning countenance he said. What do you thinke that you have received the Spirit to expound the Scripture more than other men? Do you thinke you have a Cloven-head upon yours? (what he meant by Cloven-head, I leave ohers to judge:) I do protest (saith he) the Paper I have given you already, is my Judge∣ment; which I will live and dye in. But how unlikely that Paper is to satisfie a scrupulous Conscience, let them that read it, and the Reply to it, judge. As for me I cannot live by an implicite faith; for I am like the Bereans, Acts 17.11. One that can be∣leive nothing (though delivered by an Apostle) without searching the Scriptures daily whether those things be so: and if I be mista∣ken I would be thankfull to any, that in the spirit of meeknesse would by Scripture-arguments and reason shew me my mistake, for as yet it is not done: and there are both Bishops and Ministers of very eminent Guifts & learning, of the same Judgement with me in this point, that it is lawfull for me to marry. Suppose the Church of Rome, and some few Protestants are of opinion that divorced persons may not marry; I do conceive I am not bound to submit to their Judgement, because I find both the Word of God, and the practice of Protestant Churches hath allow∣ed the innocent party to marry: and as Peter & Iohn said Acts 4.19. Whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto them more than unto God, judge ye. To what I have said, I shall adde this, I have been credibly informed that about the begnning of the Rebellion in Ireland, Levtenant Coll: Hewson sued out a Divorce before Arch-Deacon Buckley in Dublin, and after he was divorced, while the first wife was living, the Arch-Deacon himselfe did joyne the said Liev: Collonell and another woman together in marriage: and was this lawfull then, and is it not lawfull now: and was it thought law∣full by the late Reverend Lord Primate Dr. Usher (whom all Europe reverenced for piety & learning) and Dr. Martin to separate Mr. Lingart and his wife, and presently after Mr. Lingart married another while the first wife was living, and is it not lawfull for me now, being divorced by His Majesties Royall Assent: and was
it thought lawfull by the Protestant Church in Germany to suffer Gaelleatiu to marry another, because his wife would not live with him, though he had no Divorce; and is it not lawfull fo me now to marry that hath a Divorce, and my wfe hath forsaken me 7 years and 5 months. What an Iron-age is this that we live in? I could instance some such like passages as these above, that hath been allowed of in England; but I forbear, I thinke here is enough to satisfy reasonable men that reads it. Thus much I thought I was bound in Conscience to declare to the world, to clear my selfe from scandall, before I would take another wfe, to prove the lawfullnes thereof as you see I have done both by Scripture, and reason, and the practice of Protestant Churches, lest any through ignorance should say, I practce that my selfe I condemne in others; because I have set forth in a Booke, the practice of Anabaptists in Germany, who had many wives at once: but I have had none almost this eight years, but only the name of one untill I got a Divorce. And those that can procure Zanty's Booke, and read him upon Divoce both for Adultery & Desertion, may be further informed of the innocent parties liber∣ty to marry in such cases: and I may justly say I have had the ad∣vice of twenty Bishops, Doctors and Ministers, and none but this Bishop spoke against it, but all concluded that it was lawfull for me to marry. George Pressicke.
Certain Quaeries touching the silencing of Godly Ministers, &c. Iohn 3.3. Verily, verliy, I say uneo thee, except a man be borne again he cannot enter into the Kingdome of God. I Observe from this Text, first, that no man living and dying in that naturall condition in which he is bon, except he dye in Infancie, for to such there may be by the free grace of God, a secret imputation of the merits & righteousnesse of Jesus Christ, imputed unto them for salvation: but those that live to years, and are capable to understand when they are taught, ex∣cept they be regenerated and borne again, they cannot see the King∣dome of God: that is, they cannot enter into the Kingdome of God. Secondly, I observe out of Iohn 10. and Romans 10. that the ordinary means that God hath ordained to worke faith and conver∣sion in such as shall be saved, is the Ministry of the Word; that is the Word of God preached. Ro: 10.14, 15. How shall they hear without a preacher; and how shall they preach except they be sent. that is such as God sends, and furnisheth with Guifts rightly to divide the word, and to bring out of Gods treasure things new & old, and to give every one their portions in due season: that is, com∣fort to whom comfort belongs, to edify and build them up in their most holy faith: and reproofe and reprehension to whom it belongs, to tell Israell his trangressions, and the house of Iacob their sinns, that at the day of Judgement when the Bookes of mens Consciences shall be opened, their condemnation may appear to be just; that they were instructed in the truth which they rejected and dehorted from: and were reproved for their sinfull wayes, they walked into their owne destruction. Such faithfull Pastors may say as Isaiah, Isa: 8.18. Behold here an I and the children that thou hast given me: or that thou hast made me instrumentall by my Ministry to them in the worke of their Conversion: when idle Drones, and dumme Doggs, and covetous Cormorants that seek the fleece moe than the flock, and to please men more than God, which run before they are sent, for filthy-Lucres-sake, these will
have nothing to say for themselves, but wish the Mountains and Rocks to fall upon them, and cover them, from the face of him that sits upon the Throne, &c. Thirdly, I have observed with grief of heart, and I humbly desire it may be seriously considered off by all whom it doth or may concern, that many godly and faithfull Ministers, such as no man can deny but they have been instrumentall by their Ministry to the conversion of many souls, but they are now silenced, and not suffered to preach, for refusing subscription to that which they say is part of it the Ordinances of men, and not agreeng with the Ordinances of God, and they are forbidden to plow with an Oxe and an Asse together: and they say it is very rare, if ever there were any soul converted by the reading of that Forme of Prayer only; but they can make it appear that many hundreds have been converted by the preaching of the Word only, which they are hindred from the exercising of their guifts in; though many of them would be glad they might be suffered to preach in Places that are vacant, though they had nothing for their pains: and they say that Preaching being an Ordinance of Divine institution: and those things they refuse to subscribe (they say) is but part of Divine and part of Humane institution: and therefore they think they have not equall dealing that they are silenced from preach∣ing for not reading such a Forme of Common-Prayer, &c. and so many preferred as hath been, that many of them could scarce ever preach, but read only: and they desire it may be considered of, whether the profit that comes by the latter will countervail the dammage of prohibiting the former from preaching in these sinfull gloomy dayes, and places of ignorance; and which might be the most probable and powerfull means the most to advance Gods glory, and to convince sinners and turne them from their sinns: is it because they cannot see with other mens eyes, that they may not be allowed to worship God in his own institu∣ted Ordinances, without subscribing to the Ordinances of Men? as to read Aporipha instead of Canonicall Scripture, of which Apocrypha they say some part of it, seems to be untrue; as to in∣stance one place, Tobit 12 chap: appointed to be read for the first Lesson at evening Prayer the fourth of October. In the 5 chap: & 4 verse, Tobias went to seek a man to go with him to Media,
and he found Raphaell (saith that verse) that was an Angell: and verse the 12. he calls himselfe Azarias the son of Ananias the great, and of thy Brethren, saith he to Tobit: and verse the 13. Tobit saith, he knew his father Ananias, when they went together to Ierusalem to worship: and chap: 12. verse 15. He calls himselfe again Raphaell, one of the seven Angells which presents the prayers of the saints. Now this is contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of England, and all our Protestant Churches, that Angells should present the Saints Prayers, and so become their Mediator or Intecessor; we leave that to Papists, for we own no Mediator or Intercessor between God & Man, but the Man Christ Iesus, Thus you see he calls himselfe Azarias the son of Ananias, and of Tobit's Brethren; and in another place he calls himselfe Raphaell one of the seven Angells. Now they say, that the imposing of this and such like, instead of Canonical Scripture, makes them that they cannot subscribe; for God is not worshipped with Mens hands, nor with mens tongues, except it be in a way of his own institution: He will be sanctified in all that draw near uno hm. I could say much more, but I forbear, for a word to the wie is suffcent. For my own particular, I conceive a Litturgy in the Church is very usefull, that ignorant persons that cannot pray, may by often reading and hearing it read, learne to pray in a forme of Prayer: yet I think it should be such as both the Prayers and Lessons to be read, should be suitable to Canonicall Scripture; and not such as is mentioned before: and so composed for matter and manner, as other parts of Gods worship be not hindred. But from what hath been said, this Question may arise, vizt. Whether the silencing of Godly Ministers be not very near of kn to the killing of the two Witnesses? spoken of Revelation 11. chapter, and 3 & 7 verses. For with submission to better Judgements, it is humbly con∣ceived, that by the two Witnesses is signified, all the faithfull Prea∣chers and Professors of the Truth which in all Ages have opposed Popery, and all other Heresies. They are called Witnesses, because they bear witnes to the Truth, and they are said to be but
two, because two is the least number in bearing witnes, In the mouth of two or three Witesses, shall every word stand. And this Prophecy did foretell, that popery and Herefy should so generally prevail, that few in comparison of the adverse party should oppose them. These Witnesses are said to prophecy in sackcloth, signi∣fying the mournful condition they should be in, by the prevailing power of their adversaries, that they should lead a sorrowfull life in this wold, they spend not their time in Iollity, nor worldly Pompe, and bravery: and verse the 4▪ they are compared to two Olive trees; for by the preaching of Gods Word the oyle of the Spirit is dropt into tender penitent hearts: and they are compared to two Candlesticks, that as the Candlestick bears the Candle to give light to others, so faithfull Preachers holds forth the light of Gods Wod in time of greatest darknes. And whereas it is said that these two Witnesses were killed by their adversaries, we must take notice that there are severall sorts of killing, besides the killing with the sword: there is a killing with the tongue as well as with the Hand, calling Men, Schismatick, Obstinate, Turbu∣lent, and Pestilent persons, which cannot be proved that they are such: and St. Iohn tell us, 1 Iohn 3.15. That. Whosoever hateth his brother is a murtherer, and ye know that no murtherer hath eternall life abiding in hm, and verse 14. He that loveth ot his bro∣ther, abideth in death. and saith our Saviour, He that saith to his brother, thou fool, shall be in danger of Hell fire. But if there were love amongst Brethren, there would be more bearing and forbearing of for infirmities, and scruples of Conscience, for which they dare not subscribe, &c. A second Quaerie my be his, vizt. Whether the making of the Image of the Beast that had the wound of a sword, and did live. Revel: 13.14. be not meant of the erecting of an externall Forme of Ecclesiasticall Government, like some Government that had been before: and what Govern∣ment this making  Image of the Beast is, I desire to know: For the beast himsel s said in the 6 verse, to blaspheme God, and his Tabernacle; that is his Church and People: and in the 7 verse, He is said to make warre with the Saints, and overcome them; that is, with the temporall sword, though they overcome
him wth the spirituall sword, and it is said in the 8 vese, that the power of the Beast should be so great, that all that dwell upon the Earth should worship him. that is, by submitting to his Edicts & Government, even all under his jurisdiction or Dominon, whose Names are not written in the Booke of Life. It is said af∣ter, that such as would not submit to his Government, must nei∣ther buy no sell, they must not enjoy those priviledges that others do that do submit. Some say that by the Beast mentioned in the first verse of this Chapter) that rise out of the Sea, which had 7 Heads and ten Horns is meant the Romane Empire: and by the second beast, that rise out of the Earth, that had two Horns like the Lambe, but spake like the Dragon: (verse the 11.) is meant, the Pope in his height. Again others thinke that by both these Beasts, is meant the Pope; whose one and the same Person is described under a double resemblance of two Beasts: for Anti-christ alone is a dou∣ble Head; in respect of his Civill power, he is the first beast; and in respect of his Spirituall or Ecclesiasticall power he is the second beast. Or if you will, He is the first beast in regard of the wound he received by the Gothes, Vandalls, and Hunnes: and he is the second Beast, as he was exalted in his height, when his deadly wound was healed, and he Gothes, &c. destroyed, and the Pope rise to have great possessions of Cities and Lands: for he exercised all the power of the first Beast. Take it in what sence you will. For by his two Hornes is meant both Civill & Eccle∣siasticall power; for by the sword which the Pope doth exercise, he commands obedience to his Ecclesiasticall Decrees as verse 16.17. He caused all both small and great, rich and poor, bond and free to receive a Marke in their right hand, or in their fore-head. And that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the Marke, or the Name of the beast, or the number of his Name. Now by the Marke of the beast in the fore-head, or right hand some thinke is meant to professe and practise the Lawes, Religion, and Decrees that are commanded; and those that will not submit thereunto, must not buy nor sell. Now this second Beast exercising all the power of the first beast, and commanding an Image of the Bast to be made, which Image must be something that doth resemble,
like unto the beast: and if the Marke in the fore-head or right hand, signifie the profession and practice of the Lawes, Religion and Decrees of the Beast: then what is meant by the Image of the beast, that they must not buy nor sell that have not the Beasts marke? and whether it have no relation to the silencing of Prea∣chers, that do not subscribe their Canonicoll obedience, I desire to be resolved, and would be much ingaged to those that would take the pains to do it. For, certain it is, many pecious soules are at a stand, and know not what way to turne themselves, to see so many eminent Persons, which they dare not thinke but there is something of God in both Parties, and yet they are at such a distance in their prac∣tice and affections, and that for a small Punctilio, or as the Holy-Ghost saith, They make a man an offender for a word; or for omis∣sion of some small matters, which they that urge them, will not say that either salvation or damnation doth depend upon the doing, or not doing of them: and yet for omission thereof, their mouthes shall be stopt from preaching; and in some sence salvation or dam∣nation depends upon preaching. Rom: 10.14. How shall they be∣lieve in him, of whom they have not heard: and how shall they hear without a Preacher, &c. For preaching is the outward ordinary means that God hath ordained to worke Conversion in such as he will save: for where Vision faileth, the people perish: and by the ching of the Word also, those that are not reformed, their ondemnation will appear to be just. And those that do not preach, and those that hinders others from preaching, see what the Scripture saith, Ezek: 33.6. If any man be taken away in his iniquity, for want of warning, his blood will God require at the Watch∣mens hands: both he that should, and doth not preach, and he that hinders others from preaching. Let no man say, I take upon me to teach, for what I do is but (as the Apostle saith,) 2 Pet: 3.2. To stirre up your pure minds by way of remembrance, though ye know these things: for I heartily desire peace and unity, and that all men would remember and practice St. Paul's exhortation, Colos: 3.13. To forbear one another, and to forgive one another: and if any man have a quarrell against any, even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. Or else; how  any man pray the Lords Prayer? a Hea∣then
may say it, but no man can pray it, but such as are willing to passe by their Brethrens failings and infirmities: For if ye for∣give not men their trespasses, neither will your Heavenly Father forgive your trespasses. And these Men (we speake of) say, that if they trespasse against Men in denying to subscribe Canonicall obdience, it is, fearing they should trespasse against God if they should do it, because they cannot do it of faith, and whatsoever is not of faith, is sin: and whether it be right in your sight, to obey Men rather than God, judge ye. A third Quaerie may be this, vizt. Whether the silencing of Godly Ministers, have not some re∣lation to the causing of the daily Sacrifice to cease, that hath been offered up daily to God: and how do men thinke God will take it, Whose voice once shooke the Earth; Heb: 12.26, 27. but now he hath promised saying, Yet once mose, I shake not the Earth only, but also Heaven: and this word, yet once more, signifieth the removing of those things that are shaken, as of things that are made, [which some thinke the things that are made, are to be understood of all Humane Inventions in Divine Worship,] that the things that are not made, may remain: that is, those things that are of Divine Institution, shall remain: Men, nor Divells, nor all the Pow∣ers of Darkenesse shall not be able to prevaile against that which is of Divine Institution, when all Humane Inventions, in point of Divine Worship, shall be removed, according to this Promise. If any should thinke or say, that I make my selfe too busy to propound such Questions, give me leave to answer such, That I do but propound my Question to men: and yet I find Ieremiah in the 12 chap: in such an evill time as this, when God had war∣ned the Prophet, chap: 7. verse 16. and chap 11. verse 14. That he should not pray for that people for their good, for he would not hear him for them; yet even then did Ieremiah (chap: 12. verse 1.) propound a question to God: Wherefore doth the way of the wicked prosper? wherefore are all they happy that deal treacherously? meaning that they were happy as to their outward estate in the world. For (saith he) thou hast planted them, and they have taken root, and grow: thou art near their mouth, and farr from their reins. Then God answers Ieremiah, ver: 6. Even thy brethren, and the house
of thy Father, they have dealt treacherously with thee; they have called a multitude after thee: and verse 10. Many Pastours have destroyed my Vineyard, they have troden down my portion under foot: they have made my pleasant portion a desolate wildernesse: and being desolate it mouth to me. and verses 13, 14. They have sowen wheat, but shall reap thornes: For thus saith the Lord against all mine evill neighbors, that touch mine Inheritance, which I have caused my people Israell to inherit, Behold I will pluck them out of their Land, and no marvell if God pluck them out, when they had pluct God's people out first: for he that toucheth them, toucheth, the Apple of his eye. I am loath to trouble the Reader with too much, un∣till I see how this will be accepted: and now all those that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, I commend you to God, and to the word of his Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among them that are sanctified. By George Pressicke. FINIS.
