P657A 99828813 33245
THE Door Of Salvation, OPENED: OR, A Voice from Heaven, to unregenerate Sinners. Plainly shewing the necessity of opening your hearts to Christ, or else he will open Hells mouth to devour you. VVith many sweet invitations to come to him, that they might have life, and be hidden from the wrath of God, which is worse then death. Together with the dreadful condition of the stubborn and hard-hearted Sinners. Dealing impartially with their souls, propound∣ing blessing and cursing, life and death; Salvation if you open to Christ, Damnation if you refuse Christ. By T. P. Mat. 4.1. For the day is coming that shall burn as an Oven, and all the proud, yea, & all that do wickedly shall be as stubble: and the day commeth that shall burn them up, saith the Lord, and shall leave them neither root nor branch. Printed for Tho. Passinger on London-bridge.
THE Door of Salvation opened. Rev. 3.20. Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come into him, and sup with him, and he with me. IT hath pleased the most Wise Disposer of all things, out of the riches of his free Grace, to tender Iesus Christ to poor lost and undone sinners; and also it pleased the Lord Iesus, not onely to dye for sinners, to redeem them from Death, and the Curse of the Law, that he might open the way for poor lost sinners to re∣turn to God, but he is also pleased to stand knocking at the door of their hearts, to wooe, to beseech, and intreat poor souls to be recon∣ciled to God.
These words now read, are very full of mat∣ter, & upon each word might almost be writ∣ten an intire Volume, but my narrow scant∣ling will not permit me to explain the terms, onely come to the main intended. I might hence raise many observations, but I shall name but one, and ensist on it. Doct. That Jesus Christ waits, and calls long upon Sinners, and earnestly labours with them for admission, he stands at the door and knocks. A hundred and twenty years waited he upon the Old world, thirty years upon the Jews, forty years in the Wilderness by signs and wonders: these one hundred years well nigh hath he waited upon England; twenty years he waits upon one sinner, forty years upon another: how often doth he say to us, Open to me my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my undefiled, for my head is filled with dew, and my looks with the drops of the night, Cant. 5.2. Mat. 23.27. How often would I have gathered thy children, as a Hen gathereth her chickens, but ye would not: What do these passages hold forth, but the love of Christ? but to enlarge a little▪
1. Christ gives not sinners over, though they have given him no answer at all, though they lye in the bed of ignorance, and mind not the dignity of his Person, nor the heavenlinesse of his voice, nor the excellency of his salvati∣on; and though he call louder and louder, and knock harder and harder, Rom. 13.11. It is high time to awake out of sleep, the night is far spent, the day is at hand, yet Christ waits still to be gracious. 2. Christ hath continued knocking, and calling, though sinners have made light of his invitations: though the soul be lazy, and hath put off his Coat, and cannot put it on: and hath washed his féet, and is loath to de∣file them, yet for all this Christ puts his hand by the hole of the Door. 3. Christ hath not given over knocking, though sinners have opened their mouths a∣gainst him, & reviled him, yet he stands thrust∣ing at the posts of sinners hearts, & he waits and labours much to reconcile the soul to God, he sends his Ministers, who entreat, and exhort, though all to no purpose. But to give you the Reasons why Christ is thus pleased to wait, to be gracious to such graceless souls. Reas. 1. Christ continues knocking at the
sinners heart, that he might glorifie his frée Grace, and rich Love, in converting some poor soul to himself, that the soul might be thereby brought to sée the tender care of Christ, and his vehement desire to bestow himself upon him, that he might at length sée the frée bounty of Christ, in his long calling: Open to me, open to me: that it might sée Salva∣tion to be had no where else; that the heart at length sées it must open to Christ, or else it must perish, that it might sée its lost conditi∣on without Christ, that it might sée Christs travellings and sufferings, torments and tor∣tures, and all to redéem and save him, who was lost for ever without him. Reas. 2. Christ continues knocking and in∣viting, that in the end he might gain the soul to esteem him as the onely and desireable ob∣ject in the world, that the sinner at length may confesse, it is better to let Christ in, then so keep Christ out: that the soul may see him whom he hath reviled, yea, crucified all his life; see him to be the swéetest Saviour, and the loveliest object in the world, and delight in him; and, as it were, be ravished with his Excellenctes.
Reas. 3. Christ knocks long at the door of sinners hearts, that thereby he might mag∣nifie the glory of his Iustice in their utter ruine and destruction: for now, Oh soul, wilt thou be left without excuse, thou stout Rebel, that stood'st it out against the Lord, that though he called again and again, thou wast resolved thou would'st not hear, though mercy were upon his knées before thée, and begged thée to give admission to the Lord of life; yet impenitent thou were, and impenitent thou would'st be: miserable thou wert, and mise∣rable thou wilt be: Therefore will be magni∣fie the glory of his Iustice upon thee, and make thée smart to purpose, because thou would'st not hear the voice of the Charmer, though he charmed never so wisely: now you have no longer any cloak for your sins: now take what falls, expect a reward according to your works: For the righteous Lord loveth righteousness, but the wicked his soul hateth; as it is in the 11. Psalm, 5, 6, 7. Verses. No marvel now if the Lord rain fire and brim∣stone, and an horrible tempest: for this shall be the portion of their Cup, who have despised the rich grace of God, and abused his Pati∣ence and long suffering towards them; Mal. 4.1. For the day is comming that shall burn as
an Oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall be as stubble, and the day com∣eth that shall burn them up, saith the Lord, and shall leave them neither root nor branch. But to procéed to Application, the main thing in∣tended: the Vses I shall make are these thrée. 1. Exhortation to Sinners. 2. Terror and affrightment. 3. Incouragement: and then close all with some directions Use 1. Of Exhortation, to exhort, and stir up, if it be possible, every secure sinner, to stand it out no longer, but to set out your hearts, that the King of glory may enter in. Oh sin∣ner, now Christ is standing, and calling to thy soul, If thou wilt hear and open, I will come in unto thee: now Christ is saying: I know thy works, I know well enough what thou hast béen, and what thou hast done: I know thou hast béen a Blasphemer, or a Drunkard, or a Whoremonger, or a Thief, or a Sabbath-breaker, and a Scorner: yet I stand at thy Door this day and knock, I will receive thée unto mercy, I will forgive thee all thy sins, I will accept, I will heal, I will save thy soul, if thou wilt open thy heart this day unto me, and let me in: Oh brethren, for Christ his sake refuse not Christ, do not reject nor neglect so
great salvation, so ample a salvation, so wait∣ing a salvation, lest you perish. 1. Consider the necessity you have of him▪ Give me Children, or else I dye, saith Rachel: Oh give me Christ, or else I perish for ever. Can you be saved without Christ? and if you may have Christ but for opening the Door: Then while it is called to day, hear and open to him: if the door of Grace should be shut, be∣cause the door of thy heart is shut, thou would∣est be shut up with a vengeance for ever. 2. Consider what answer thou wilt be able to make at the great day, if thou wilt har∣den thy heart and not open, why, what wilt thou? why, what canst thou plead for thy self at the day of Iudgement? Wilt thou say, the Gospel never offered thée Christ? Why, thou hast heard this day, If any man will hear and open, I will come in and sup with him: Wilt thou say, I would have opened my heart had it not béen for the love of sin, or of ease, or of Liberty, or Honour, or Friends, or Companions: Oh how will Men and An∣gels hiss at thée: this is the Person who for Lusts sake forsook his mercies, who for a little vanity rejected his own Salvation:
Oh how wilt thou curse thy self, that for no∣thing, nay, for that which is worse then no∣thing, thou hast put off Christ and his Salva∣tion: therefore, men, brethren, and Fathers, hearken unto me; as Moses said to the Israe∣lites, so this day propound I unto you, Bles∣sing and cursing, life and death, Salvation if you will open to Christ, and damnation if you refuse Christ: Oh, for the Lords sake, chuse not cursing, but blessing; chuse not death but life: chuse not Hell but Heaven: chuse not Sin but Christ: though you have formerly slighted him, if yet you will regard; though you have formerly contemned him, yet if you will prise him, though you have formerly re∣sisted, if yet you will yield, if yet you will consent, if yet you will become willing to o∣pen unto Christ, Christ will be yours, Mercy will be yours, and Salvation will be yours: and what would you have more? What, will not all this do? will not mercy allure you? will not love constrain you? then give me leave to reprove you, and affright you, if it be possible, out of those depthe of Satan into which you are faln: however, I am resolved whether you will or no, and the Lord fasten it upon your souls.
Use 2. Of terrour to you who have no communion with Christ, that have refused to let in the king of Glory: Oh seriously lay to heart your unspeakable misery for ever. And here I know not how to begin: if non-com∣munion with the Church of God, be so direful a curse, that makes Cain cry out: Thou hast driven me out this day from the face of the earth, and from thy face shall I be hid, I shall be a fugit ve and a vagabond on the earth, and every one that finds me will slay me, Gen. 4.14. Oh then what is non-communion with Iesus Christ? Luther did professe that he would not be in Heaven if God were not there, but he would rather chuse to dwell in Hell if God were there. Oh soul, where wilt thou abide after death? let me beg thée to ask thy soul these Questions following. 1. In the bowels of love and mercy, let me beg thée to ask thy soul this Question: How long will this life, and the comforts of it last? thy soul is immortal and must never dye, but it must have being somewhere to all eternity: this worlds happinesse, is it everlasting? no surely, thy Money, and thy Corn, and thy Land, will do thée no good in the great day: Oh what hast thou done for hereafter? what
hast thou laid up for the world to come? is the door of thy heart open to Christ? Alas, is thy poor soul unmarried all this while? Q. 2. What will become of thée, when this life and the comforts thereof are gone? Oh thou hard-hearted sinner, this broad way which thou walkest in, will never lead thée to the promised Land, thy gold and silver key, will never open heavens gate for thée, thy care for this worlds good, will not plead for thee before the Iudge: all thy careful friends and acquaintance with whom thou hast spent so many jolly hours, their good word will stand thée in no stead: then thou wilt be ready to cry: Oh where is the Christ that I have despised? O where is the Iesus that I have re∣sisted; will he plead for me? No surely, but go to the Gods whom thou hast chosen: Oh, what will become of me? must I not dye? Oh whither will death carry me? into which of the Regions of the world will my death land me? either of light or darkness? to which of these two Regions am I now travelling? certainly the way of pleasure or worldly pro∣fit, the broad way of the world, it is not the way to transport me to heaven, and everlast∣ing happiness: say, Oh sinner to thy soul,
what, must I be taken from all my glory and greatnesse: from all my delights and dalli∣ances, and be thrown like Lucifer, son of the Morning, from all my brightness, into black∣ness of darkness for ever: when death hath closed my eyes, must I awake in everlasting flames? I sinner, thou shalt without remedy, unless thou open to the Lord Iesus Christ. Q. 3. Ask thy self on which hand thou art like to stand in the day of Iudgement: on the Right hand, or on the left, among the Sheep, or among the Goats: if thou wilt not hear and open now: if thou wilt not open thy heart now; be assured the Devil will open Hells mouth for thée: what will be the end of those joys, which now so make glad thy heart? you who are in the broad way to destruction, and utter separation from Gods presence for ever: thy pleasures here we may judge of: Oh, but who can tell the thousandth part of those fiery torments, to which thou art liable in the other world: whilst thou livest here thou art a cursed sinner; and when thou dyest thou shalt be a Damned Creature: whilst thou livest, thou art fed like a Beast, by common Providence, and art a meer stranger to saving Promises: if
thou lookest upwarde, God is frowning, and his wrath is revealed from Heaven against thee, Rom. 1.18. The Heavens and their Hosts are ready every moment to discharge Gods curses, like Thunder-bolts against thee: if thou lookest downwards, thou maist see Hell gaping and opening its mouth to swallow thee up quick, many dangers attend thee every day, many miseries every moment, Legions of Devils stand about thee, watch∣ing for thee, and waiting only for leave from God, to drag thy soul into the Lake of Fire: Ah, when thou dyest man, what must thou then do? when that Captain death strikes, whole Armies of Wolves will fall upon thée: look to it, and remember thou wast once war∣ned, for if thou dyest naturally, before thou livest spiritually, thou dyest eternally; Saint Augustine's Prayer was, O Lord, hack Me, hew Me, burn Me here, but spare Me hereafter: as long as thou refusest to hear Christs voice, thou hast a Hell upon earth: it is not the mul∣titude of thy Companions that go thither, shall any whit lesson thy torments, but ra∣ther encrease them; thy life, that hath been full of worldly joy, shall end in deadly woe. All you into whose hands this little Book shall come, Oh let me beg you to consider in
those bowels of love you have to your own souls, how your hearts can endure to think of being shut out of Heaven, out of blessednesse for ever: Ask your hearts these questions: Can I burn? can I endure the vengeance of eternal Fire? Will boiled Oyl, burning Brimstone, scalding Lead, a glowing Oven, a scorching Furnace, be an onlie Lodging for me? Oh why, oh my soul, wilt not thou now be perswaded to repent? is there too much pain in that? thou art ready to say, thou canst not bear a Crosse, or an affliction, a Scoff or a Reproach: talk to thee of Crucifying the flesh, of parting with thy Lust, with thy worldly Companions, of entring in at the Straight gate; O these are hard sayings, who can bear them? but how wilt thou do to dwell with devouring fire? how wilt thou dwell with everlasting burnings? whatso∣ever thou thinkest now, think what Hell will be, when the day comes thou must descend in∣to it; thou canst now drink or laugh away the fear of it, but what will it be to thée when thou féelest thy self wrapped up in the flames of it, and not a drop of water left to cool thy tongue; think on hell, oh Soul, and then think on Christ, and consider if a Redeemer from such misery be not worth the accepting: think
on Hell, and then think on Sin, and Carnal Pleasures and Delights: and consider how they will relish with thée, when thus salted with everlasting fire: are these the price for which thou sellest thy soul to Hell: Oh bid these lusts and pleasures be gone: bid your Companions in sin be gone, and though you loved them well, yet tell them you must not burn for them, that you will not damn your souls to please your flesh. Having thus as briefly as may be, laid down the use of terrour, which I hope will a∣waken some poor soul out of the depth of se∣curity: I proceed to the last use of incourage∣ment: to incourage poor Sinners to ven∣ture to lay hold on him, before it be too late. Use 3. Oh poor soul, hast thou kept Christ out a long time, and art thou not yet resolved to open thy heart to him? what shall I say to thee? let me say this, Christ waits still for thee: Christ is willing still to receive thee: then why wilt thou undo thy self by neglect∣ing so great salvation? let the consideration of the Message Christ brings you, of the er∣rand he comes on, it is not a dismal word he
brings? is it not a dreadful errand if Christ had come to destroy thy soul? could he have had less welcome then you give him? Oh for your souls sake receive him, enter∣tain him, for there is great comliness in him: O ye fools, when will ye be wise? come unto Christ, and he will have mercy on you, he will heal all your back-slidings, and love you fréely. But some poor soul will be ready to say, I have a desire to come to Christ, but I am afraid Christ will never receive such a wretched sinner as I, who hath stood it out so long against him. For answer to this, give me leave to give you some few Directions. 1. Ah poor soul, art thou willing to come to Christ? then will Christ in no wise cast thee out: if thou comest to him poor, miserable, blind and naked; Oh sinner come not to him in thy own strength, but come thus, and say: O Lord, here is a poor soul, not worth a far∣thing: Oh Lord make me rich in Faith; Oh Lord here is a miserable soul, Lord shew mer∣cy to me: Here is a poor blind soul, Oh Lord enlighten me from above: here is a poor nak∣ed Wretch: O Lord cloath me with thy Sons Righteousness: Oh Lord help me, Oh Lord save me, lest I perish, for I cannot help my self.
Direct. 2. Come to Christ by believing in him; Ah when thy poor soul is sinking head∣long to Hell, and thou seest no way to escape the fearful wrath of God hanging over thy head, catch thou then at such a time, fast hold on Christ: O then apprehend and apply all his benefits to thy poor soul: come this way and grasp him in the arms of thy faith, and say: O Lord I believe on thee, help thou my unbelief: and the answer which the Lord will give thee, will be this: Be it according as thou wilt. Let Christ be in your hand, and the promise in your eye, and no doubt, though thou hast been a Rebel, and Traitor, yet Iesus Christ having received gifts for the Rebellious, will shew mercy to thee, and re∣ceive thee. Direct. 3. Come to Iesus Christ by repent∣ing, and forsaking all thy sins, thou canst ne∣ver come to the Wedding Supper without the Wedding Garment; the old man must be done away, before all things can be made new, Jer 4.14. Oh Jerusalem, wash thy heart from wickedness, that thou maist be saved, Ezek. 18.31. Make you a new heart, for why will you dye? Act. 17. Saith St. Paul
to the Iaylor, Repent and be Baptized, & thou shalt be saved, and thy house. Christ will ne∣ver enter into an unclean heart: Oh get thy heart washed by the tears of true and hearty repentance, and then Christ will come in and dwell with thee. By this time I hope you see your absolute necessity of closing with Christ, and of open∣ing the door to him; and having given you some directions suffer me now in the conclu∣sion, to perswade you by all the bowels of love and mercy, which Christ doth exercise to∣wards you: if Christ had come to destroy your souls, he could not have had less welcome: will not you believe Christ? Will you neither believe his Messengers? If the Ministers of the Gospel had béen Messengers sent up from the bottomless pit to deceive Nations, to de∣stroy souls, to drag them down to everlasting darkness, there could hardly have been a greater hate and out-cry against them: Oh, hath Iesus Christ sweat, & groaned, & travel∣led, and laboured in pain, & all to bring forth a Lye: Did he dye to purge, and cleanse, and wash his people, and when all comes to all, it is but a cheat? what do you mean sinners by your wilful neglect? sée what's the reason of this abuse of Gods grace, and mercy, and
patience, comes it not from sin? Oh 'tis sin hath made men Devils Devils against God, Devils one against another, there is not one sinner, but if God should pull up the sluces, and let his wickedness have its full course, he would do his utmost to damn all the world: Oh friends, let me beg you to consider hat sin hath done: go to Mount Calvary, and see what it hath done there: what was it that slew the Lord of Glory, that put Christ to death? was it not those sins which were laid upon him? These were his betrayers, his Murderers: these were the thorns, the nails, the spear that wounded him: let the sweat, the cries, the groans, the blood, the soul that was pressed and poured out by sin, let these speak. Turn aside from Mount Calvary, and go down to the Valley of Hinnom, lay your ear to the mouth of Tophet, and hear∣ken: Oh poor soul, what work sin hath done there: What is it that hath filled Hell so full already? What sent down Cain, Judas, and Ananias and Saphira, with those millions of damned souls that are already tormented in those flames: stand and admire, Oh that thou art not there to bear them company: 'tis meerly the mercy of God, that spareth thee: Oh therefore be not high-minded but
fear: Did God damn so many souls for no∣thing or for a trifle, inflict so great torments for so small offence: what was it that cast them thither? was it their righteousness, or rather was it not their iniquities? If you step down to those Chambrs of death, and ask those wretched creatures; Friends, how came you in hither? what would they answer? Oh it is our sins brought us into this place of torment: O saies one, 'twas my covetousness brought me hither, Oh saith another 'twas my lying brought me hither: O saith a third, 'twas my Pride, and Wantonness, and Sloathfulness: Oh sin, sin, sin: this is that for which we burn, we roar, we rave, we dye, we dye eternally: Oh therefore sinners, despise the riches of his grace no longer, lest his wrath break forth, and he tear you in pieces, and there be none to help: but let me beg you to open the door of your hearts, that the King of glory may enter in: take the Yoke of Christ upon you, for that is easie, and his Burden, for that is light: Wash your heart from your iniquities, that you may be saved: Oh how long shal vain thoughts lodge with∣in you? And my prayer to God for you shall be, That the God of peace would sanctifie you wholly: And I pray God, That your whole
Spirits, Soul and Body, may be preserved blameless, unto the coming of our Lord Je∣sus Christ. Now the God of Peace make you perfect in every good work, to do his will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight: that after you have run with joy, the Race that is set before you, you may possess a Kingdom, and a Crown, which is incor∣ruptible, which fadeth not away, reserved in Heaven for you. T. P. FINIS.
Courteous Reader, These Books following are sold by Tho. Passinger, at the three Bibles on London-Bridge. THe Wise Merchant: Or, The Peerless Pearl▪ By T. Calvert, Minister of Gods Word in the City of York. The Christians Combate: or, His true Spiri∣tual Warfare. By C. Love, late Minister of Gods Word in the City of London. The Book of Graces, with Prayers for Mor∣ning and Evening: All but three pence a piece. The Sinners Warning-piece: Or, Heavens Messenger. By Tho. Robins B of D. Mans Chief guide to Salvation. By T. R. B. of D. The Scholars Winter Garment: Or, The Garment of Righteousness. By T. R. Batche∣lor of Divinity. A wonder of wonders: Or, Gods People the VVorlds wonder. By R. Hough.
Englands Golden Legacy: Or, A brief de∣scription of the Mercies of God bestowed up∣on England. By L. P. Gods Message from Heaven to Sinners on Earth. By T. P. B. of D L. The School of Learning: Being Prayers for Morning and Evening for every day in the week, with Graces before and after Meat, and a short Catechism for Children. The Vertuous wife is the glory of her Hus∣band; Being a new Book, shewing the rare qualities of the truly vertuous woman. Christ upon the Cross suffering for sinners, By S. S. Now or Never: work out your Salvation with fear and trembling, &c. Gods call to unconverted sinners. The School of Patience. These twelve last are but two-pence a piece, and very seasonable for these sinful times in which we live. FINIS.
