P760 12538707 62913
THE CHRISTIAN SACRIFICE. A TREATISE Shewing the Necessity, End, and Manner of Receiving the Holy COMMƲNION: TOGETHER With suitable Prayers and Meditations for every Month in the Year; and the Principal Festivals in Memory of our Blessed SAVIOUR. In Four PARTS. Ecclus. 14.20, 21. Blessed is the Man that doth Meditate good things in wisdom, and that reasoneth of holy things by his understanding. He that considereth her ways in his heart, shall also have understanding in her secrets. LONDON, Printed by R. N. for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty, in St. Pauls Church-yard, 1671.
MVNIFICENTIA REGIA. 1715. GEORGIVS D.G. MAG. BR FR ET HIB. REX F.D. J. Pine sculp
TO THE READER. THE Reasons that moved me to write this Book, to∣gether with its design, I have de∣clared in the beginning of it: and given Directions also, in their proper places, how to use it. I have little therefore here to advise the Reader of, but that I am much indebted for what I have writ, in the Second Part, about the Nature and End of this holy Sacrament, to a Treatise called
MENSA MYSTICA: un∣to which I refer those that desire a larger discourse on that subject. It is possible that I may not only have followed the sense, but used also some of the expressions, which you find there. But if I have, it is more than I know: for I have not read it of many years; nor had either that or any other Book on this Argument by me, when I composed these Meditati∣ons. And to say the truth, since I comprehended, as I thought, what belonged to this matter; I was not willing to look into any: meerly lest they should hinder the free conceptions of my own mind; and their very words should cleave
too much to my Imagination. I hope the Reader will think fit to bring the like free and un∣prejudiced mind to the perusal of what I have writ; especially an heart seriously desirous to have ho∣ly Devotion wrought in it to our Creator and Redeemer: and then neither of our pains, I presume, will prove unprofitable. But I do not mean by Devotion, only some transient thoughts and passi∣ons arising at certain seasons; when we more solemnly address our selves to God our Saviour: But a setled love to him, disposing us to present him alway with an heart humble, pure, just and charita∣ble;
which is the oblation that all our other Sacrifices are to prepare for him, and the greatest honour that we are capable to do him. For this expresses the high esteem we have of him; that above all things we study to be like him, and conform our selves, whatsoever it cost us, to his holy Nature and will. This indeed glorifies him before men; and all the praises we can bestow upon him without this, are but words: which we revoke and unsay again when we cross his Commands. And for this end Christ insti∣tuted this Commemoration of the Sacrifice, which he made of him∣self
to God; that we might be mov∣ed thereby to offer up our selves freely and chearfully, as he did, to do and suffer what our heaven∣ly Father pleases. For it is rank hypocrisie to commend and praise his obedience to the death, whilst we will not imitate it: but follow our own humours, rather than the will of God. And that is the scope of this Treatise, to excite those that read it to worship the Lord with holy Worship, that is, saith one of the Ancients, by purged thoughts and reason∣ings, right and true opinions; composed passions and quiet affections; and by likeness to God in vertue, to the utmost
of our power. They are the words of EusebiusL. 3. Praepar. Evang. cap. 13.: to which you may add these of Lactantius, There are two things that ought to be offered to God; a Gift and a Sacrifice: the Gift for ever, the Sacrifice for a time; and both the one and the other is incorporeal. The Gift is integrity of mind; the Sacrifice is praise and hymns. Therefore the most excellent manner of worshipping God, is praise directed to him, out of the mouth of a just manL. 6. In∣stit. Div. cap. 25.. The Eucharist consists of both, as you will find in this Book. The help of which if the Reader will be pleased to use, till he hath made
himself such a thankful oblation to God; he will not want a reason why I call it, The Christian Sa∣crifice: nor fail to grow in wis∣dom and spiritual understanding. For, as the Son of Syrach saith, The love of the Lord passeth all things for illumination:Ecclus. 25.11. he that holdeth it, whereto shall he be likened? The candor also of such men, I know, is incompa∣rable: which will make them cha∣ritably pass by the defects, that they may espy in a work well intended. And if there be any that shall dislike the design it self, or slight my performance; I shall not con∣cern my self in their censures: but rest in this, as well as other
cases, in the judgment of the same wise man; which they may do well to consider: Blessed is the man whose conscience hath not condem∣ned him;Ecclus. 14.2. and, who is not fal∣len from his hope in the Lord. 1.26.For it is an easy thing unto the Lord in the day of death, to reward a man according to his wayes.
THE CONTENTS THe First part treats briefly of the ob∣ligations we have to Communicate. Page. 1. The Second shews the Ends and purposes of this Holy Action; and contains Meditations or Addresses to God suitable to each. p. 15. You may find the first Me∣ditation. p. 19. The Second. p. 24. The Third. p. 34. The Fourth. p. 49. The Fifth. p. 56. The Sixth. p. 69. The Seventh. p. 81. The Last. p. 92. Directions for the use of them. p. 95. A more compendious form of Devotion after re∣ceiving the Bread. p. 96. After the Cup. p. 99. The Third part shews how to dispose our selves to receive with profit and pleasure. p. 105. Several Meditations af∣ter the Consecration of the bread and wine, and whilst the rest of the company is receiv∣ing, from p. 113, to p. 134.
A compendium of them. p. 135. Directions how to use them. p. 136. An Introduction to the last part of this Discourse. p. 141. Which contains Medita∣tions and Prayers be∣fore and after the Com∣munion For January. p. 153. For February. p. 175. For March. p. 199. For April. p. 219. For May. p. 239. For June. p. 259. For July. p. 279. For August. p. 299. For September. p. 319. For October. p. 341. For November. p. 361. For December. p. 381. For Christmas-day. p. 399. For New years-day. p. 423. For Easter-day. p. 437. For Ascension-day. p. 463. For Whitsunday. p. 485. Imprimatur, Sam. Parker Rmo. in Christo Pa∣tri ac Domino, Dno. Gilberto Archiep. Cantuar. à sac. Dom. Ex Aedib. Lambeth. Mart. 3. 1670/1
WHEN I consider whence it is, that they who otherwise frequent the Christian assemblies, are generally so negligent in Communicating at the Table of the Lord; the Reasons seem to me to arise from one or other of these four Heads, It is either thought to be no necessary part of a Christians Duty; at least, not so necessary as others are: or else the Meaning, Use, and Benefit of it is not understood: or men are loth to be at the pains of disposing themselves to be worthy Communi∣cants: or, lastly, having sometimes Commu∣nicated they found no good by it, and so left it of. It is the design therefore of this small Trea∣tise, which a desire to quicken and promote Christian Piety hath brought forth, to shew as briefly and plainly as I can devise,
First, that all those who are called by the name of our Lord, have a strong tye upon them to address themselves to his Holy Table; and Secondly, that the ends and purposes for which it is prepared are such, as both invite and ingage them to come thither: Thirdly, to direct the Readers to an easy and familiar way of disposing themselves to do this duty with Profit and Pleasure: and Lastly, to furnish them with some Medita∣tions and Devotions sutable to the Action; for want of which, I conceive, many reap so little good from it. These are the Four parts of the insuing Discourse.
PART I. Of the Obligations we have to Communicate. For the First of these, to make you sensible of the necessity and weight of this Duty, there are these Six things to be considered. THAT we have an express Com∣mand  for it, from our Lord and Master; to whose service we were solemnly devoted, when we were Bap∣tized. And lest there should be any room for shifting and excuses, this Command is so ordered that it hath respect both to the Officers and Ministers in his Church, and also to the People under their Care: to the former, that they might prepare this Holy Table; to the other, that they might come to pertake of it. First, he requires his Apostles, Luke 22.19. to do this in re∣membrance of him. Which words, it is plain refer to what our Saviour then did, who took Bread and gave thanks and brake it and
gave it unto them saying, this is my body which is given for you: thi do in remem∣brance of me, And therefore it is as much as if he had said, Do you take bread, give thanks, break it, and give it to all my fami∣ly hereafter. Now if they were bound to give it, then all Christians no doubt must be bound (though there had been nothing more said) to receive, and eat it. But the more to inforce the Duty, they are requird so to do, according as S. Paul hath declared the mind and intention of our Lord in this bu∣siness (and he is the only person beside S. Luke who makes mention of these words Do this in remembrance of me; though two other Evangelists mention the Institution of this Sacrament.) He tells us, 1 Cor. 11.24. that when our Lord had given thanks, he brake the Bread and said, take, eat, this is my body which is broken for you, Do this in remembrance of me. Here these words DO THIS immediately re∣fer, to take, eat; which are not in S. Luke. And therefore DO THIS in his Gospel, immediately refers, as I said, to taking bread, giving thanks, breaking it, and giv∣ing it to them. In that, the Apostles and their Successors were more peculiarly con∣cerned; and none can Do this, (i. e. take
bread, give thanks, break it, and give it) but they. But in the other, taking, eat∣ing, and drinking; all Christians are con∣cerned, and are bound to do this as long as the world lasts. Which appears sufficient∣ly from the whole discourse of S. Paul to the Corinthians, who were, as he tells them v. 26. to shew forth the Lords death, as of∣ten as they did eat that bread, and drink of that Cup, which the Ministers of our Lord gave to them. As they were not to neglect their duty, in making ready this holy food, inviting the Lords people to pertake of it, offering it and giving it to them: so it behoved them who were called to be careful not to neglect theirs; but to come, and eat and drink, at the Table of the Lord: that by the whole action, per∣formed by both, the Lords death might be declared and solemnly commemorated, with Thanksgiving and Praise. And to make this Command appear more weighty, let me cast in two or three considerations more, before I proceed any further. 1. That our Lord not only gave it to the Twelve Apostles; but to S. Paul also, after he was added to the number. From which we may clearly gather his intention of having this duty every where perform∣ed;
not only by the Jews, but all others. For when he appeared to this person and revealed his whole mind to him, that he might be an Apostle and preach to the Hea∣then world; he left not out this precept, but gave him particular instructions about it. For I have received of the Lord; that which also I delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus, the night in which he was betrayed, took bread, &c. v. 23. 1 Cor. 11. He had not this from the Apostles, nor was taught it by man, but Christ himself delivered it to him, as he had done to the rest of his A∣postles: that he might teach men to do this; if they had any regard to the express Com∣mand of their dearest Lord. And it is ve∣ry hard, if they have not a great reverence to it, considering 2. That it is the very last Command∣ment which he gave before his Death. When he was parting with his Disciples, and taking his farewel of them (till he should see them again after his resur∣rection) he left this charge with them, that they should do, as they had seen him do, just before he went away. Read the verses going before those now mentioned out of S. Luke (ch. 22. v. 16, 17, 18, &c.) and you will find the sense of our Saviours whole dis∣course to be this.
This is the last Supper we shall eat to∣gether in this world: I shall keep no more Feasts with you, till we meet in Heaven. But I would have you meet often and Feast together, upon my bro∣ken Body, and my Blood shed for you: according to the pattern which now I set before you. As you see me, take bread, give thanks, break it and give it to you, so do ye. This is my Will and Testa∣ment: if you have any respect to the words of a dying Master and Saviour; if you love me, and bear me in mind when I am gone from you; Do not for∣get to do this in remembrance of me. And what he said to them, we are to take as said to us, for 3. S. Paul saith, this is to be done till his coming again, 1 Cor. 11.26. It is not a Temporary Command like those given to Moses, but layes a perpetual obligation upon us: till Christ, who appeared to put away sin by this Sacrifice of himself (which we commemorate) shall appear the second time, without sin, unto Salvation. From whence it necessarily follows, that not only the Apostles, but all the Ministers of Christ to the end of the world have power
to do this: and that the people are bound to do their part, when the Minister hath done his. How they will excuse them∣selves from an open breach of our Saviours Commandment, who do not do this in re∣membrance of him, I cannot imagine. There is nothing that he enjoyns with more solemnity, and particular care, than this Action: and therefore the same necessity lyes upon us for the performance of it, that there doth for obedience to other of his Commands. If there be any differ∣ence, it is such as should rather make us exceeding careful about this duty, than otherwayes. For, It is a Command whereby our Love and Affection to Christ Jesus, our ever blessed Redeemer, is more than ordinarily tryed and proved: there being no other reason for performing it, but merely our respect to his will and pleasure. To most other duties in our Religion there is some∣thing in Nature to prompt us, or to shew us the reason of them. That we should be just, and merciful, and sober, and grateful, &c. we can derive from a Rea∣son within our selves. But this duty, to which I am exciting you, is one of the things for which there is no other ground,
but his Divine Commandment and ap∣pointment. We have no other reason why we should do this, but because he would have us. And therefore the doing of it is a piece of pure obedience, arising wholly out of our respect and affections to him and his injunctions. It being indeed designed for the keeping him in Memory; his appointment of it for that purpose, hath added a good Reason to it: Which doth mightily enforce our duty, if we have any love to the Memory of so dear a Saviour: and desire to perpetuate the sto∣ry of so rare a Love, and make it known to all succeeding generations. By this it is apparent, that the thing which makes most men negligent of this duty, is that which if they were under∣standing Believers, should make them most zealously affect it. Natural Conscience not reproving them for not doing this, as it doth for injustice, cheating, lying, and such like sins, they live securely in their neglect of it. And this is the very reason why the people known by the name of Quakers, have so little, or rather no regard to it. But if Christian Faith were planted and deeply rooted in mens hearts, they would upon this very account be the more forward to do it. Because it is a peculiar
mark of a Christian, a work proper to him alone: who is moved to this, not by Na∣ture and the common light of mankind, but purely by his Religion, and Devotion to his Saviour. For there is no piece of Divine Service in which he is interessed so much as this. It is more properly Chri∣stian worship than any other. All the world think their Religion binds them, to pray to God, to praise him, and give him thanks: but to acknowledge him, and render thanks to him by doing this, belongs only to Believers in Jesus. And that was one cause, I make no Question, that the first Disciples of Christ made this so great a part of their Devotion: which is the next consideration. Primitive use and practice upon this Com∣mand of our Saviours, doth very much ex∣plain his intentions, and tell us the obli∣gation of it. They who were taught by the Apostles of our Lord best understood the weight of this Commandment. And truly they understood it so, that they did as constantly do this, as they did publickly meet together to pray, or hear; and as oft as they did eat and drink together in token of their love and friendship. Both which they did very frequently. In the
Church of Hierusalem every day; as we read. Act. 2.46. They continued daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread at home, did eat their meat with gladness, and singleness of heart. That is, after they had daily performed their common Devotions with the Jews in the Temple Service, they went to their own houses to tender a more particular Service to our Saviour; by doing this in remembrance of him, and keeping feasts of charity for the poor and indigent. At those Meales it is manifest they forgot not this, 1 Cor. 11.20, 21, &c. Act. 20.7, 11. which they took to be an exact imitation of Christ, who after the Paschal Supper instituted this Holy Sacrament. And that it accompanied other parts of Divine Ser∣vice and Christian duties is as manifest from Act. 2.42. where you find they con∣tinued stedfastly or unweariedly in hearing the Apostolical instructions, in communica∣ting to each others necessities, in breaking of bread, and in Prayers. The word we ren∣der continued stedfastly. denotes both the frequency of the action, and that they were not tired with it. But the principal time for it, seems to have been on the Lords day: according to what you read in the place just now mentioned, (Act. 20.7.)
that the Disciples were assembled on the first day of the week to break bread: and the Syriack translation of those words, 1 Cor. 11.20. which runs thus; when you meet together, you do not eat and drink as be∣comes the day of our LordAs if they had found in their Copy  not . Which it is most likely was the set day on which, PlinyStat die. . 10. Epist. 97 saith, they were wont to assemble before it was light, to sing a Song of praise together to Christ, as God: and to bind themslv by a Sacrament, not to any wickedness ha,  they would not commit theft, nor robe, nor adulteries; nor break their words, nor deny any thing that was deposited with them in trust, when it was demanded. This done; their custome, he adds, was to depart, and to meet together again to partake of a common but innocent meale. Which assembly, it is plain from the Scripture, was in the evening, as the other was held be∣fore the morning light. So that it should seem, in some places they remembred our Lord by doing this, 'twice in a day, both morning and evening. In their assemblies before day (as Tertullians words areCap. 3. de Corona.) as well as in the time of meat: which we know was Supper time; when they held their Feasts of Charity. This is sufficient to shew what a great affection they had to this duty, and in what high account it was a∣mong
them: in that, no assembly of Chri∣stians, of whatsoever sort it was, could pass; wherein Christs death was not re∣membred with thanksgiving and praise. And indeed it is part of the food which  our Lord hath appointed for his family; and which his Stewards, as I have shewn you, are to provide for them and give unto them. It ought therefore to be thankfully received and constantly used, when we are invited to it: unless we mean to starve our selves; and provoke our Lord by refusing this, to withdraw his blessing from other means of our spiritual growth and nourish∣ment. The very names as you shall hear, whereby it is called, suppose it to be Food. And since for the Body it is not intended; it must be Christian Food: part of the plenti∣ful provision, which Christ hath left in his House for the Souls of his Faithful Ser∣vants; that they may be well maintain'd, and able to do their work. And truly, as long as we have any need to grow in the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, to increase in strength and power to master all tempta∣tions and do our several duties, to renew the sense of our obligations to God, and bind our selves faster to him, to heighten our Love and Gratitude, and to stir up delight
and joy in God our Saviour: so long will there be a necessity of Doing this; which serves for all these ends and purposes. And did we but seriously consider this one thing; that a principal end for which both this and the other Sacrament was in∣stituted is, that by these outward signs we might express our hearty consent to the new Covenant made by Christ in his Blood, and ingage our selves to stand to the terms and conditions of it; we should be extremely afraid to refuse to come to this holy Com∣munion: because that is the same with re∣fusing to be of his Religion. For he that made the New Covenant with us and is the Author of the Christian Religion, hath made these outward Rites and Solemnities to be Instruments of stipulation: whereby they who are willing to enter into that Covenant, and be of that Religion, should express their agreement and submission to it; and openly declare that they own Je∣sus to be the Lord, and will perform due obedience to every one of his Commands. Which when they have once done, they are to signifie their continuance and sted∣fastness in that Religion, to which by these means they have addicted themselves, by the repeated use of the same things. Other∣ways,
they live as if they repented of the contract which they have made, and re∣nounced our Blessed Saviour: who hath made the doing this to be a special testifica∣tion of our Devotion to him and his Ser∣vice. This is a thing to be sadly ponder'd; and might prevail much, were it laid to heart as it ought. To which if you add all the other pur∣poses  and ends for which it was ordained, they would still make it appear more ne∣cessary: if either the will of Christ, his spe∣cial Command, the practice of all Christians, our own wants, our respect to the Christian Religion, or the great Benefits we may re∣ceive by doing this in remembrance of him; can make us judg any thing so. And that is the second part of my Discourse; to which I now proceed.
PART II. Concerning the Ends and Purposes of this Holy Action. IF the Reader be convinced by what hath been writ, that he is as much bound to do this, as he is to be a Chri∣stian, I hope it will have a double effect upon him. First, that he will endeavour to quicken and stir up himself, to a serious and constant performance of this duty, by often pressing these considerations hard up∣on his heart. Secondly, that he will be very desirous to understand the full mean∣ing, end, and use of this holy Action; that so he may reap the profit which is therein de∣signed to him. He must stifle his Consci∣ence, or else it will move him to the For∣mer: and the more resolved he is in that, the more solicitous he will be about the other. Leaving him therefore to attend to the voice of his own awakned mind; I shall give him no further encitements to this duty, than will arise from what I am now going to say about the Nature of it: From whence he may draw a great many Arguments, to perswade him to be ready
prepared to this, as well as every other good Work. First then, the very words of the Insti∣tution of this Sacrament, and the whole discourse of S. Paul about it, prove that it is to be considered as a Divine Feast which our Lord hath appointed in commemoration of himself. That it is to be lookt upon as a Feast or repast provided for us, the Bread and Wine, the eating and drinking suffici∣ently declare. But it is more fully expressed in the names of Breaking bread, and of the Supper of the Lord, which are given to this Action. And as it is expresly ordained, to be in remembrance of our Blessed Lord, so (I think it not amiss to add) it was no unusual thing in the world to institute Feasts and entertainments to preserve the memory of famous Persons. It is record∣ed by Athenaeus,L. 5. Dei∣pnosoph. cap. 1. , &c. that there were such set meetings of several sects of Philoso∣phers in Athens to commemorate their Founder. Some on a certain day cele∣brated the memory of Diogenes, others of Antipater, others of Panaetius. And the great Philosopher Theophrastus left a sum of money at his death for such a meeting: not that they might there debauch them∣selves, as his words are, but manage their
discourses soberly and learnedly in that Compotation. So the Greeks called their Feasts, which took their denomination from the Wine, as among the Hebrews they took their name, from the BreadGen. 43.25. They heard they should eat bread, i. e. dine with Joseph: and v. 31. he said, set on Bread.. And so Constantine, I remember, calls the Chri∣stian Feasts in Memory of the Martyrs, Orat. ad Sanct. coe∣tum. cap. 12., where the Poor were comforted, and those that had lost their estates mercifully re∣lieved. At these most sober Tables they discoursed of their memorable sayings, their worthy actions, their patient suffer∣ings: and rehearsing the History of their life and death excited themselves to tread in their steps. For this, as Germanicus said excellently on his death-bed,Quae vo∣luerit Me∣minisse, quae ma∣davet ex∣equ, Tac. l. 2. Annal, is the principal part of Friendship; not to follow the dead with tears, but to remember his Will, and to execute his Commands. Which is the general design, I make no doubt, of this most holy Feast: where we meet to preserve an eternal Memory of our glori∣ous Redeemer, and to fix more deeply in our minds, all that he did and suffered for us; that thereby we may be disposed with the greater chearfulness to perform his Will, and obey his Precepts. For this end I findCa. ex Mosa∣ra. atur Exerc. 16. n. 38. that the Gothick Churches (which long continued in Spain) having comprehended the History of our Saviour
under these nine words [Incarnation, Na∣tivity, Circumcision, Appearance, Passion, Death, Resurrection, Glory, Kingdom,] were wont to divide the holy Bread in the Sacrament into just so many parts: on which they imposed those nine names. Whereby they have let us know what their conceptions were of this Action; and that they thought the Breaking, giving and receiving of that Bread, was to comme∣morate and more strongly imprint on their minds, the whole History of our Lord Jesus. Which we are not to reflect upon in an idle and ineffectual manner, but with such passions as we feel, when we think of the sweet conversation, the good offices, and the solemn departure of the dearest Friend that we ever had. Whom no good natur'd man can seriously call to mind, without Love, Delight, Gratitude, and a great forwardness to fulfil his Will and Testament, and to follow his admired ex∣ample. Now that we may be made able to do so, in respect to our Lord Christ, he is pleased to set before us this Holy Food; which the Christian Church hath always lookt upon, as a Spiritual nourishment, to strengthen and encrease in us all goodness. And for that purpose we are to address our
selves to the Table of our Lord, that by affectionate meditation on his condiscend∣ing kindness in becoming a Man for our sakes, and by laying to heart the whole sto∣ry of his wonderful Love from his Birth to his Grave; and fixing our eyes on the glori∣ous hopes he hath given us by rising again from the dead, and ascending to the Throne of God; we may feel a greater strength derived to us from him, enabling us to our several duties, and be enlivened to a great∣er freedom and chearfulness in denying all our own appetites and desires, and sub∣mitting them to the Will of Christ. Say therefore to your selves before you come thither, some such words as these; We are invited to a Feast: our most Gracious Lord is the Master of it: yea, He himself is the cheer that is provided for us. With what Humility, with what thankfulness ought we to accept of his invitation! Let us fit up our selves and make our souls ready, to appear before him in as holy and becoming a manner as we are able. Let us go with such joy, as if we were called to the richest entertainment in the world. Let our Meditation of him be sweet: and let us be glad in the LordPsal. 104.4. Isa. 63.7. Psa. 45.17.. Let us mention the
loving kindness of the Lord, according to all that the Lord hath bestowed on us. And let us make his name to be remembred in all generations. Let us resolve to feed on him in our hearts by Faith with Thanks∣giving, as his Minister exhorts us: to ruminate so long upon his love till we feel our hearts burn with love to him. Let us meditate on his holy life, his bitter passion, his bloody and shameful death, his glorious Resurrection and Ascention, his Power and Authority at Gods right hand, the great benefits we justly expect from thence, and the pretious promises he hath by these means sealed to us: till we feel all the powers of our souls quick∣ned and stirred up with a mighty heat and zeal to do the will of our ever blessed Redeemer: even a new life and spirit coming into us, and making us Strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Which vertue we shall certainly find flowing into us, and spreading it self through our hearts; if we believe, and enter into a serious consideration of the more parti∣cular intention and design of this holy Feast: whose general meaning I have briefly described. Having surveyed therefore in your
thoughts the whole Gospel of our Saviour Christ, I shall proceed to shew you, on what you are more principally to fasten them. You must not consider this holy Action only as a Feast in remembrance of him; but as a Feast upon a Sacrifice, where∣in you are more particularly, to comme∣morate his Death. Our blessed Lord, the High-Priest of our profession, was pleased himself to be offered upon the cross; where he gave him∣self for us an offering and a Sacrifice to God, for a sweet smelling savour. Ephes. 5.2. A kindness that, as it ought never to be for∣gotten so it, ought to be mentioned with the highest and devoutest praises. And therefore after the manner of those Feasts among the Jews, and Gentiles too) in which the people had some portion of the Sacrifice to entertain themselves and their friends withal; he makes us pertakers of the Sacrifice which he made to God, by admitting us in these representations of his body and blood, to feast upon it. Which Action is a grateful commemoration of his death to his everlasting praise and glory. Therein we set forth that Sacrifice of his for us; and signifie the thankful sense we have of his love, and our high esteem of
those benefits which his bloody Death hath purchased to us. This we learn, first, from those words of our Lord and his A∣postle S. Paul which teach us to do this in remembrance of him. Which phrase doth not signifie our calling him to mind, but our making mention of his dying love with due praises and acknowledgments: which is best expressed by the word Com∣memorate. We declare by doing this, that we indeed bear that remarkable testi∣mony of his kindness, in the remembrance of a thankful heart; and will endeavour to make it be remembred in the succeed∣ing generation. That this is the meaning appears more fully from a second expression of S. Paul's 1 Cor. 11.26. where he saith as often as they did this, they shewed forth the Lords death, till he came. We declare and publish by this Action his bloody Death. We proclaim, and abundantly utter the me∣mory of his great goodness: which he would have made known to all, by this solemn Feast, till his second appearing. This is the import of that word shew forth: only it carries this further notion in it (as appears by the use of it in the PsalmsPs. 106. . Ps. 145.4, 5, 6, 7..) That we hereby publish his mighty Acts with praise; extol and magnifie his marvellous love; and celebrate the Memory of those divine
benefits he hath obtained for us: with a desire that they may be acknowledged in the same manner to the Worlds end. And here now we may consider that this Commemoration and shewing forth looks two ways: towards men and towards God. First, We shew it forth and tell it to the world. We openly declare to all those that see or know what we do, that the Son of God dyed for the Children of men: that he freely gave his body to be broken and his blood to be shed for our redempti∣on. We proclaim Jesus to be the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the World: and shew how God hath com∣mended his love to us, in that, while we were sinners, he gave his only begotten Son for us that we might live through him. In this riches of his grace we make our boast; and glory a great deal more, than if we possessed the Treasures of the whole Earth. Secondly, And then we Commemorate also and shew forth his Death unto God the Father. We set before him this free-will Offering of Jesus as a sufficient Sacrifice for the sins of the whole world. We mag∣nifie his bounty in this invaluable blessing: and make mention of this which his Son
hath suffered for us, as a compleat satisfa∣ction for all our offences against him. We must approach therefore to the Ta∣ble of the Lord with affectionate acknow∣ledgments of his infinite goodness: extol∣ling and praising his merciful kindness in bestowing on us so great a gift: professing we will never forget the tender love of our Lord, who laid down his life for us: and beseeching the Father of Mercies to receive us into his grace and favour; for the sake of his dear Son, whose Death we shew unto him. We should resolve to ex∣press the sense of our hearts in some such words as these.Psal. 92.1, 2, 3. It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto thy name, O thou most high. To shew forth thy loving kindness in the morning, and thy faithfulness every night. For thou, Lord, hast made me glad through thy work: I will triumph in the works of thy hand.66.16.86.13. Come and hear, all ye people, I will declare what the Lord hath done for our Souls. For great is his mercy towards us: and he hath delivered our souls from the lowest hell. Glorious things are spoken of thee,John 1.14, 29. Colss. 1.15. Joh. .12. O Jesus, thou lover of Souls: The word made flesh; the Image of the invisible God; the light of the world; the Lamb of
God that takes away its sin; the first begot∣ten from the dead; the heir of all things;Rev. 1.5. the Prince of the Kings of the Earth;Heb. 1.3. Heb. 8.1.9.24.7 25. an high Priest who is set down on the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty in the Heavens: who appears in the presence of God, and lives for ever to make intercession for us.Psal. 89.6. Who in the Heaven can be compared to the Lord! who among the sons of the mighty can be like∣ned to the Lord? For thou Lord art highly exalted: thou art exalted far above all Gods.9.9. In this most powerful name, O Father Almighty, we humbly cast down our selves before the Throne of thy Glory. Give us leave to mention before thee the Death of him, who said, behold I come to do thy will, O God. Behold, O Lord, the bleeding wounds of thy well-belov∣ed; in whom, thou hast testified by a voice from Heaven that, thou art well pleased. Remember how his Body was broken for us, and his Blood poured out. In him we believe thou art perfectly sa∣tisfied: and therefore are bold to hope that thou art reconciled to us on that ac∣count. O hear his dying groans: re∣gard his Agony and Bloody sweat: by his Cross and Passion let our sins be blot∣ted out: and by his glorious Resurrecti∣on and Ascension let us feel every evil
affection and lust perfectly killed and cru∣cified. We have nothing to plead, if he have not done enough, and ful∣filled all thy will. But since he hath laid down his life in obedience to thee; O let us, by vertue of that voluntary Sacri∣fice which now we represent before thee, obtain thy mercy and grace. We can∣not be content to lose our share in so great a Love. And since thou hast bid us to Commemorate it; we hope we shall as certainly pertake of it, as we do of this Feast, to which thou hast invited us.Ps. 79.13.145.1, 2. So we thy people and sheep of thy pa∣sture will give thee thanks for ever. We will shew forth thy praise from generation to generation. We will extol thee, our God, O King; we will bless thy name for ever and ever. Every day will we bless thee, and will praise thy name for ever and ever. In such Meditations as these when we shew forth the inestimable value of Christs Sacrifice, we do, as it were, offer it unto God: or rather make before him a com∣memoration of his Offering. And in this sense the Ancient Christians did call this Sacrament, a Sacrifice: and every Chri∣stian they lookt upon as a Priest and a Sa∣crificer, when he came to the Table of the
Lord. Because Christ not only bad his Apostles do this in remembrance of him; but S. Paul requires every one of us to do the same, and to shew forth his Death till he come. There is none mentions this Sacri∣fice more frequently than S. Chrysostome: but to explain himself; after he had said, [we do not make another Sacrifice, as the high Priests of old, but always the very same] he adds; or rather we make a Com∣memoration of a Sacrifice, in Heb. 10. p. 523. edic. Savil.. And in the very same manner Eusebius writes in his first Book of his Evangelical Demonstration. Christians cannot think fit, saith he, to re∣turn back again to the first and weak Ele∣ments (he means the Mosaical Sacrifices) which were but Symbols and Images; not the Truth it self:, &c. cap. 10. p. 37. since they celebrate eve∣ry day the Commemoration of his Body and Blood; and are made worthy of a better Sa∣crifice and ministery, than the Ancients were. And a little after, speaking of Christs won∣derful oblation, and most pretious bloody Sacrifice to the Father, he adds, that he delivered also to us a Remembrance, instead of a Sacrifice, to offer up continually unto God p. 38.. By which words it is manifest he took the Remembrance or Commemora∣tion of Christs death, to be that Sacrifice which we make to God. And again he
saith in the very next page: to celebrate the remembrance or commemoration of that Sacrifice upon the Table, by the Symbols (or representations) both of his Body and saving Blood, we have received, according to the ordinances of the New Testament. Hither he applies those places out of the Psalms, offer to God Thanksgiving. Let the lifting up of our hands be as an evening Sacrifice. The Sacrifices of God are a contrite Spirit, &c. So that they thought of no other Sacrifice, in those days, but that of praise and Thanksgiving; together with the offer∣ing of our selves, our Souls and bodies to be a reasonable, holy and lively Sacrifice unto him: as it is admirably expressed in our Communion ServicePrayer after all have Com∣municated.. With which the Author now mentioned perfectly agrees, and delivers his mind almost in the same words. We Sacrifice, &c. Ib. pag. 40., saith he, a divine, venerable and most holy Sacrifice. We Sa∣crifice after a new manner, according to the New Testament, a pure Sacrifice, &c. we both Sacrifice, and offer Incense too. Celebrating the remembrance of that great Sacrifice, according to the Mysteries deli∣vered by him to us: and offering Thanks∣giving for our Salvation by godly Hymns and Prayers to God: consecrating our selves also wholly to him, and to
our high Priest, the word; devoting to him both our Souls and Bodies. It would be easy to add much more to the same pur∣pose: but this is sufficient to shew, what the Sacrifice is which we make when we do this, and that our Church now doth that, which the Ancient did. By feasting upon this Sacrifice, we not only commemorate that oblation of himself, with the Sacrifice of Praise and Thanks∣giving, but likewise offer up our selves to him to be intirely his. As will appear more fully in the next consideration: which is this By this Action we make a solemn Profession  of the Christian Religion, and declare our selves to be the Disciples and followers of Jesus, to whom we joyn our selves in fellowship. So much is the rational con∣sequence of what hath been said. For by eating of the Sacrifices offered at the Altar, both Jews and Gentiles professed them∣selves to be the Worshippers and Servants of that God, to whom the oblation was made. And secondly, it may be rationally drawn from that discourse of our Saviours with the Jews, in the Sixth of S. Johns Gospel. Where eating his flesh and drink∣ing his blood, v. 51, 53, 54, &c. signify no∣thing
else but believingSee v. 29 35.47. the word and keeping the Precepts which Christ published in our flesh, and sealed with his Blood. This is honestly acknowledged by a Learned Person in the Church of Rome: who gives the sense of those ver∣ses in these two lines. They are nourished with the flesh of Christ to eternal life, who keep the sayings of Christ incarnateCarne Christi nu∣triuntur in vitam aeternam qui Sermo∣nes Christi incarnati servant, Rigaltius in Cypr. Epist. 1.. Which he expresses more largely in another place. The words of eternal life which Peter ac∣knowledged our Saviour had, are the Commands, saith he, which he gave when he was in Flesh among men. For therefore he was made Flesh, that in the Flesh or Body of man, he might procure their Salvation, and form them to eternal life. Therefore the words which Christ spake in flesh, the Gospel of Christ, is the flesh of Christ. These words, this flesh, this meat Christ would have us eat, ruminate and digest, that being nourished thereby, we may profit to eternal lifeIdem in Epist. 55. Annot. a.. Thus S. Peter understood our Lord, when he answered at the end of that discourse to his Question [will ye go away?] To whom should we go? thou hast the words of eternal life, v. 68. And thus Christ explains himself, v. 63. where he saith his discourse was not to be understood so grosly as the Jews apprehended it; but in a more spiri∣tual
and divine manner. His meaning was to be conceived as if he had said, unless you really receive me, notwithstanding my be∣ing crucified, as God speaking to you in flesh; and so conform your selves to my Doctrine, you cannot be saved. And in∣deed this eating and drinking which now he call'd them unto, could be nothing else, but receiving him and his Doctrine; for the Sacrament of his Body and Blood was not yet instituted. But when it was; then, I make account, they who did eat of this Bread and drink of this Cup in Comme∣moration of Christ, were to look upon it as a devout Profession of that Faith in him and Obedience to him, without which we cannot inherit eternal life. We declare by this Action the intire assent of our minds to the Truth of all that he preached, when he was in our flesh: and the unfeigned con∣sent of our Wills to be ordered and go∣verned according to it. Hence, perhaps, it was that this Action came to be called the Sacrament, which was the ancient name for our whole ReligionAs may be seen in S. Cyprian Lactanius &c. in in∣numerable places., because here we make the most solemn Profession of the Christian Religion, as the Jews did of the Mosaical; when they did eat before God of the Sacrifices offered on his Altar. Thus much I am sure of (in the third place)
that the whole discourse of S. Paul is to this sense; when he calls the Cup of bles∣sing which we bless, the Communion of the Blood of Christ; and the Bread which we break, the Communion of the body of Christ. 1 Cor. 10.16. That is, an Holy Action whereby we declare our Society and fellowship with Christ; and that we are of his Religion, in opposition to all others. Which we shall easily discern to be the Apostles meaning, if we take but the pains to consider what it is that he goes about to prove in those eight verses [from v. 14. to 22.] It is nothing but this: That if they did Communicate with Christ in the Cup of Blessing and Breaking of Bread, then they must flee from all Idolatrous Servi∣ces and not pertake in them. The conse∣quence, saith he, is manifest to any under∣standing person, as I take you to be. For to Communicate with him in that manner, is as much as to acknowledg Jesus only to be the Lord; to honour and worship him; to profess that you belong to him; and to joyn your selves in fellowship with him. Which he proves, first, from the intention of the Feasts upon the Jewish Sacrifices; of which whosoever did eat, he thereby became of that Religion, and professed to worship that God at whose Altar (which
Malachi calls his Table. Mal. 1.7.) that meat was offered in honour of him. And secondly, from the Religious Feasts among the Gentiles; whose Sacrifices being offer∣ed to Daemons, whosoever did eat of them, thereby he made an acknowledgment of their Deity; and that he was one of their Servants and Worshippers. Which in∣stances carry in them this general reason; that the eating continually of any ones meat, signifies us to be of his Family; or his Friends and familiar acquaintance: and so this Religious eating at their Tables and of their meat, was a token and a declara∣tion of Friendship and Society with God or with Daemons: and by consequence this must be the meaning of our pertaking of the Table of the Lord. From which pre∣misses the Apostle concluds with the great∣est force of reason, that all those who made this profession of being Members of Christs Body, and belonging to the Christian So∣ciety or Corporation, (v. 17.) by per∣taking of Christs Table, and eating of his Meat; must have nothing to do with the Tables of Daemons. For this would be to jumble the most contrary and incon∣sistent things together: to worship God, and Baal too: to be the servants of Christ, and the servants of the Devil. Whereas,
in truth, by honouring them in eating of their Sacrifices, they did, in effect, re∣nounce Christ. And by Communicating with Christ, at his Table, they did re-renounce them. For he came to destroy the works of the devil, 1 Joh. 3.8. and Idolatry in the first place: wherein that worship and service was paid to the devil, which was due to God alone. You must address your selves then to the Table of the Lord, as the friends of Jesus Christ; on purpose to profess that you be∣lieve on him, and are of his Religion, and mean to cleave unto him and obey him; renouncing all other Masters for ever. Say in your hearts; O Blessed Jesus, I acknowledge thee to be the Lord; Thou art the only begotten of the Fa∣ther full of grace and truth.Joh. 1.14. 14.16. Thou only art the Way, the Truth, and the Life. I humbly adore thee; and here devote my self everlastingly to thee. I believe thy blessed Gospel: I own thy supreme Au∣thority: and submit my self to thy So∣veraign Commands. Truly I am thy ser∣vant, I am thy servant. I look for all blessings through thy hands alone: who hast all power in Heaven and in Earth. Let it be unto thy servant, according to
thy word. Yea deal with me, according as I unfeignedly acknowledg thee, and heartily joyn my self in fellowship with thee, to be thy Disciple and follower for ever. I give thee possession of my heart intirely. Do there what thou pleasest. Be the sole governor and disposer of all my thoughts, words, desires and actions.Psalm 119.128. I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right; and I hate every false way. And according to our Sincerity in this devoting of our selves to him, we shall find the powerful communication of his good spirit to us, to unite us closer to himself. When this outward action de∣clares the inward devotion of our hearts, to knit themselves to him, and to become one spirit with him; without all doubt he will make us feel that he dwells in us by the power of his Spirit, to enliven, help and strenghthen us in a Christian course of life. For this Communion is mutual; and the word properly signifies a Participation of something from him, by our joyning our selves to him. We dwell in Christ, and Christ in us: we are made one with Christ and Christ with us (as the words are in our Communion Service) and so may expect
all those graces and favours which he hath received from God, to impart to faithful souls: perticularly it is a pledge of his Divine presence with us, and that he will send his heavenly influences into our hearts. Being knit and joyned to him as Members of his Body, we may be assu∣red he will take care of us, as our Head. He ingages himself to guide, quicken, re∣fresh, powerfully move and assist us in all well doing. This we may humbly wait for by vertue of our Union with him. As the evil spirit wrought in the children of disobedience, who were joyned to devils, by eating of their meat: so will the Spi∣rit of grace work in those that obey our Lord; being joyned to him by pertaking of his holy Table. And for that end we may come to it, that being knit still faster to him, we may have a more abundant communication of his holy spirit to us. We may entreat him to be a constant Friend to us, to make his abode with us; so that we may evermore dwell in him and he in us. He will say, Amen, to it as well as we; if in the uprightness of our hearts, we perform this holy Action: the meaning of which I shall still further declare. It is easy to gather from what hath been
said, that by pertaking of this Feast; we make such a profession of Christianity and subjection to the Lord Jesus, as to engage our selves hereby in a mutual Covenant with him. So much I told you at the beginning; that Sacraments are outward Rites and So∣lemnities, to express our consent to the new Covenant: and whereby we signifie our setled purpose, and ingage our faith, to perform the duties of Christians; as ever we expect that Christ Jesus should be a Saviour to us. But this Sacrament of the Lords Supper is more particularly designed for that end: that by often doing this, we may, with repeated protestations of our fidelity, renew our Baptismal Vow and Cove∣nant wherein we stand ingaged: and in the most sacred manner addict and devote our selves again and again, to that Service which we promised, when we entred into Christs Religion. It is well known that eating and drinking together, was ever reputed a token of friendship and brotherly accord, between those persons who consent to such a meet∣ing. But this was more notorious when there was a Feast made on purpose to ex∣press this Friendship: For this amounted to a Covenant, and thereby they entred
into a league, to be at peace and Unity among themselves. Thus you read that King Abimilech and his Courtiers came to Isaac and said (Gen. 26.28, 29.) Let us make a Covenant with thee; that thou wilt do us no hurt, as we have not touched thee, and as we have done unto thee nothing but good, &c. And then it follows immediate∣ly (v. 30.) that he made them a Feast, and they did eat and drink. That is, he entred with them, according to their desire, into a league of love and friendship, by mak∣ing this solemn entertainment for them. But then, it is farther to be noted that, when this Feast was upon a Sacrifice, and they eat and drank of what had been offered to God; it was still a more sacred way of co∣venanting and making compacts one with another. So when Laban desired Jacob, in these words (Gen. 31.44.) come now, let us make a Covenant, I and thou; and let it be for a witness between me and thee: we are told that this was the manner of it, v. 54. Then Jacob offered Sacrifice upon the mount, and called his Brethren to eat bread; and they did eat bread, and tarried all night in the mount: that is, they remained together in one and the same place, as those that had now no emnity nor suspition of each other (though they had been at difference be∣fore)
after they had covenanted to be Friends, by eating all of the same Sacri∣fice. By this it is apparent, that it was then a common custom among the several Nations of the Earth, to make contracts and agreements together, by eating and drinking, especially upon a Sacrifice. Which continued, I might shew you, in after Ages among the Gentiles, as well as Jewes. But I shall only mention one me∣morable instance, which we find in Quin∣tius Curtius: who tells us, that when Alex∣ander was so surprised with the beauty of Roxane, that he presently determined to make her his wife: he commanded Bread to be brought, after his Country fashion. For setting Bread before them was the most sacred pledg of Conjugal love among the Ma∣cedonians; which being divided with a Sword, each party tasted ofHc erat apud Ma∣cedones sanctissimum countium pignus; quem divisum gladio, uterque libabat, Lib. 8. cap. 4.. All that need be added to this is, that there was an Oath frequently accompanied these holy Covenants; which could never be more solemnly made, than when they were in the presence of God, at these Feasts upon his Sacrifices. You have ex∣amples of it in the stories already mention'd.
Abimelech not only desired to make a Co∣venant with Isaac; but said let there now be an Oath betwixt us. And accordingly you read after they had feasted, they con∣firmed the Covenant thereby made, by swearing one to another, early the next morning, Gen. 26.31. This was a sign they intended to continue friends; and had not made that league in a fit of kind∣ness, when their hearts were warm with good chear, but seriously and deliberate∣ly before Almighty God. Just so you find it in the History of Jacob and Laban: only the Oath there went before the Sacri∣fice and the Feast. And the consequence of this discourse is this: that when the Jews therefore, did eat of the Sacrifices of Thanksgiving, which was Gods meat; being offered or set on his Altar or Table: they did express thereby that they were in Covenant with God. Their feasting with him in that manner, was a declara∣tion of peace and friendship with him: and they bound themselves to keep the whole Covenant made with their Fathers; which every time they came to his Altar, was renewed and confirmed. And this we are to conceive is the meaning likewise, of our eating and drinking of this Bread and of this Cup at the Table of our Lord.
Our pertaking of his Sacrifice, is an open declaration that we continue stedfast in the New Covenant, that he hath made with us, and we with him: which hereby we renew and ratify. It is an engaging of our faith again to him; that we will remain for ever in his love. A promise to keep friendship with him, by never swerving from that Obedience, which we have vowed to him. We pass our words to him; that whatsoever service we owe him, shall be punctually performed. That all the Articles of the holy Covenant, which we made with him when we were first receiv∣ed into his society, shall on our part be carefully and duly observed. As hereby he ingages himself (you shall see anon) to make us pertakers of all the blessings of that Covenant; so we engage to perform the duties of it. And accordingly as we acquit our selves, and honestly stand to the terms of our agreement with him, and make it good; so we must expect, and no otherways, to enjoy the benefits which he hath promised to the faithful. If we prove not false in this Covenant of God, but in the uprightness of our heart keep close to our duty; then, as sure as we take that Bread and that Cup into our hands, as certain as we tast them with our mouths,
and receive them into our bodies, will he give us his pardon, grace, and eternal life. And this we do not only Covenant with him to perform; but this Action looks like an Oath which we take, that we will be Christs faithful Souldiers and servants to our lives end. This is an ancient notion of the word Sacrament, which we now use to express this Action by. And thus in Pliny's time they understood the meaning of it: for he tells us, as you heard, that Christi∣ans bound themselves at their Assemblies, by a Sacrament (or oath) not to commit any wickedness. When we come there∣fore to the Table of the Lord, we swear fidelity to him, and vow that we will be stedfast in our Covenant. We take the Sacrament upon it, as we ordinarily speak, that we will be true to him, and manfully fight under his banners against the Devil the world and the flesh. And here I cannot but remember what JosephusL. 2. de bello Jud. cap. 7. . writes concern∣ing the Essens (a sect among the Jews) who would not admit any to their Commu∣nion nor eat with them, before they had taken certain Horrible Oaths, that they would worship God, and observe all the rules of Justice towards men. But can there be any more dreadful than this, whereby we keep our Communion with
Christ? Is it not a most terrible thing to swear fidelity to our Lord, by laying our hands, as it were, upon his Body and Blood; nay eating and drinking that which represents him to us? This lays the most powerful engagement on us, and binds us in the strongest resolutions to be constant, hearty and zealous in our Christian Pro∣fession of Faith and Obedience to him: without which we draw upon our selves the greatest mischiefs imaginable. For I must observe once more; that this made it such a perillous thing to eat and drink unworthily, and brought such judgments on the Corinthians (1 Cor. 11.29, 30.) because in all Covenants made in the pre∣sence of God and with appeals to him, there is necessarily understood, though it be not expressed, an imprecation of divine vengeance, if we do not keep them. There is nothing more easy to be observed in the Leagues among the Greeks, which were confirmed by Oath, than such words as these., &c. v. Seld. L. 2. de S∣nedr. cap. 11. n. 3. I wish perdition to my self and my house, if I transgress any of those things which I have agreed unto: as I hope for all good things if I keep them inviolable. And if they did not use such formal words; yet it was the sense of all Nations, that having Covenanted in Gods presence and made
him a witness of their action; his wrath was to be expected against the unfaithful: which they had burthened themselves withal. And therefore seeing here we do in such a sacred manner vow to God that we will be at peace with him and observe the Laws of our blessed Saviour; we must remem∣ber that we load our selves with Curses and expose our selves to the Almighty's displea∣sure, if we do not faithfully study to make good our word. A consideration that ought not to deter and affright us from this holy Communion, but only make us more serious in it, and diligently to frequent it: if we intend to be good Christians, and expect to enter into the blessed society of our Saviour in Heaven. It shews us the great necessity of obeying this Command of our Lord; because of the security we hereby give him, that all the rest of his Commands shall be better observed; if we carefully observe this. For who can live always in the midst of meditations of our Saviours Love, and not be sensibly moved to love him above all things? who can be ever thinking of his Obedience to the death, and yet himself be disobedient? who can indure to lose such blessings, as he saith the blood of Christ was the price of? How is it possible that we should continu∣ally
remember him, and yet quite forget our duty to him? with what face can a man plead his Sacrifice, and not himself be wholly offered to him? what an intolera∣ble hypocrisie is it, to be continually pro∣fessing our selves Christians and acknow∣ledging him to be our Lord; if we will not be governed by him, and live in sub∣jection to his Commands? Nay more than that, what desperate profaneness is it, to promise, Covenant and Vow to be his servants; and to make no Conscience how we behave our selves towards our Lord and Master? certainly, the serious perfor∣mance of this Action must needs produce other effects, and be of mighty force to make us thoroughly good. And therefore can be neglected by none that understand it; but those who are unwilling to be tyed to their duty: and are afraid to be ingaged to use their best diligence, to keep the Commands of Christ. And what such persons think of themselves I cannot tell. It is like they put away all sober thoughts of other matters, as they thrust by the thoughts of this. But it is certain they are in a most dangerous condition. They have broken their Baptismal vow and Covenant: and they have no mind to repent, amend their lives, and be bound to keep it better here∣after.
They do the works of their Father the Devil, and will not come and renounce them once more; because, they are of o∣pinion, that if they should, they shall re∣turn to them. Were their hearts right to∣wards God, they would be forward to come and dedicate themselves anew to him. And they would not out of fear of breaking these bonds too, refuse to renew their Covenant with him: but in hope to be assisted by the Holy Ghost, make a sincere protestation of their purposes of holy liv∣ing. And suppose they should be guilty of any failing afterward; it would only move them to make the more hast to sue out their pardon; and to bind themselves more strictly by renewed vows to their duty: that at last by the help of Gods Almighty grace, in the use of this and all other means, they might get the mastery over their sins, and perform an uniform obedience to Christs Commands. There is a Fable goes among the Roma∣nists concerning a Lord in Provence; how that he being extremely sick and earnestly desiring the blessed Sacrament, intreated the Priest, when he brought it to him, to lay it upon his Breast, because he durst not eat it for fear of vomiting it up. Imme∣diately, saith the Legend, his breast opened
and receiving into it self the Heavenly food, closed its mouth again. The moral of it, if we please, may be true in every one of us. Did we but come to the Holy Table with fervent desire and great devo∣tion of Spirit; did we apply our thoughts strongly to meditate on our Saviours won∣drous love, and lay our hearts, as I may say, to his, to feel how full of affection it was to us, in dying for us: we could not chuse but set our hearts (our Wills I mean) wide open to admit him for our Lord and Governor. Our hearts would leap for joy to entertain such a gracious Master: and they would not easily open again to any thing else, that would rob him of our love, and oppose it self to his Commands. We should hate that which tempted us to break our faith with him. The world would seem little in our eyes; and we should find all our inordinate affections to it languishing and dying; that we might live to him, who dyed for us. So S. Basil, I remember, describes the meaning and intention of this SacramentL 1. de Baptismo cap. ult.. What is the profit, saith he, of those words, Do this in remembrance of me? I'le tell you. That eating and drinking we may al∣ways remember him that dyed for us and rose
again, and so may be taught necessarily to keep before God and his Christ that Ordinance delivered by his Apostle in these words; for the love of Christ constraineth us; judging this, that if one dyed for all, then were all dead, and he dyed for all, that they who live should not henceforth live to themselves, but to him that dyed for them and rose again. He that eateth and drinketh to the indelible memory of Christ Jesus who dyed for us, and rose again, but doth not fulfil the reason of that memory of the Obedience of our Lord even unto death, according to the aforesaid instruction of the Apostle [the love of Christ constraineth us, &c.] hath no pro∣fit at all: according to the declaration of our Lord, who saith, that the flesh profiteth no∣thing. He adds a great deal more to the same purpose; and repeats it over again in fewer words in another place (if the Book cap. 3. Reg. 21. be his) The reason of eating the Bo∣dy and drinking the Blood of Christ, is for a Commemoration of his Obedience unto death, that they who live should not henceforth live to themselves, but to him that dyed and rose again. Let us always then have this in our mind, when we are making our selves ready for this holy feast, that we are going to con∣secrate
our selves again to the obedience of Christ unto the death. To renew our protestations of friendship with him, and confirm the Covenant that is between us. Utterly to disclaim all emnities and oppo∣sition to his will: and to profess our selves heartily his confederates that will never forsake him. In short, to promise and vow in the most sacred manner, that we will henceforth live unto him and not to our selves: and remain his servants in truth and fidelity for ever. Let us say to him some such words as these. Thou O Lord hast redeemed me by thy own most pre∣tious blood. I see the wounds thou hast received for my sake. I behold how thy holy flesh was rent and torn for my sins. O the Agonies, O the pains and sorrows which thou hast endured for my salvation! I will never willingly grieve thy heart any more. Far be it from me, to pierce thee again, by slighting thy Commands. I had rather die, than wound thee by my unkind unfaithful∣ness to thee. Rather had I be torn in pieces my self, than break thy Laws, and vio∣late thy Covenant wherein I am ingag'd. I forswear all confederacy with thy ene∣mies, and all opposition to thy will and pleasure. I vow most sincerely, that I
will endeavour to live in all good Con∣science towards God and towards all men. So help me God; as I mean to be true and faithful to thee, to my lives end. I have sworn,Psal. 119.106, 112, 113, &c. and I will perform it; that I will keep thy righteous judgments. I have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes al∣way, even unto the end. I hate vain thoughts: but thy law do I love. Depart from me, ye evil doers; for I will keep the Commandments of my God. Hold me up, and I shall be safe: and I will have respect unto thy statutes con∣tinually. But the Obedience of Christ to the death, which we here remember, puts me in mind to add another consideration (which we are to have in this Action) that belongs to this, which I have now handled. It is such a Covenant wherein we stand enga∣ged, that by doing this, we covenant even to die for him, rather than deny him. We promise to be obedient to him, as he was to his Heavenly Father; so that if he de∣mand our lives to be laid down to do ho∣nour to him, we cannot honestly refuse it. For as we offer the Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving, in this Commemoration of him: so we offer, I told you, and present our selves, our Souls and Bodies to God,
to be a lively, holy and acceptable Sacri∣fice unto him. Now the very life of the Beast which was offered in Sacrifice, was given to God; its Blood being shed at the Altar. And therefore the compleat mean∣ing of this phrase, and of this action, of offering our selves to be Sacrifices to God, is this: that we part with our selves so in∣tirely and are so absolutely devoted to him; that it shall not be in our power af∣terward to recal this gift: no, not though we die for it. As the beast that was offer∣ed to God was no longer the owners; and the Blood, which is the life (saith he him∣self) became appropriated wholly to his uses: so the grant we make of our selves to God at his Altar is irrevocable: we are no longer our own but his, and cannot resume our selves any more into our own disposal: but if he will have our very life, it must be at his service. This was one reason, I make no doubt, of receiving the Sacrament so oft in the beginning of our Religion; that they might fortifie their ho∣ly resolution of following Christ to his Cross, and dying for the testimony of his Truth: to which they expected continu∣ally to be called. I have the authority of an holy Martyr (S. Cyprian) for it, who tells us (in his Book upon the Lords Pray∣er)
that in his Church they Communicated every day: which custom remained till S. Hieromes time at Rome, and in Spain. One great end of it was, that they might be well appointed against the assaults of their enemies; and have courage, as good Souldiers of Christ Jesus, to march after him, even unto the death. For the same person, giving an account in one of his let∣tersEpist. 54. Cornelio., why he would receive to the peace of the Church certain persons that had faln away in time of persecution (but now bewailed their fault, and resolved to be more constant hereafter:) saith, that he saw a new storm arising, and was assured by divine admonitions and tokens, that a more furious conflict would be renewed. And therefore it was necessary to receive them into Communion again (whom he exhorts to fight valiantly and play the men) that so they might not be left naked and unarmed: but be strengthned by the protection of Christs Body and Blood. For since the Eucharist is designed for that end, that it may be a defence or safeguard to them that receive it, we arm those with the Ammunition of the Lords fulnessMuni∣mento Do∣minicae Sa∣turitatis., whom we would have to be safe from the adversary. For how can we teach and provoke those to pour out their blood, in the confession of his name, to whom we deny
the blood of Christ, when they are about to fight? Or how can we make them fit for the Cup of Martyrdom, if we do not first admit them, by a right of Communication, to drink the Cup of the Lord in the Church? He can∣not be fit for Martyrdom, who is not armed by the Church for the war. That heart will fail, which by receiving the Eucharist, is not lifted up and inflamed. By which last words, it is clear that the minds of be∣lievers were raised up by the Eucharist, and had a holy zeal inkindled in them, to fol∣low Christ in sufferings. The Priests who celebrated the Sacrifices of God every day (as he speaks in the same Epistle) prepared Sacrifices and Victimes to be offered to God. For remembring the blood of Jesus, and being touched with a sense of his love to them; they went full of heat and courage: as those who had made a sworn agreement to suffer death valiantly; which Christ underwent for their Salvation. And in his next Epistle but one, which is an ex∣hortation to Martyrdom, he calls upon the people of Thibaris, to arm their right hand with the spiritual sword, (speaking accord∣ing to the manner in those days, when they received the Eucharist into their hand, as we do now, and not into their mouth, as the fashion is in the present Church of Rome)
that they might never stretch it forth to Ido∣latrous sacrifices: but being mindful of the Eucharist, that hand which received the body of the Lord, might embrace him and hold him fast; and receive hereafter the reward of coe∣lestial Crowns. The like we read in his Book concerning those that fell away, in a time of suffering: when other mens mouths sanctified with the coelestial meat, after the body and blood of the Lord, refused to taste the profane infections and reliques of Idols. I shall add no more but the words of ano∣ther Writerde Cardi∣nal. operi∣bus Christ: Cap. de Coe∣na Dom.; under his name, which are very significant. When we celebrate the Sa∣crament, saith he, we are admonished to ru∣minate and chew over and over again, the ex∣ample of our Lord; that his passion may be alway in memory; and the punishments of death may not terrifie the Heirs of the Cruci∣fied: but they may feed and refresh themselves, with the joyful solemnities of a timely resur∣rection. O how excellent is this Cup! How religious is the excess of this Drink! by which we are divinely out of our selves: and forgetting the things that are behind, reach forward to those that are before. And losing the sense of this world, and contemning the delights of the purpled rich man; we cleave to the Cross, and suck the blood, and lay our tongues in the wounds of our Redeemer.
They were transported, he means, by the thoughts of Christs death beyond them∣selves, and thought of nothing but dying for him, if he called them to it: prefer∣ring his Cross, which they carried always in their mind, before the greatest riches and glory in the World. And with the same affections should we be inspired when we make the same Comme∣moration of him: professing we had ra∣ther die than dishonour him and his religi∣on, by denying them: Vowing our very life to be expended upon his account, if there be occasion for it. This being a Feast as I told you, upon a Sacrifice; we in∣gage by doing this, that we will become a bloody Sacrifice to him, if his will be that we should be offered up for his service. It being a Communion, participation, or fellowship with him; if he will have us to pertake and have fellowship with him in his sufferings; we here express our selves to be well contented. We Ʋnite and joyn our selves to the Crucified Jesus; and so profess that if he will have us bear his Cross, we will not deny him. Nay we declare that we will glory in nothing so much as in the Cross of Christ: that we will rejoyce in tribulation: and think it is
given to us as an honour to suffer with him. For a feast is a joyful meeting; and therefore our eating and drinking, at this feast, shews that we will not think he feeds us with gall and wormwood, when we induce any thing for his names sake: but that he gives us the Wine of joy and gladness; when the same Cup is put into our hand, which our blessed Saviour drank of. This is the very height of Christianity; to which no∣ble pitch we should earnestly strive, by all means, to arrive. Every drop of our blood should be ready to be poured out, for that Religion, which Christ sealed with his own. And indeed, what better use can we make of our life, than to give it for him, from whom we received it, and who gave his life for us? And how much better is it not to live at all, than to live with the mark and brand of cowards and fugitives, from the Prince of life and the Lord of glory? Let us say therefore when we come to the Table of the Lord; O how much do we owe thee, most blessed Redeemer! How great is the price which thou hast paid for the ran∣som of us, miserable sinners! Tongue cannot express it, nor thought conceive it. What shall I render unto thee for the incomprehensible benefits thou hast
bestowed upon me? I can give thee no less than my self; which here I resign in∣tirely into thy hands. Do thou dispose of me according to thy pleasure. It is but reasonable I should follow thee, whi∣thersoever thou leadest me. Though it be to thy Cross, I refuse not to obey thy orders. Though I should die with thee, I hope I shall not in any wise deny thee. For there is no better use I can make of my life, than to spend it for thee. I esteem all things but loss, for the excel∣lence of thy knowledg. I account not my life dear unto my self,Act. 20.24 so that I may finish my course with joy. It is Christ that died; yea, rather that is risen again: who is even at the right hand of God; who also makes intercession for us.Rom. 8.34, 35, &c. Who shall separate me from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? (as it is written, for thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter.Psal. 44.17, 18.) Though all this should come upon me, yet will I not forget thee; nor will I deal falsly in thy Covenant. My heart shall not be turned back; neither shall my steps decline from thy way. Nay in all these things, I shall be more than a Con∣queror, through him that loved me. For I
am perswaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come. Nor height, nor depth, nor any other crea∣ture, shall be able to separate me from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. And great reason there is, that we should cleave to him to the very death; if we consider the inestimable benefits which he by his death hath purchased for us, and by this Commemoration of it confirms unto us. Especially that of remission of sins through his blood: which he, for his part, covenants to grant us, if we, for our part, be faithful to the death. For We are not to consider this Action mere∣ly as a Feast, or only as a Feast upon a Sacrifice: but as a Feast upon a Sacrifice for Sin. Wherein we agreeing, as I said, to be his constant Disciples, profess our belief that God hath set him forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood: and he gives us a part in that propitiation, and promises to be merciful to our unrighteousness, and to remember our sins and iniquities no more. It was not permitted to the Jews you know, (no not to the Priests them∣selves)
to taste of the blood of any Beast, that was slain in their Sacrifices to God: but it was to be poured out at the foot of the Altar, after some part of it had been sprinkled thereon. And as for the flesh of the Sacrifice, if it was an offering for sin, that was to be wholly burnt also, and they were not allowed the least portion of it, at any of their Feasts. This is a priviledg belonging to Christians alone at the Table of the Lord: where they not only eat of the Bread, which represents the body or flesh of Christ; but drink of the Cup, which represents his Blood. We have an Altar (i. e. a Sacrifice) whereof they had no right to eat that served the Taber∣nacle: that is,Heb. 13.10. which the Jewish Priests them∣selves, who ministred at the Altar, could not pertake of. We are admitted to the injoyment of more singular priviledges, than they were invested withal. As we are pertakers of a better Sacrifice, which is of greater efficacy and vertue, than any of theirs were: so God receives us into a nearer familiarity with himself; and by setting before us not only the body of that Sacrifice which was offered to him, but the blood also (which was his own proper food) plainly tells us that he intends to make us pertakers of the highest blessings;
even of his own joy and happiness. Of which he gives us strong assurance, in that he lets us pertake not only of the blood of the Sacrifice, in this figure and re∣presentation: but of the blood of that Sacri∣fice, which was offered for the sins of the world. This bids us rest assured of his abundant grace; and not doubt of our acceptance with him, to a participation of his highest favour. There is nothing now to hinder it, nor to make us call in question his merciful kindness toward us. For we have such a token and pledg of forgiveness of our sins by this Sacrifice; as the anci∣ent people of God had not of the forgiv∣ness of their offences, by the blood that was offered at Gods Altar. They were not admitted to taste of that blood, as we are, of the blood of Jesus: and so could not have that boldness, and access with con∣fidence to God, which we have through the faith of him. Luk. 22.20. 1 Cor. 11.25. compared with Mat. 26.28.This seems to be one great secret of this Sacrament: as appears from the words of S. Luke and S. Paul, who tell us, that this Cup which we drink of, is the New Cove∣nant in Christs blood, which was shed for the remission of sins. We are received by doing this into that gracious Covenant;
which assures us of forgiveness through his blood. He gives us a right to those benefits (of which that is the first) which he obtained by his obedience to the death. Which is the import also of the word Communion, used by S. Paul to express the effect of this Sacrament; 1 Cor. 10.16. The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the Com∣munion of the body of Christ? In its full signification, that phrase denotes, not merely our being made of his Society, but our having a Communication of his body and his blood unto us:So the word  is rendred in other pla∣ces, Gal. 6.6. Phil. 4.15. of which we per∣take by eating this bread, and drinking this Cup, in remembrance of his death for the remission of sin. And so we beseech our merciful Father (in the Prayer of Consecration which our Church prescribes) that we receiving these his Creatures of bread and wine, according to his Son our Saviours holy institution, in remembrance of his death and Passion, may be pertakers of his most blessed body and blood. For after the bread and wine are deputed by holy prayer to God, to be used for a Commemoration of Christs death; though they do not cease to be, what they were before, yet they begin to be something which they were
not before this Consecration. That is, they become now to us, visible signs of an inward and spiritual grace: and do not merely figure to us the breaking of Christs body and the shedding of his blood; but are a pledg of that inward and spiritual grace, which they represent. What that grace is, we are taught in our Catechism; when it tells us that it is, the body and blood of Christ, which are verily and indeed re∣ceived of the faithful in the Lords Supper. That is, they have a real part and portion given them in the death and sufferings of the Lord Jesus; whose body was broken and blood shed, for remission of sins. They truly and indeed pertake of the vertue of his bloody Sacrifice; whereby he hath ob∣tained an eternal redemption for us. This is the meaning sure, of pertaking of his body and blood, which are here communicated. Because this bread and wine do not become his body and blood, by ceasing to be bread and wine: but by tendring them to us, as a spiritual grace. Their efficacy therefore and vertue by the divine favour is made ours. All the effects and benefits of his passion are imparted to us. In short, there is nothing which the body and blood of Christ can be to the spirits of men, but by these tokens he exhibits it to us, and gives us
an interest in it. This is spiritually to eat his flesh and drink his blood; as both our Church and the ancient speak. Our souls intertain and feast themselves upon his Sa∣crifice; being really made pertakers of whatsoever his body and blood can do for them. Which S. Gregory Nazianzen meant, I should think, when he saith that these ob∣lations are the Communication of the Incar∣nation of God; and of the sufferings of Godin his . Tom. 2. Jamb. 15., How doth he communicate to us his Incar∣nation, but by giving us the fruits and be∣nefits of it? and so he communicates to us his broken body and his blood that was shed. We pertake of both in the same manner. We are admitted to participate of the secret of the sufferings of Christ (as he speaks in another place, Orat. 40..) and by means of this Sacrament are vested in the merit of them. And thus indeed the bread and wine are changed, not by abolishing their substance but, by turning them to this di∣vine use (to which they are deputed by prayer according to Christs institution) to tender to us the spiritual grace of the body and blood of our Saviour. The principal part of which grace is, remission of sin. For sin being done away; death, the fruit of sin, is abolished: he graciously restores us to the priviledg of immortality which
we had lost: and in order to it assures us he will not fail to communicate the grace of his holy spirit; to assist and further us in our way to everlasting bliss. We may be satisfied that he will send a living ver∣tue into our spirits, to quicken, excite, and strengthen us, to do according to our Vows and ingagements: that so we may continue in his love, as he continued in his Fathers love, by keeping his Commandments. For this is the nature and office of all Sa∣cramental pledges, to assure us of the good will of God, and of his truth in fulfilling his gracious promises. He ingages to be faithful to us by giving them; as we in∣gage our selves to be faithful to him, by receiving them. God bids us believe that we shall be accepted in his beloved; nay, he puts us in possession of all that which the Gospel promises, and the Sacrifice of Christ on the Cross obtained to us: mercy, grace, and peace: remission of sin; the power of the Holy Ghost, and eternal life. Thus the prayer of Consecration runs in the ancient Liturgies: into which though many things are foisted, sutable to the conceits of later times, yet they con∣tain sundry expressions of Christian devo∣tion,
worthy of those who are called the Authors of them. Bless this Bread and this wine (saith that ascribed to S. Chry∣sostom) make it to be the body and blood of thy Son, &c. that it may be to all that per∣take of it, for the washing of the Soul, the forgiveness of sin, the communication of the Holy Spirit, &c. And a little after. Make us worthy to pertake of thy heavenly and dreadful mysteries, of this holy and spiritual Table, with a pure Conscience; for the re∣mission of sin, the pardon of our offences, the communication of the Holy Spirit, the inhe∣riting the Kingdom of Heaven, and confi∣dence before thee; not for judgment or con∣demnation. In that also which goes under the name of S. James (to mention no more) we find these words. Be merciful to us, O God, according to thy great mercy, and send upon us and upon these gifts thy Holy Spirit, that it may sanctifie and make this bread the holy body of thy Christ, and this Cup the pretious blood of thy Christ; that they may be to all those who receive them, for the remission of sin, and for eternal life, the sanctification of body and soul, the bringing forth the fruit of good works, and the esta∣blishing of thy holy Catholick and Apostolick Church which thou hast founded upon the ROCK OF FAITH; that the gates of
hell may not prevail against it, &c. The meaning of which words [make this Bread the Body of thy Christ, &c.] are so well ex∣pounded in the Service of the Roman Church, by the addition only of these two words [TO ƲS] as if their fore∣fathers had studied to prevent that gross conceit, which now they have entertain∣edOur Writers have shewn often e∣nough, that the fancy of transub∣stantiation is not coun∣tenanced by the ser∣vice of that Church which tea∣ches it.. For the Prayer there concerning the Bread and wine is, that they may be∣come to us the body and blood of thy wel-be∣loved Son our Lord Jesus Christ. God doth not make them so in themselves, by chang∣ing their substance: but unto us, by their change from the common to this Spiritual use. Nor doth the prayer, now mention∣ed, for the Holy Spirit to come and san∣ctifie them, and make them his body to us, &c. suggest any such thing, as a change of their substance. For the ancient writers frequently say as much concerning the sanctifying of the Water in Baptism, by the holy Spirit: and yet it remains Water still, though it serve to the mystical wash∣ing away of sin. So do the bread and wine remain bread and wine, after the sanctifying of them, and their becoming the body and blood of Christ to us. They are both: bread and wine in their sub∣stance: and the body and blood of Christ
the Spiritual use to which they are appoin∣ted. To that use when once they are consecrated, we have no regard at all to the substance of bread and wine: but on∣ly to the body and blood of Christ; which by doing this are communicated to our souls, in the remission of sin, the sanctifi∣cation of the Spirit, and eternal life. To conclude, what Gregory Nyssen saith con∣cerning BaptismTom. 2. in Bapt. Christi p. 802. [Do not contemn the di∣vine washing, nor undervalue it as a common thing, because of the Ʋse of the Water: for that which it works is great, and there are wonderful effects of it] we may say con∣cerning the Supper of the Lord; Bread and Wine are but small things: but in this holy use of them they are great, and pro∣duce admirable effects. Nay he himself immediately mentions this very thing, among others, for an example of the great benefit that may be received from common matters; when they are applied to a divine use. This Altar, saith he, at which we stand is in its Nature but ordinary stone; nothing different from those you tread upon: but being dedicated to God er∣vice, it is an holy Table, &c. And this bread also, is in the beginning but com∣mon bread: but when the mystery hath of∣fered it, then it is called and it is the body
of Christ. So the mystical oyl and so the Wine, which are little worth before the blessing, after the sanctification of the Spirit, have another kind of operation. And thus a Priest who the other day was a vulgar person, being separated by blessing, becomes a guide, a Gover∣nour, a teacher of piety, &c. And these things he doth, without any change at all in his body or form. By these exam∣ples any man may see that he thought, the bread and wine in the Sacrament become the body and blood of Christ; with no more change in their substance, than there is in the water with which we baptize, or in the Priest who ministers there or at the Eucharist. But that they are called the body and blood of Christ in regard of the Use to which they are sanctified; and are his body and blood, in regard of the won∣derful effects which are communicated to the faithful in the use of them; viz. re∣mission of sin, and all other benefits of his passion. Now what greater favour can we desire at Gods hands, than to be admitted to such fellowship with him and with his son Jesus Christ? what is there of equal power with this, to possess our hearts with the love of
God? was there ever any so treated by him as we are? did the friends of God in ancient time receive such pledges of his grace and favour? were they ever made thus one with him and joyned to him, by pertaking of his Sons body and blood? who would not give up himself soul and body eternally to him, that thinks of these things? who can think he makes a dear purchase, if he give his life in exchange for such invaluable blessings? we should go to the Table of the Lord and say; How excellent is thy loving kindness O God! How pretious are thy thoughts towards us, how great is the sum of them! who would not fear thee? who would not love thee, and glorifie thy name? For thou hast given us exceeding great and pre∣tious promises,2 Pet. 1.4. that by them we might be pertakers of a divine Nature. Thou hast sealed them with the blood of thy Son: and hast made a new Covenant with us in that blood,Heb. 10.16, 17. to put thy laws in our hearts and write them in our minds; and our sins and iniquities to remember no more. Thou hast made him an high Priest for ever to make intercession for us: and gi∣ven him power and glory at thy right hand;1 Thess. 5.24. that he may be able to perform all his promises. Faithful is he that calleth
us, who also will do it. For ever, O Lord, thy word is setled in Heaven.Psal. 119.89, 90. Thy faith∣fulness is unto all generations. But thou hast given likewise farther assurances of thy mery and thy Truth: by entertaining us at thy Table; and making us pertake of that body and blood, which was offer∣ed for our sins. Enough, Enough, O most merciful Father! We see the love thou bearest to us. We cannot desire greater tokens and testimonies of it, than these thou hast given us.2 Cor. 1.20 All thy promises in Christ, we believe, are Amen; certain, faithful and true. We know and are sure,1 John 2.1, 2. that we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righte∣ous; and he is a propitiation for our sins. I will never doubt any more of thy good will towards us: for I taste and feel that the Lord is gracious.Psal. 111.4, 5, 9. The Lord is gra∣cious and full of compassion: he will ever be mindful of his Covenant. He hath sent redemption unto his people, he hath com∣manded his covenant for ever: Holy and reverend is his Name.Psal. 103.17, 18. The mercy of the Lord, is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him. To such as keep his Covenant, and to those that remember his Commandments to do them. I wait therefore for thee O Lord,Ps. 130.5. my soul doth
wait: and in thy word do I hope. Mine eyes shall be ever towards the Lord;Jude 2. that Mercy and peace and love may be multiplied unto me: that I may walk in the light as thou, Lord, art in the light; for so shall we still have fellowship one with another,1 Joh. 1.7. and the blood of Jesus Christ thy son shall cleanse me from all sin, Amen. The natural consequence of what hath  been said concerning the love of God to∣wards us, in sending his only begotten Son, that we might live through him, and he might be the propitiation for our sins; is drawn to our hand by S. John 1 Epist. 4.11. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. This is so certain a fruit of an hearty sense of Gods merciful kind∣ness to us, that no man ought to think he loves him, or hath any fellowship with him or with his son Jesus, who doth not feel in himself an unfeigned affection and rea∣diness to do good, to all his Christian Bre∣thren. By this we know that we dwell in him, and he in us (which we pray for at the Lords Table) because he hath given us of his spirit, v. 13. That is, indued us with his own kind, and gracious Nature and disposition. Of which that we may not fail to be pertakers, he hath ordained
this Sacrament to be a bond of Ʋnion between all Christians, who believe in one common Saviour, and all pertake of his Sacrifice. There is no doubt but this is one of the ends for which he invites us to this Feast, that we may profess charity to all our Bre∣thren, and joyn our selves in a league of Friendship with them, as well as with him∣self. This was the intention of publick feasts in all Cities of the world. Athenaeus mentions such among the Athenians, Lace∣daemonians, and CretiansL. 5. Deipno∣soph. cap. 1.2.  and .. Whose Law∣givers had appointed common entertain∣ments, at which the Citizens met in one place; that they might be more firmly linked together, and not espouse any pri∣vate interest. Many other besides these he there remembers: at which they thought it of great import that all should appear and present themselves. For he immediately adds the saying of an ancient Poet who admonished them, that Friends and companions should not long abstain from these Feasts, because this was a most lovely Commemoration—.. (the very word used by our Saviour at the institution of this Feast of his) They commemorated, I suppose, the common benefits that had been be∣stowed on them, the famous Acts of their ancestors, and the marvellous victorie
and deliverances which they had obtained: whereby they were ingaged to love and unity, without which they could never hope to remain so happy. Such meetings (besides those ordained by the Law) there were among the Jewes, that lived in the same neighbourhood: who maintained so∣ciety and friendship by eating of the same food in the evening of the Sabbath. Which was as much as to say (as Maimonides his words areMentio∣ned by Dr. Lightfoot in 1 Cor. 10.) we are mingled together, or associated: there is one food for us all: no man intrenches on his neighbours property. But as there is one equal right to us all in this common place, so there is a several right to every one in the place which is peculiar and proper to himself. Thus our Companies and Fraternities have their Common Halls and Feasts also: which were appointed for nothing else, but that they might the better maintain love and kindness, among the Brethren of the society. In like manner this Divine Feast of our Saviours instituti∣on, was attended with that of charity: in which the poor were entertained as Chri∣stian Brethren together with the rich; for the continuing and promoting of friend∣ship, Unity, and peace among them all. Nay, this Feast it self was designed, with∣out all question, for this purpose, as well
as others: that all those who met at the same Communion, might be joyned toge∣ther in the strictest bond of holy friend∣ship; by pertaking all of one bread, and drinking of one Cup. So S. Paul teaches us, 1 Cor. 10.17. For we being many are one bread, and one body: for we are all pertakers of that one bread. As the bread was broken to commemorate the sufferings of Christ, whose body was broken for our sins: so it was broken also to be distributed a∣mong all the Communicants; in token that they were but one body: members of the same Christ, and members one of another. As it was a Feast, their eating at the same Table declared their friendship and chari∣ty: but their eating there of one and the same loaf (which represented the body of Christ) more effectually declared it, and ingaged the holy Brotherhood to greater Unity and intireness of affection. It is well observed by S. ChrysostomHmil. 18. in 2. Cor. p. 647., that it was not lawful for the people among the Jews to pertake of that part of the Sacrifice which was given to the Priests. But they had their portion to themselves, and the Sacrificer with his Friends another portion different from the Priests. But now it is not so, saith he: one and the same body and one and the same cup is given to all. To teach
us that we are one body: differing no more one from another, than member doth from member in the same body. And therefore we are not to throw all upon the Priests: but every one is to take care of another; and contrive as much as he is able the good of the whole Church. I will only add the words of S. CyprianEpist. ad Magnum. p. 151. Edit. Re∣gal.: who saith, the Lords Sacrifices declare the Christian Ʋnanimity, knit toge∣ther in a firm and inseparable charity. For when our Lord called the bread, which is kneaded together and made up by the union of many corns, his body; he denoted Christian people. And when he calls the wine, which is pressed out of many grapes and gathered to∣gether in one, his blood; he signifies also our flock, coupled by the mingling together of an united multitude. From whence it is ma∣nifest to all that will not shut their eyes; that he took the bread to be Christs body, not only as it represents Christ, but all the faithful together with him. Which ap∣pears more fully from the long discourse he makes in another placeEpist. ad Coecilium 63. p. 103., concerning the mixing of water together with wine in the Cup of the Lord; as the custome then was. Waters, saith he, in the holy Scrip∣ture signifie many people and Nations: which we behold also contained in the Sacrament of the Cup. For since Christ
bare us all, who likewise bare our sins, we see the people to be understood by water, as the wine shews us the blood of Christ. Now when the water in the Cup is mingled with the wine, the people is made one with Christ: and the multitude of believers is coupled and joyned together with him in whom they believe. Which conjunction of water and wine is so min∣gled in the Cup of the Lord, that they cannot be separated one from the other, &c. So that in Sacrificing the Cup of the Lord, the water alone cannot be offer∣edHe is dis∣puting a∣gainst those who used only water in this Sa∣crament., no more than the wine alone. For if one offer wine alone, it begins to be the blood of Christ without the people: if wa∣ter alone, it begins to be the people with∣out Christ. But when both are mingled and joyned together by such an union that they cannot be known one from the other, then the spiritual and heavenly Sa∣crament is perfected. It is just so likewise in the other part: the body of the Lord cannot be meal alone or water alone, but both must be made one and coupled to∣gether and make up one solid loaf. By which Sacrament also our people is shewn to be made one. That as many corns be∣ing gathered together in one, and knead∣ed and mixed together make one loaf:
so in Christ who is the bread from Hea∣ven, we may know there is one body, to which our number is joyned and uni∣ted. From which words we may clearly discern (that I may touch on this by the way) that he did not believe the Wine in this Sacrament was turned in substance into the blood of Christ, but only in represen∣tation and use. For it begun to be his blood, when it was offered to God, just as the water begun to be the people and flock of Christ. He uses the same words of both. And therefore if we say he thought the wine was changed from its own nature into the very substance of Christs blood: we may as well say, he believed the water to be changed from being water, and to be made the very substance of his Church or people. In the like manner we may discourse concerning the bread, which, in his opinion, is so made Christs body, that it is also the body of the Church. For that is represented, he saith, together with Christ, by the flour and water made into one Bread. But not to trouble our selves any fur∣ther with disputes, let us therefore when we pertake of the Table of the Lord, think, that as thereby we are made one with
Christ, so we are joyned in the closest Union one with another. And let us remem∣ber when we are making our selves ready for this heavenly Feast, that as we are go∣ing to commemorate the dearest love of our Lord, and to profess our love to him: so to engage our selves to the heartiest love towards all the members of the same body; to enter into a Covenant one with another (as well as with him) by eating of the same bread and drinking of the same Cup; that we will never fall out any more; much less hate, maligne, or do despite and injuries one to another: but live for ever in the peace of God; in unity and godly love. O that this holy use of this Sacra∣ment were more seriously regarded and laid to heart! It would make a marvellous change in the face of Christs Church; if all that pertake of his Table, did cordially embrace as loving friends; and resolve to remain in an inseparable affection. For Love or Brotherly charity is the fulfilling of the Law; and would certainly secure all thoses duties, which we owe to our Neigh∣bour: as S. Paul shews, Rom. 13.8, 9, 10. If our hearts were filled with it, we should not only be preserved from doing of him harm: but it would make us do him good. By giving and communicating to his ne∣cessitiesWhich is joyned with breakin br  us ∣ship.;
and by forgiving him, and passing by his injuries, trespasses and of∣fences: under which two heads, are com∣prehended all the offices of brotherly cha∣rity. We have our Saviours word for it, that if this heavenly vertue were but plan∣ted in our breasts, all other Christian ver∣tues would presently shine in us and adorn our souls. For he compares this loving and kind disposition, free from all base selfishness and covetous desires (which look only at their own particular profit) to the eye in our head: which when it is clear and pure, the whole body is full of light, Matth. 6.22. And therefore the oft∣ner we come to the Lords Table, with this end, among other, in our aim; the better Christians we shall grow. We shall preserve this light that is in us, from growing dim: and renewing our friendship at this feast (to which the Lord invites both high and low, rich and poor) we shall neither despise, nor envy, nor bear ill will, nor be hard hearted one to another any more. Nay, our light will so shine before men, that they seeing our good works, will glo∣rify our Father which is in Heaven. It is a maxim (I observe) among Poli∣ticians, that a great person or Governor
should Feast or entertain but seldom; upon some special occasions: because it is un∣certain whether he shall procure by it fa∣vour or envy. Some may think themselves neglected; and others think themselves disparaged, who are not able to give the same entertainment. But our Lord upon the quite contrary reasons, invites us fre∣quently to his house and Table: because he invites all, and makes no difference, upon account of mens outward estates; and expects nothing at all again, but that all his Guests would love one another, with a sincere heart and unfeigned affecti∣on. The great he would ingage not to scorn the meaner sort; and the meaner sort not to envy the great. He would oblige the rich to be merciful and liberal; and the poor to be thankful and contented. The weak in knowledge not to judg the strong; and the strong not to despise the weak: but all to live together as loving Brethren and members of the same body. That so, they may have the same care one for another. And whether one member suffer, all the mem∣bers may suffer with it: or one member re∣joyce, all the rest may rejoyce with it. And whatsoever differences may arise, he con∣jures them, by all that is sacred and dear to them; that they fall not out, nor make
any quarrels; much less divide and sepa∣rate themselves one from another; or do any thing that may spoil the harmony and consent of their affections, together with the comfort of their lives and the beauty of his Church. O how good,Psal. 133.1, 4. how pleasant it is (should every one say when he is at this feast) for Brethren to dwell together in Ʋnity! Heaven and Earth are plea∣sed with this happy agreement and sweet accord. Here the Lord commandeth a blessing, even life for evermore. Never will I make any jars in this heavenly consort. Nothing but love, nothing but Love, shall possess that heart, in which, thou O Lord of love, art pleased to inhabit. I willingly enter into these holy bonds of friendship and peace. I ty my self here insepara∣bly to all my Brethren. I embrace them all in every place, with an open and in∣larged heart. I will ever endeavour to keep the Ʋnity of the Spirit in the bond of peace: and will love not in word nor tongue, but in deed and in truth. And O that we could see that holy Spirit, which gather∣ed so many Nations and tongues and people of sundry sorts, into one body of the Church; descending once more to joyn together all Christian hearts. Come holy Ghost, and draw us all to
unity concord and peace. That as there is one Lord and one spirit and one Baptism,Ephes. 4.3.4, 5. Act. 4.32. and one hope of our calling: so the mul∣titude of believers may be of one heart, and of one soul. O blessed Jesus, who when thou ascendedst up on high gavest gifts to men, yea, to the rebel∣lious also; renew thy ancient bounty to thine Universal Church. Visit our minds and inspire us with heavenly grace; that we may be like minded,Phil. 2.2. having the same love, being of one accord, and one mind. That so at last there may be but one voice also: that we may all speak the same thing,1 Cor. 1.20. and that there be no divisions among us: but that we be perfectly joyned together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. Now the Lord of peace himself give us peace always, by all means.2 Thess. 3.16. Now the God of patience and con∣solation, grant us to be like minded one to∣wards another, after the example of Christ Jesus:Rom. 15.5, 6. that we may with one heart and one mouth glorifie God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. And the Lord make us to encrease and abound in love one to∣wards another,1 Thess. 3.12, 13. and towards all men: to the end he may stablish our hearts unblame∣able in holiness before God even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ
with all his Saints. Amen. Now what is there that will more cer∣tainly  accomplish our wishes, and make us love our Brethren, do them good, and for∣give them; than a grateful sense of all Gods benefits to us, who are less than the least of them? This will provoke us to love and to good works: and make us not to be weary of well-doing. It will press our hearts to render something both to him from whom we have received all: and what he needs not himself, to bestow on his Members, who were as dear to him as his life. And therefore S. Paul, I observe, after he had made a passionate exhortation to the Colossians to put on bowels of mercies, kindness, long-suffering, forbearing and for∣giving one another,Coloss. 3.12, 13, 14, 15. if any man had a quar∣rel against any, and above all to put on cha∣rity, and to let the peace of God rule in their hearts, to which they were called in one body: immediately adds in the close of all, AND BE YE THANKFƲL. As if he thought that this would secure all the other: as they do the rest of our duty. And for this very purpose hath our Saviour insti∣tuted this holy Feast, that our hearts may be raised to Praise and give thanks to the Father of mercies with the devoutest af∣fection;
not only when we are there, but at all times and in all places. This is a thing that cannot be omitted at this feast, without spoiling the very nature of it. It is not what our Lord appointed it to be; if this be wanting. With this we begin; with this we continue; and with this we conclude this holy Action. Nay, it is Thanksgiving, with prayer to God, by which the bread and wine are sanctifi∣ed, that they may become to us the body and blood of Jesus Christ. And (to say no more) it is so much of the essence, as we speak, or being of this Action, that it hath been the name of it for many, if not for all, Ages. We find this Sacrament called the Eucharist, that is, Thanksgiving in the most ancient writers: which would make one think this was the name belong∣ing to it in the Apostles times. And in∣deed S. Paul calls it the Cup of blessing, which is the very same with Thanksgiving. For, if you observe it, the Evangelists use these words indifferently when they speak of the institution of this holy Feast. S. Matthew, and S. Mark say that he took the bread, and blessed; and he took the Cup and gave thanks. S. Luke and S. Paul only say, he took bread and gave thanks: and the Cup in like manner. And thus
they speak also in another matter, con∣cerning common food: which will help to explain this business. S. Luke saith Christ looked up to Heaven, when he took the five loaves and two fishes to feed the mul∣titude, and blessed them, Luke 9.16. S. Mat∣thew and S. Mark say only, that looking up to Heaven he blessed, viz. his Father, who is in Heaven, Matth. 14.19. Mark 6.41. And S. Johns words are that he di∣stributed them, when he had given thanks, Joh. 6.11. From whence we may con∣clude these two things. First, that blessing and giving thanks are the very same in their language, or include one the other: which may be further confirmed from, 1 Cor. 14.16. Secondly, that though this blessing or speaking good of his name, and thanks∣giving, be directed immediately to God: yet the Creatures for which we bless and thank him, pertake of the blessing, and become the better to us. For so the loaves and fishes were blessed, by our Sa∣viours blessing God. And so we say in common speech, that before we eat we should bless the Table (or those good crea∣tures that are before us;) because by thanking God for them, he grants them to our use, with his good will and blessingSee 1 T. 4.. And in like manner at the last Supper of
our Lord, he blessed the bread and wine, by giving thanks, and blessing God, to be to his Disciples the divinest blessings, and pledges of his singular love. And thus we are to conceive it is at this day: by the blessing and thanksgiving of him that Mi∣nisters at this holy feast, to which all the people say, Amen, and joyn their hearty consent, those creatures of bread and wine are sanctified and blessed, to those excellent uses, which I have already namedThence Justin Mart. calls them , in English, Thanksgi∣ving'd food or food hallowed by Thanks∣givings Apol. 2.. For thanksgiving and blessing sutable to this occasion (if nothing else were added) in∣clude the most powerful prayer to God, that by receiving this bread and wine in remembrance of his Son Jesus, he would make us pertakers of all the benefits, which he procured by dying for us. And therefore you ought to be very careful of this as a principal part of your duty here: to lift up your hearts, when the Minister calls upon you, unto our Lord God: and to give thanks and praise together with all the heavenly host to the Father Almighty, who of his tender mercy gave his only Son Jesus Christ to suffer death upon the Cross for our redemption, &c. And be sure to say Amen to that prayer which presently follows in our Service (for the clearer understanding of the use to which the bread and wine are
deputed, and of the means whereby they come to be so: which is the divine blessing) That we receiving these thy Creatures of bread and wine, according to thy Son our Saviour Jesus Christs holy institution, in remem∣brance of his death and passion, may be per∣takers of his most blessed body and blood. Nay, all the time of this holy solemnity, praise and thanksgiving are to be intermix∣ed with every part of the Action: to make it the more effectual to us. We cannot commemorate him, as I told you, with∣out extolling and magnifying his name, and making our acknowledgments to him. And how can we remember his making his Soul an offering for sin; without spe∣cial thanks unto him for so great a kind∣ness? We ought to profess our selves Christians, with the height of joy and gladness of heart. To bless him for the gracious Covenant into which he receives us. To vow our selves unto him with the most solemn thanks, that he will accept such poor things as we are to be his ser∣vants. And to make a grateful mention of all the benefits, he hath bestowed on us, and intends unto us; and to all our Chri∣stian Brethren: whose concernments should be very dear unto us, as well as our own. And truly the ancient Church were so much
in love with this duty, that they gave thanks to God, for all good things; the benefits we enjoy by all his creatures: as well as for our redemption by his Son Je∣sus. Because this feast accompanied that of Charity; in which, their bodies were fed, as in this, their Souls: and because of the offerings they then made of some of the fruits of the Earth (as we do now of money in lieu of them) for an acknow∣ledgment to God, that he was the Author of all the blessings which they enjoyed. But this alwayes made the principal part of their acknowledgments that God had sent his Son into the world to save sinners. And there∣fore (as our Church teaches us in the ex∣hortation just before the Communion) above all things we must give most humble and hear∣ty thanks to God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, for the redemption of the world by the death and Passion of our Saviour Christ, both God and man: who did humble himself even to the death upon the Cross for us mise∣rable sinners, who lay in darkness and the sha∣dow of death, that he might make us the children of God, and exalt us to everlasting life, Without which thanksgiving, to speak the truth, we do not do that which Christ commanded, and so cannot hope for the blessing he hath promised. Hear S. Chry∣sostom
(in stead of all that treat of this matter) who excellently declares the man∣ner and reason of this Thanksgiving,Homil. 25. in Matth. p. 178. Edit. sav. in a Sermon of his upon Eighth chapter of S. Matthew. A perpetual memory, saith he, and thanksgiving for a good turn, is the best way that can be found, to se∣cure and preserve it to us. And there∣fore the dreadful mysteries and full of Salvation, which we celebrate in every assembly, are called the Eucharist: be∣cause they are a commemoration of many benefits, and shew forth the principal piece of divine Providence, and dispose us al∣ways to give him thanks. For if to be born of a virgin was a great wonder: what was it to be crucified, to shed his blood for us, and to give himself to us for a Feast and a Spiritual banquet? what shall we call this? where shall we place it? we can do no less than give him thanks perpetually. Let this precede both our words and works: and let us give him thanks not only for our own good things but for those of others. For by this means we shall destroy envy, and bind charity faster; and make it more genuine and of a kindly nature. For a man will not be able to envy them any more, for whom he gives thanks unto his Master.
And therefore the Priest, when this Sa∣crifice is in hand, bids us thank God for the whole world: for what is past, and what is present, and for those things that are to come. This sets us free from the Earth and translates us to Heaven: and of men makes us Angels. For they making a Quire gave thanks to God, for the good things he bestowed on us, saying, Glory be to God in the highest, on earth peace, good will towards men. Thou wilt say perhaps, what are they to us? they live not upon the earth, nor are men like unto our selves. It is all one for that; this signifies very much to us. For we are taught hereby to love our fellow servants, so as to account their happiness to be our own. Let us do so then; giving thanks perpetually for our own blessings, for others; for little, for great: or rather there are none little that come from God. And that I may pass by other things, which are more than the sand for multitude; what is there comparable to this dispensation? For that only begotten son of his who was more pretious to him than all things besides, hath he given for us enemies. And not only given him; but after that gift, set him before us for our Table:
doing all things himself for us: both to give, and then to make us thankful for his gifts. For mankind being generally ungrateful, he undertakes throughout, and doth all things for us himself. And what he did for the Jews putting them in mind of his benefits from PLACES, and TIMES, and FEASTS; that he hath done here: from a kind of Sacrifice, cast∣ing us into a perpetual remembrance of the good he hath wrought for us. None la∣bours so much that we should be approv∣ed, and great and ingenuous, as God who made us. And therefore he doth us good oftimes even against our will: and gives us many good things which we know not of. It is but reason then that whatsoever we do in word or deed, we should do all in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ; giving thanks to God and the Father by him, Coloss. 3.17, which Theodoret refers to this busi∣ness. There being those, saith he, that re∣quired them to worship Angels, the Apostle enjoyns the contrary: that they should adorn their words and deeds with the memory of our Master Christ; and send up thanksgivings to God the Father by him, and not by Angels. To him we should address all our Services,
in a grateful remembrance of his love in Jesus: and, as our Communion Book ex∣cellently expresses it, we should give him (as we are most bounden) continual thanks, submitting our selves wholly to his holy will and pleasure, and studying to serve him in true holiness and righteousness all the days of our life. But especially when we go to this holy Communion, we should enter in∣to his gates with thanksgiving and into his courts with praise: we should be thankful unto him and bless his name. Saying, Great is the Lord and greatly to be praised:Psal. 145.3. his greatness is unsearchable. Great and marvellous are thy works,Rev. 15.3. O Lord God Al∣mighty, just and true are thy ways, thou king of Saints.Psal. 106.2. Who can utter the mighty acts of the Lord? who can shew forth all his praise?100.3. He made us and not we our selves:116.8. we are his people and the sheep of his pasture. He holdeth our souls in life, and keepeth our eyes from tears and our feet from falling.66.9. 36.6. Thou, Lord, preservest man and beast:145.15, 16 Thou givest food to all flesh. The eyes of all wait on thee and thou givest them their meat in due season. Thou openest thy hand and satisfiest the desire of every living thing.34.3. O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together. O give thanks unto the Lord for he is good, and
his mercy endureth for ever.Psa. 136.1, 2, 23, 24. O give thanks unto the God of Gods: for his mercy en∣dureth for ever.138.1.149.6. Who remembred us in our low estate: for his mercy endureth for ever. And hath redeemed us from our enemies: for his mercy endureth for ever. I will praise thee with my whole heart: the high praises of God shall be in my mouth. Who hath raised up a mighty Salvation for us:Rom 8.32 and hath not spared his own Son but delivered him up for us all.Heb. 9.12. Who hath obtained for us an eternal redemption:2 Pet. 1.3. and given us all things that pertain unto life and godliness, through the knowledg of him that hath called us by a glorious power. Bless the Lord, O my soul,Psal. 103.1. &c. and all that is within me bless his holy name. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits. Who forgiveth all thy iniquities: and healeth all thy diseases. Who redeem∣eth thy life from destruction: and crown∣eth thee with loving kindness and tender mercies.Psa. 111.1. I will praise the Lord with my whole heart, in the assembly of the upright and in the Congregation. While I live will I praise the Lord:146.2. I will sing praises unto my God, while I have any being.145.21, My mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord: and let all flesh bless his holy name for ever and ever.
Thus I am come to a conclusion of the second part of my Discourse; concerning the Nature, End and Use of this Holy Sa∣crament. The sum of what hath been said is this. It is an holy Feast in comme∣moration of our Lord Christ, especially of his Death. In which we, for our part, make a solemn profession of his Religion; and tie our selves in the strictest Covenant to follow him unto the death, and to live in love and charity with all our Christian Brethren. And he, for his part, makes a representation of his dying love to us; and confirms the continuance of it; giving us pledges that he will make us heirs of all the blessings, which were the purchase of his body broken and blood shed for us. So that when the Minister gives the Bread and the Cup to us, we should think that Christ by him gives us tokens and assuran∣ces of his continued and everlasting love and kindness. And when we take, eat and drink that which he gives us, we should look upon it, as expressing our con∣sent to continue his faithful Disciples, in hope of that eternal life, which God that cannot lie hath promised to us. In short, the whole Action is the renew∣ing
of a Covenant between Christ and us. He by giving, we by receiving, ingage our selves to perform our mutual promises. He his promises, of giving us pardon, pow∣er to do well, and immortal bliss. And we our promises of loving God with all our heart and soul and strength: and our neighbor as our selves. All which we are to reflect upon, with the greatest love to God and our Saviour; with thanks∣giving, blessing, and praise; and with an humble confidence that it shall be to us, according to his word. To promote which ends I have conclu∣ded every particular Head of this discourse, with a brief Meditation, which may be used in this manner. The First of them may serve to excite our devout affections before we go to Church; or, when we have placed our selves conveniently, just before the Com∣munion begin; or while the company are making their oblations to God. The Se∣cond will be proper immediately after the Consecration; while the Minister is re∣ceiving himself, and giving the Communi∣on to the other Ministers that may be there present with him. The other Six,
half of them may be used after we have re∣ceived the Bread; and the other half after we have received the Cup. Or if any de∣sire a more compendious form of Devoti∣on, wherein to lift up their Souls to God immediately after their receiving; they may reserve those till they retire from the Holy Table to their seats again: and in this manner address themselves to him just after the receiving of the Bread. 2 Cor. 1.3.Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,1 Pet. 1.3. the Father of mercies and the God of all comfort: who, according to his abundant mercy, hath begotten us again unto a lively hope by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.Col. 1.22.13, 14. Who hath reconciled us in the body of his flesh through death, to present us holy and unblameable and unre∣proveable in his sight. Blessed be God who hath delivered us from the kingdom of dark∣ness and translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son. In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of our sins. I love thee, O Lord, I love thee. I devote my self most unfeignedly unto thee. I will ever cleave unto thee, and unto all my Brethren, with setled purpose of heart. Search me O God and know my heart:Psal. 139.23, 24. try me and know my thoughts. See if there be any
wicked way in me: and lead me in the way everlasting. Yea,Psal. 23; 4, 6. though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with me. Thy power, and thy care of thy flock; they comfort me. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life;34 and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live: I will sing praise to my God, while I have my being. My me∣ditation of him shall be sweet: I will be glad in the Lord.67.3. And let all the people praise thee, O God, let all the people praise thee. O that men would praise the Lord for his good∣ness; and for his wonderful works to the chil∣dren of men.107.21, 22. Let them Sacrifice the Sacri∣fices of thanksgiving, and declare his works with rejoycing.117.2. For his merciful kindness is ever more and more towards us, and his truth endureth for ever. Praise ye the Lord. Or thus. Lord,Psal. 8.3, 4. what is man that thou art so mind∣ful of him, or the son of man that thou thus visitest him! Thou hast made him a little lower than the Angels, and crowned him with glory and with honour. Thou hast given him dominion over the works of thy hands, and hast put all things under his feet. Many, O
Lord my God,Psal. 40.5. are thy wonderful works which thou hast done; and thy thoughts which are to us ward, they cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee: if I would declare and speak of them, they are more than can be numbred. Sacrifice and offering thou wouldest not:Heb. 10.5. But a body hast thou prepared for thy Son Jesus; Who hath done thy will, O God: and made himself an offering for sin; and made us one body with himself. Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, be unto thee O Lord God Almighty; and unto thy Son for ever and ever. I offer up my self intirely, both Soul and body, unto thee. I consecrate my self here most faithfully to thy Service.Psal. 40.8, 11. I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea, thy Law is within my heart. Withhold not thy tender mercies from me, O Lord: let thy loving kindness and thy truth continually preserve me. Ʋnite my heart, to fear thy name. Fill me with all thy fulness O God: and above all things, with fervent charity. This I pray, that my love may abound yet more and more in knowledg and in all judgment; that I may approve things that are excellent;Phil. 1.9, 10, 11. that I may be sincere, and without offence till the day of Christ; being filled with the fruits of righte∣ousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto thy glory and praise. I am thine; save me. Multiply grace, mercy and peace upon me
unto eternal life. For it is thou O God,Psal. 68. ult. that givest strength and power unto thy people. Blessed be God. Immediately after the receiving of the Cup, they may lift up their hearts and say, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,Eph. 1.3, 7, 8. who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ: in whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace; wherein he hath abounded towards us in all wisdom and pru∣dence. O Lord, how manifold are thy works!Psal. 104, 24, &c. in wisdom hast thou made them all. The earth is full of thy riches: and so is the great and wide sea, wherein are creatures innume∣rable. These wait all upon thee: that thou mayest give them their meat in due season. Thou openest thine hand, and they are filled with Good. But eye had not seen,1 Cor. 2, 9, 10. Eph. 3.5.11. nor ear heard, neither did enter into the heart of man, the things which thou hadst prepared for them that love thee: and hast now re∣vealed to thy holy Apostles and Prophets by the spirit; according to thy eternal purpose in Christ Jesus our Lord. Who for us men and for our Salvation, came down from Hea∣ven;
and was manifested in flesh to destroy the works of the devil;1 Joh. 3.8. and dyed for our sins;Rom. 4.25 rose again for our justification; ascen∣ded up on high to give gifts unto men;Eph. 4.8. and is at the right hand of God to make inter∣cession for us;Heb. 7.25. 1 P i. 3. ult. Heb. 1. ult. Angels, authorities, and pow∣ers being made subject unto him; and sent forth to Minister for them who shall he heirs of Salvation.Eph. 3.8. Col. 2.3. O the unsearchable riches of Christ! in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledg. I submit my self unto thee, O thou Prince of life, and Lord of glo∣ry: unto thee I will live henceforth; and not unto my self: and if for thee I must die; the will of my Lord be done.Ps. 16. ult. Thy favour is better than life: in thy presence is fulness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore.Luk. 17.5. Lord, increase my faith; strength∣en my hope; raise my love to a greater height; and make patience to have its perfect work: that I may not love my life unto the death. But the trial of my faith,Rev. 12.11 though it be tried by fire,1 Pet. 1.7. Col. 2.2. may be found unto praise, and honour and glory at thy appearing. And O that our hearts may be comforted, being knit together in love!Eph. 4. ult. that we may be ever kind, tender-hearted, forgiving one another, as thou, O God, for Christ's sake hast forgiven us. That so, with united minds and affections, we may be still praising thee and saying; Blessed be
the Lord of Heaven and Earth, who only doth wondrous things.Psalm 72.18, 19. And blessed be his glorious name for ever, and let the whole earth be filled with his glory: Amen and Amen. Or thus. O the breadth, and length,Eph. 3.18, 19. and depth and heighth! O the love of Christ Jesus our Lord, which passes knowledge!Phil 2.7, 8. who made himself of no reputation, but took upon him the form of a Servant: and humbling himself, became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross, for us miserable sinners.Rev. 5.12. Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honour, and glory, and blessing.Re. 1.5, 6. 1 Pet. 2.5. For he hath washed us from our sins in his blood, and hath made us Kings and Priests unto God; to offer up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God by Christ Jesus. Behold, O Lord, an heart that offers up it self unto thee, in love unfeigned. I ab∣solutely resign my will to thy holy will and pleasure. Not my will, but thy will be done. And praised be God, who hath made a new covenant with us in the blood of Jesus:Col. 1.20. who hath by him reconciled all things to himself, both in heaven and in earth: and hath now renewed unto us the assurance of his conti∣nued
love.Psal. 75.1. Ʋnto thee, O God, do we give thanks: unto thee do we give thanks: for that thou art near unto us, thy wondrous works declare.Psal. 20.3, 4. The Lord remember all our offerings, and accept our Sacrifices. Grant us according to our hearts desire and fulfil all our petitions.Col. 1.9, 10, 11. That we may be filled with the knowledg of his will, in all wisdom and Spiritual understanding: and may walk worthy of him unto all pleasing, being fruit∣ful in every good work, and increasing in knowledg; strengthned with all might accord∣ing to his glorious power, unto all patience and long suffering with joyfulness; giving thanks continually to the Father of mercies, who hath made us meet to be pertakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.1 Tim. 1.17. Psal. 106. ult. Now un∣to the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honour and glory, for ever and ever. And let all the people say, Amen. But when you have eased your hearts a little in these expressions of faith, love and grateful remembrance of our Saviours kindness: you will still find room for more devout effusions of your soul in some holy passion or other; while you are at this feast. Either before or after you have been at the Table of the Lord (while the rest of the company is com∣municating)
there will be time to enter∣tain your selves with sundry pious thoughts and meditations; which I shall briefly sug∣gest unto you in the next part of this Trea∣tise; that now follows. The intention of which, I told you in the beginning, should be to instruct you in a plain and easy method; how to pertake of this holy food with the greater fruit and delight also.
PART III. Containing a familiar way of disposing our selves to Communicate with Profit and Pleasure. HAVING shewn you what is the Nature and Use of this Feast; you will expect, perhaps, that I should tell you, who are the persons whom our Lord invites and calls unto it. Which is a question so easy to be resolved from what hath been said, that I have assigned no part of this discourse, for the discussing of it. If you are baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus, and seriously believe his Religion; if you take upon your selves to make good that promise, vow and Covenant, which was made in your name, when you were baptized; if you understand the ends of this holy Communion (which I have named) and are willing and desirous to perform them; if you lie not under the cen∣sures of the Church for any violation of those sacred vows, which you have made to our Saviour: You are the persons whose com∣pany
he waits for, and would gladly see at his Table. Nay, he will take it ill, and account it a neglect of him and of your duty, a breach of your promise to obey all his holy commands; if you accept not of his kindness in inviting you thither: because this is one of his Com∣mands, as I have proved, that you should do this in remembrance of him. Do not intangle your selves therefore in endless doubts and scruples about the qualificati∣ons that are required in those that come to this Supper of the Lord: but only ex∣amine your hearts by this plain and cer∣tain rule. Do you believe the Gospel of Jesus Christ to be the truth of God? Do you consent to be governed by his Laws? Do you remember, and will you stand to the Vow that was made in your name, when you were baptized? Are you desirous to renew that Covenant, in the manner that I have described? Do you value his favour and grace de∣clared in his pretious promises above all earthly things? Would you pertake of this holy Communion, that you may commemorate your Saviours dying love; that you may own and acknowledg him to be your Lord; that you may devote and unite your heart unto him in stricter
friendship; that you may bind your self in the bond of peace to all your bre∣thren; and that you may receive more of his grace and greater assurance of his love, as the most invaluable blessing? Then lay aside all your fears, and hum∣bly approach unto him; to render him the Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving; and to receive fresh tokens and pledges of his unchangeable good will and affecti∣on to you. I shall make no more words of this matter: but only add, that you may know sufficiently by the invitation which the Minister makes to you at the Communion, in Christs name (according to the order of our Church) who are per∣sons qualified for this feast. And it is ex∣pressed in such plain and pregnant words, that better cannot be devised for your di∣rection and satisfaction. They are these. Ye that do truly and earnestly repent you of your sins, and are in love and charity with your neighbours; and intend to lead a new life, following the Commandments of God, and walking from henceforth in his holy ways: draw near with faith, and take this holy Sa∣crament to your comfort. Which that you may be able to do, I
shall now proceed (according to the method I have propounded) in my endeavours to put you into such a temper of mind, when you are at this holy Sacrament; that you may perform all that which hath been said, with more ease and edification also to your selves. And that I may the better raise those affections in you, which are sutable to this action; it will not be amiss to re∣member you a little of the excellency and dignity of the feast to which you are in∣vited. To make a true Feast these four things (in the opinion of the most learned of all the ancient Romans) must conspire and meet together.Varro. lectis viris; lecto loco; lecto tem∣pore; lecto appa∣ratu. Chosen and select persons, a choice and delicate place; a choise time and season; and choise provision; proportiona∣ble to the quality both of him that makes it, and of those that are invited to it. Now in all these regards, if we reflect a while on them, this Supper of the Lord which he makes for us, will be found to be incom∣parably beyond the noblest entertainment which the world ever saw. For as concerning the persons that here meet together, they are our blessed Lord, the Master of the feast, and those that be∣lieve
on his name: to whom he hath given the right, or priviledg, to become the sons of God, Joh. 1.12. A company of souls that are larger than the world; heirs of a King∣dom; rich in faith; as full as they can hold of love and charity towards each other, and towards all men. So that there can∣not be either more honourable or more sweet society found under heaven. Then for the place you see it is prepar∣ed in the house of God: where we give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name; and shew forth his salvation from day to day: where we pay our vows unto him in the pre∣sence of all his people; and make a joyful noise unto him by singing of his praises: where the Angels (as I may say) are wai∣ters; and the heavenly host are glad to attend upon us: according to those words of the Apostle (in that very chapter where he treats of this Sacrament, 1 Cor. 11.10.) the woman ought to have a covering on her head, because of the Angels. As for the time, you see likewise it is commonly the Lords-day: on the day when he rose from the dead, when he trampled under his feet the great enemy of man∣kind; when the Angels not so glistering
as he, brought news that he had accom∣plished our redemption; when the host of heaven was at a gaze to see mortal man made immortal; and restored to the state of paradise again: when we have nothing else to do but to rest and rejoyce; to de∣clare the works of the Lord; to give thanks unto his holy name, and triumph in his praise. And lastly, for the provision it self, I have told you already what it is: the body and blood of the Lord of life: bread that ex∣cells the Angels food: a cup of blessing, of which those sons of glory never tasted. To these our Lord calls us; nay, besee∣ches and intreats us to come: that we may feast our selves on his Sacrifice of himself; and be filled with his love; and satisfie our selves with his joyes, and everlasting consolation. Now what soul is there that can be wil∣ling to lose his share in such divine food? that would be shut out from such society, or absent from such a place; or desire to spend his day better than in near commu∣nion with our Lord? Either men do not believe these things, or they do not reflect on them and lay them to their hearts: for otherwise there is none that reads this
writing, but will be moved to make one at this holy feast. But then as you cannot chuse, if you seriously consider, but judg it very desirable to be admitted to it: so you cannot but think in what manner it becomes you to be adorned, and how you should behave your selves in so great a presence. If a mean subject should receive a message from his Prince, to come and bear him company at his own Table; would he not wonder and be astonisht at the favour? would it not busie every thought in his heart to know the cause? and would he not lay aside all other im∣ployment, that he might prepare himself to appear there after a decent and seemly fashion? He could not be so stupid as not to study to form himself to a comely be∣haviour: and to learn to comport himself with all the reverence and fear, the caution and circumspection, that his soul could possibly be master of. No marvel then if we see good Christians so curious and exact, so diligent and laborious; to under∣stand the meaning of our Lord in this in∣vitation; to dress up their souls in the best manner they are able when they go to his Table; and to sute their beha∣viour to the height of the solemnity: since to approach unto Majesty, on such an oc∣casion,
with negligent thoughts and after a careless fashion; is to slight both the greatness and the grace of him, who grants us the honour of his society. To gratifie therefore the pious desires and endeavours that are in any souls, to render themselves fit company for our blessed Lord at this feast; I shall spend a few pages of this Book, in directing them how to demean themselves before him, and dispose their hearts to enjoy most sweet and fruitful communion with him. And that I may make my discourse more easie and affectionate withal; I shall take the rise of it from one of those things just now named. Much of the contentment of a true feast, consists in apt and good discourse; according to the old saying, a supper without discourse, is a Crib and not a Table.. And therefore the old Roman, I mention'd, gives this description of the chosen persons, of whom he would have his guests consist; that they should be such as know how to speak in a decent manner: and are neither talkative, nor altogether dumbNec lo∣quaces, nec omnino muti.. Our Lord then making a feast here for us, and presenting himself unto us in this broken bread, and wine poured forth: we are not to look on these as dumb signs; but as things that speak most sig∣nificantly
and distinctly to us. Though we hear never a word with our ears, yet our minds are to conceive, when Christ crucified is set thus before our eyes, that we hear him discoursing to us of his Love; of the ends of his death; of all the great blessings that he hath bought for us; and of all those things which he justly expects from them that profess themselves his dis∣ciples. And accordingly it becoms us, to make such replies unto him, and to answer in our hearts with such expressions of our affection: as may shew that we understand, and are very sensible what he says unto us. Of both these I shall treat a little: leaving it to every mans own devotion, to inlarg them, as he sees occasion, in his private Meditations. First then, when you see these symbols of Christs body and blood, think that you behold the crucified Jesus represented to  you; that you stand in his sight, and are in his company, yea, and hear him speak∣ing graciously to you, and calling you by the name of his chosen guests, his dear friends, and beloved Brethren. Into what a trance would it cast you, if you really saw the Lord of life and glory, and heard him thus saluting you? How ready would you be to fall into a swoon of love and joy,
at the very mention of these few words; My Brethren? And yet for such he esteems us, saying; I will declare thy name among my Brethren, Heb. 2.12. And so he called his Disciples after he arose from the dead, saying, Go tell my Brethren that I go into Galilee, and there they shall see me, Matth. 28.10. and again, go to my Brethren and say unto them; I ascend to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God, Joh. 20.17. And we may well conceive that in such terms of grace he receives us at this holy Feast: and make account we hear him say; My Brethren, I sent my Mini∣sters to call you to my house and bid you to my Table, which here you see spread for you. It is well done that you are come; and I take it kindly to see you here. The reason of my invitation is that I may remember you of my love, and that you may shew your selves my Friends by a joyful commemoration thereof. I have no other end in sending for you, but to make you more sensible of your happiness; and to lay obligati∣ons on you, by doing my will, to conti∣nue in it; and likewise to impart unto you new tokens of my love: the very greatest pledges that I can bestow on you, to assure you that I will be your
eternal friend. You may think perhaps, that this is but a little bread and wine which here you see before you; and that it is but poor cheer which I have provided for you. But open the eyes of your mind; remember and believe what I have taught you; and you will see that this is my body which was broken for you, and this is my blood which was shed for you: and on these I would now have you feast together. Behold here, how the spear pierced my side. See the hole which was made by the lance when it run to my very heart. Do you not discern how my hands were wounded; how my feet were bo∣red, when I was nailed to the Cross for you? How despitefully was I used? how cruelly was I martyred and tormented? besides all the mockeries and abuses, the shame and reproach, the agony and bloo∣dy sweat which I endured to do you Ser∣vice. Did I not love you, think you, when I suffered thus for you? Can you chuse but read the greatness of my affection, which is writ in my most pretious blood? Can you doubt that you are dear unto me, whom I have purchased at so high a rate? Let these wounds speak for me, and tell you what a passion I was in for your sake.
Look into them; and see what a vehe∣ment desire I had to accomplish your sal∣vation. What sorrow was there ever like unto my sorrow? or what love was there ever like unto my love? This broken bread and this wine poured out, tells you that I have dyed once for you already: and I am now come by giving them to you to let you know that I do not re∣pent me of it; but if it were needful, I would die for you the second time. What greater assurance can your heart wish of my love, than this which I now offer you? what more would you have me do, to testifie that my heart is still towards you, and that I will he ever mindful of you? As the Father hath loved me, so I have loved you: and all that I desire of you is that you would continue in my love. If you keep my Commandments you shall abide in my love:Joh. 15.9, 10, 14. even as I have kept my Fathers Commandment and abide in his love. This is the token I would have of your kindness to me. Ye are my friends, if you do whatsoever I command you. No∣thing else do I request of you, but that you would not hurt your selves by sin∣ning against my love: that you would henceforth live unto me, who dyed for you. Come, I beseech you now, and
assure me, that you love me. Renew your covenant of friendship with me. By taking, eating and drinking this that I give you, plight me your faith that you will be ever true unto me. And then I will be your security against the curse and the condemnation which you dread. I will undertake for you, that all your sins shall be pardoned. Nay, I will present you fair and beautiful before my Father, as if you had been always innocent. Take my word for it, that I will deliver you from the wrath to come, and give you the blessing of eternal life. If you doubt at all of it; come hither, take this bread and drink this cup: as sure as you now receive these, your sins shall be blotted out and never remembred in the great day of judgment. By these tokens I give you an interest in my death and sufferings. I oblige my self by these sen∣sible signs to perform all my promises. I seal to you that gracious Covenant which was made in my blood. As certainly as I dyed, I assure you that you shall live for ever. Only, as I said, do not deny me your hearty love. Grant me this small request, to correspond with me in sincere affection. And by eating and drinking here at my Table, tye your selves to be
my faithful servants. Then I allow you to begin now the joys of Heaven. Nay, I require you to rejoyce in my salvation: to comfort your selves in my promises; to solace your souls in the hope of my glory, and to sing the Song of Angels, which shall end and be completed in eter∣nal Hallelujahs. Praise ye the Lord. It is no dream and mere imagination, I assure you Christian Readers, no vain fan∣cy that you entertain your selves withal; if you conceive our Lord thus discoursing to you at his Table. For all this is, in effect, pronounced by the Bread and wine which represent his pretious body and blood. When they are broken and pour∣ed out before your eyes, and offered to you to eat and drink in commemoration of of his death: they report unto you his great love, and declare the agonies and pains which he indured, and give you assu∣rance, by authority from him, that he will never cease to bless you and do you good. And therefore you cannot better affect your hearts and raise your devotion to him, in my opinion, than by expounding their mean∣ing to your selves, and thinking you hear him uttering by them such words unto you, as I have now mentioned. And will it be possible then that you
should be altogether silent, and answer ne∣ver a word unto him? Can you find no∣thing to return to so kind and gracious a declaration of the bowels of his mercy to∣wards you? Or will it be hard to tell him your heart, who hath so freely opened his unto you? No man sure can be mute, unless he be astonisht and struck dumb at the power and mightiness of his incompre∣hensible charity. This may indeed justly strike us all with the greatest admiration, and hold us a while in wondring thoughts, that we should be thus beloved of God. It will well become us to be amazed and lost in our thoughts; to be unable to do any thing at the first hearing of all these things, but only marvel that he should be so kind to such wretched sinners. We can∣not begin this action better, than in a soul∣full of thoughts not to be expressed. In a silent admiration that the God of Heaven should thus graciously visit us; manifesting himself in our flesh, giving his Son to die for us, and inventing so many ways to make us rest assured of his love towards us. But when you have recovered your selves out of this passion; how many other shall you feel strugling in your souls, which shall first present themselves unto him.
Do but stay and pause a while, upon every part of the foregoing words; and you will find all sorts of resentments in your heart: which you may cast into this order, and thus address your reply unto him. You may be very much ashamed that you should give him so great trouble and put him to such pains; First to die, and then to find out so many ways to remem∣ber you of his death, and perswade you of his never dying love. You may say to him in your heart; O my Lord, I blush to see my soul so foul, that nothing less than thy pretious blood would serve to wash and cleanse it. I am confounded to see thee in such a case, for us who cared not how vile and base and miserable we were. What have we done, that we should bring thee to a Cross? O what wretches were we, that we should understand the love of God no better, than to stand in need of such an instance of it? with what confidence can we behold thee thus battered and bruised; thus wounded and bloody; thus full of pain and anguish as thou representest thy self unto us? I am asham'd to think that we have exposed thee to such ignominy and shame. I am grieved at the heart, that we have made thee a man of sorrows.
And our infidelity, O how great is it! that after thou wast pleased to indure all this for us, we should stand in need of such fre∣quent remonstrances of it: and be in dan∣ger to forget thee or distrust thee; unless thou didst continually thus present thy self unto us, and assure us of thy good will towards us. O my Lord, how shall I pre∣sent my self before thee! who am one of those that have occasioned all this care and pain; this agony and passion; this sweat and this blood. I sigh to remember the many groans, which we have made thy heart ake withal. It wounds my ears to hear those words, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me. I am ready to ask thy pardon, even that thou art come, at such a rate, to pardon us. It is too much, too much, but that thou art love it self, to spend all this love and kindness upon such insensible and ungrateful sinners. Thus having begun to make your ad∣dresses to him, you may proceed in the second place Humbly to acknowledg your unworthi∣ness  to be guests to so great a person as he is. Though we cannot, if we understand the nature of this feast, but come with as
thirsty a desire to it, as the chafed Hart to the streams of water; with as hungry an appetite as a poor man to a full Table, or a covetous man to an heap of gold: yet still we must remember that we are but beggers, and those desires must be tem∣per'd with much modesty, lowliness and humility of Spirit. Though our Lord say to us as David to Mephibosheth (2 Sam. 9.7.) thou shalt eat bread at my Table continu∣ally; thou shalt alwayes feast with me: yet it becomes us to bow down our selves, and say as he there did; what is thy servant that thou shouldst look upon such a dead dog as I am? It is too high a favour to sup with thee: since I am not worthy to pick up the crums that fall from thy Table. The least offal of thy common mercies is too good for me; how shall I dare to approach to this fulness of heavenly blessings to which thou invitest me? I have sinned, I have sinned; and am not worthy to be called thy son, or to bear thee company. In my very best attire I am so ragged, that I am ashamed to see my self; and therefore how shall I appear before thee? O my Lord, I come merely in obedience to thy call. I should not have presumed to ap∣pear in thy presence, but that thou hast hidden me. And been affraid to be
seen in this condition, but that I was more afraid not to be seen here at all. My com∣fort is, that you will not be angry with us when we obey thee; nor be offended that we shew our selves ready to execute thy commands. And here You may call to remembrance those sins  which are the cause of your fear, and brought our Saviour to his Cross. Excite in your heart an unfeigned sorrow and grief that he hath been so affronted and wrong'd by you and all the world. De∣clare freely the sense of your heart to him, and let him know by an humble and in∣genuous confession how the case stands with you. Say to him, O my Lord, thou dost but call to mind by this remembrance of thy dying for us, the foulness and po∣lution of all mankind. All our iniquities stare me in the face, as the people gazed and stared on thee. I see our deformities, by seeing thee thus vilely and despitefully used. It was our covetousness that stript thee naked. Our pride that crown'd thee with thorns. Our intemperance that gave thee gall and vinegar to drink. Our con∣tempt of Religion that put upon thee all those scoffs and taunts. Our coldness in devotion, which put thee into that agony
and sweat. Our want of love to God, that made thee hated and rejected of men. I see as in a glass, now that I look upon thy blood, the abominable state of sinful men: which never seemed so foul as now. How shall one of that wicked race be bold to look up unto thee: especially since that I have known thy love, I have so little valued it; and sinned even against thy pre∣tious bloodHere you may remember your parti∣cular of∣fences.? Canst thou indure to enter into familiarity with such a soul as this, that here presents it self unto thee? may I hope to be admitted into thy holy fellow∣ship and to dwell with thee? I abhor, I loath, I am weary of my self; desiring no∣thing more than to be made like to thee: in purity and holiness, in truth and justice, in love and charity, in lowliness and hu∣mility, in meekness and patience, in com∣passion and forgiveness, in intire resignati∣on to the will of God. From hence Proceed to stir up in your selves the greatest hatred against your sins, and all the wickedness that hath overspread the world. Which nothing can so effectu∣ally demonstrate to be odious and intolle∣rable as this: that it hath made the nature of man capable to act such a villany, as to put to death, after a most shameful manner,
the most innocent and harmless, nay, the most loving and kind, the most obliging and charitable person that ever was. Con∣tinue your addresses to him, and represent your extreamest detestation of that cove∣tousness and worldly mindedness, that pride and vain glory, that ambition and love of the praise of men, that envy and ill will, that wrath and bitterness of spi∣rit, that hippocrisy and partiality, which betrayed and killed him the Prince of life. Shew him how much you abhor these and all that is evil: resolving to cleave to that which is good. Destroy O Lord, may you say, all these thine enemies, and root them perfectly out of my heart. Pierce through all these evil affections, by a stroke from thy cross and passion. I have brought them to be slain by thine hand, for they are too strong for mine. If there be any life remaining in them; O that they may be quite mortified, and ne∣ver able to stir any more. They are of∣fensive to me, as well as unto thee. Would I might never see them more, but crucified and dead. Would I might never behold them, unless it be drowned in thy blood. And then Excite in your heart the mightiest sense
of his love; which as it is never to be for∣gotten: so here it is more particularly to be pondered and affectionately comme∣morated. You may say to him; O my Lord, was manner of love is this, where∣with thou hast loved us; that we should be called the sons of God! How great was thy goodness which brought thee down from Heaven; and made thee one of us! And was it not enough that thou shouldest come to dwell among us in the likeness of sinful flesh: but thou wouldest also lay down thy life for us? Would nothing serve to testifie the height of thy affection to us; unless thou sufferedst the death of the Cross to redeem us? O Love! O the infinite riches of thy grace! For a Friend one might be content to die: but what should make thee so in love with enemies? with the very worst of enemies; with Ido∣laters; with us Gentiles who were without God in the world? Yea, with us, who now that we know the greatness of thy love, have so little or no love to thee? What am I, O Lord, that thou shouldest command me to love thee? Nay, should∣est take such a course to deserve my love? What am I to thee; that thou shouldest so much desire me? And now thus graci∣ously visit me, and come to entertain me?
What made thee being in Heaven, with them who know so well how to love and serve thee; descend to us who know so ill how to do either? couldst thou not be satisfied unless we enjoy thee? nor be con∣tented to be without us; who have such low thoughts of thee and of thy love? Is it possible that thou shouldst still continue it to such ill-natur'd and insensible wretches? Art thou still desirous of our friendship? and come to give us new assurances of thy grace, by making us pertakers of thy bo∣dy and blood? O how pretious are thy thoughts to us! how great is the sum of them! I can do no less, most blessed Savi∣our, than set my soul wide open to thee; and accept thy kindness with the most in∣larged affection of my heart. How glad should I be, if it were a thousand times larger, to correspond with such a love! How happy should I think my self, if I could think of nothing, and delight in no∣thing but only thee! O that a perfect image of thee, in all divine vertues, may be formed in me; and be ever dearer to me than life it self! that I may live no longer, but thou O blessed Jesus, mayest live in me. And the life which I now live in the flesh,Cal. 2. I may live by the faith of thee, the son of God: who lovedst me, and gavest thy self for me. And then
Feeling the flames of his love in your heart, it will be a fit time to offer up your self intirely in the greatest devotion to his Service. Pray him to accept of a poor Sacrifice now at your hand. Though it be worth nothing at all; yet intreat him to receive it, since it is the oblation of the heartiest affection to him. Say to him, O sweet Saviour,1 Joh. 4.16. I have known and believed the love that thou hast to us. I see here the excessive greatness of thy dying love. No heart is able to hide it self from the heat thereof. One cannot come near it; and not be made like the whole burnt-offerings to the Lord. Never was any thing bought so dearly as this sinful soul. Never was so great a price paid for any creature, as thou hast laid down for my sake. If I was as big as the highest Angel, I should be an oblation too little for thee. The flames of those heavenly fires, are not strong enough wherewith to offer to thee. But that I may be just (for it is no more) I humbly lay my self here at thy Altar; and present thee with all I have. I Sacrifice soul and body, without any reserve, to thy holy will and pleasure: though I must be beholden to thy great love, and not my own, to procure acceptance for me. I know
how vile and unworthy I am, that thou shouldst have any respect to my oblation. All that I can say is, that I offer my self for this end, that I may be made bet∣ter: and so have every day more and more to return unto thee. For that purpose, ingage your selves  in a covenant to him, that you will never rob him any more of that, which you have so solemnly offered to him. I look, O Lord, (may you say) upon my self, as an holy and devoted thing. I have conse∣crated my self to thy service, and so I will ever remain. Never will I be so sacrile∣gious as to employ my self to any other uses, but only thine. Thou hast been pleased to make me thy Temple: and therefore I will not willingly suffer thy holy place to be defiled. I am sealed to thy self and have thy mark upon me: I will ne∣ver consent my soul should be broken up by any temptation, and stoln away from thee. I promise thee my faithful obedi∣ence. I bind my self by these presents in a firm and everlasting tye of duty to thee. I am not my own: but bought with a price.1 Cor. 6.20. Therefore will I glorifie God in my body and in my Spirit, which are Gods. I will love the Lord my God with all my mind, and
with all my heart, and with all my soul, and all my strength. And my Neighbour as my self. And then Humbly beg leave of him, that you may believe in his Name for the remission of sin. Continue to say to him: since thou hast so graciously dyed for me; since thou hast invited me hither to represent thy death and sufferings to me, and assure me of thy love; since thou hast bidden me to commemorate it at this holy Feast; be not angry if I call thee, my Lord, and my God. Suffer me to claim an interest in the Merits of thy pretious blood, which was shed to be a propitiation, for the sins of the whole world. Look on me, O thou that sittest at the right hand of God, with the favour thou bearest to thy people. Joyn thy powerful intercession with my humble suits to the Father of mercies, that for thy sake I may be accepted with him. I believe thou appearest in the presence of God for us: and as we shew forth thy Sacrifice of thy self here on earth, presentest it in the most high and holy place, before the mercy seat. Bless me, O Lord, from that throne of thy glory: and raise up such a holy hope in thee; as if I heard that voice founding from thence, I am thy Salvation. And here
Beg of him his mighty grace to confirm  you in your resolution: that so you may alway maintain in your soul this hope of his pardoning love. Since thou, O Lord, (may you say to him) art so forward to do us good, to bestow thy blessings unasked, to die for us when we desired it not, to in∣stitute this feast which we never expected, to send thy Ministers to call us to it; let me take the boldness now to ask some∣thing of thee. O do not deny me the continuance of thine almighty grace. Take not thy holy Spirit from me: but let it be my constant companion, my guide, my helper, my comforter for ever. Is it not the purchase of thy blood? Is it not thy own promise? hast thou not received it of the Father? and art thou not possessed of it, and of glory and power to bestow it on us? Thou thy self hast told us that it shall be given to those that ask it: and that because thou livest, we shall live also. O do not lose what thou hast done already, for want of doing something more.Psa. 138.8. Perfect that which concerneth me: and forsake not the work of thy own hands. Hold me up and I shall be safe:119.117, 133.58. and I will have respect to thy statutes continually. Order my steps in thy word: and let not any iniquitie have
dominion over me. I intreat thy favour with my whole heart: be merciful unto me according to thy word. Now because there must alway be some mirth and joy at a feast: conclude all in praises to our Lord, and rejoyce in his ho∣ly Name. As he said to his Disciples when he washed their feet (Joh. 13.12.) so think you hear him speaking to you now. Know ye what I have done to you? Are you sensible what grace it is that I have be∣stowed on you? Do you know what I did for you upon the cross; and what I have done unto you at my Table? O, dear Lord, that a man could but understand and conceive what thou hast done for us! It would melt and dissolve our hearts: and make them burst out into the highest ex∣pressions of joy and gladness. All that is within us would be roused up to bless thy holy Name. We should be fill'd with triumph and exaltation of Spirit in thy love: and the very furthermost parts of our soul would feel, that it is a most blessed thing to be thy servants. All the Musick, and Songs, and Melody that the feasts of sensual men are attended withal; are not worthy to be named with the joys of those that sing continually and say, Blessed be
the Lord our God for ever:Neh. 9.4, 5, &c. blessed be thy glorious Name, which is exalted above all blessing and praise. Thou, even thou art Lord alone, thou hast made Heaven, the Hea∣ven of Heavens with all their host, the earth and all things that are therein, the Seas and all that is in them; and thou preservest all, and the host of Heaven worshippeth thee.Eph. 1.4. 1 Pet. 1.21. Thou art the Lord, the God and Father of Jesus Christ: who hast chosen us in him be∣fore the foundation of the world; and re∣deemed us by his blood; raised him from the dead, and given him glory that our faith and hope might be in thee our God. Thine,2 Chron. 29.11. O blessed Jesus, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the Ma∣jesty; for all that is in the Heaven and in the earth is thine; thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as head above all. In thy hand is power and might, and in thy hand it is to make great, and to give strength unto all. Now therefore; our God, we thank thee, and praise thy glorious Name.Psal. 115. ult. We will bless the Lord from this time forth, and for ever∣more. Yea, bless the Lord ye his Angels that excell in strength, that do his Command∣ments hearkning to the voice of his word. Bless ye the Lord, all ye his hosts, ye Ministers of his that do his pleasure. Bless the Lord, all his works in all places of his dominion: bless the Lord, O my Soul.
Thus if we did converse with him; and such holy communication did heartily pass between us: it would be so pleasant and de∣lightful, that we should cry out with the Jews in another case (Joh. 6.34.) Lord evermore give us this bread. We should long for such another repast, and be desirous every day to wait on him at his Table. At least, we should greedily embrace the next invitation that he gives us to come un∣to it. And because we cannot every day do this in remembrance of him; we should secretly retire unto him in our own heart, as into his holy Temple: and there call to mind what he hath done unto us, comme∣morate his love, maintain our acquaintance, preserve our friendship, and renew to him our vows: that by all these ways we may prepare our selves for his fellowship and society in the eternal world. It may happen indeed that there may be but a few communicants at the Table of the Lord: and so you may not have time there to do all this. In which case, you may use only some part of it; or thus in brief open your heart to him, when you see how he declares his love to you.
Adored be thy condescending love, O mer∣ciful Saviour to thine unworthy servant, who blushes to lift up his eyes towards thee, even when thou invitest me unto thee. For, besides my other guiltiness, this most gracious repre∣sentation which now thou makest of thy self to me, doth but little move my dull and hea∣vy affections to love and rejoyce in thee. I am heartily ashamed of my self: only, I desire and resolve to become better. And here I prostrate my self before thee, as a humble wor∣shipper of thee; presenting thee with a poor oblation of my soul and body, which I dedi∣cate again with the most dutiful affection, I am able to excite, unto thee. Do thou, O Lord, excite a greater: that when I shall ap∣pear before thee again, I may present thee with a soul more pure, humble, meek, mer∣ciful, and improved in all other fruits of thy holy Spirit. In thy mercies alone are all my hopes. For as the Heaven is high above the earth, so great is thy mercy toward them that fear thee. As far as the East is from th West:Psal. 103.11, 12. so far hast thou removed our transgressions from us. O be merciful unto me, be merciful unto me; for my soul trusteth in thee.57.1. Looks thou upon me, and be merciful to me, as thou usest to do to those that love thy name.119.132. Thou art my portion, O Lord; I have said,57.173. that I
would keep thy word. Let thine hand help me:Ephes. 3.16. for I have chosen thy precepts. Strength∣en me with might by thy spirit in the inner man; that denying all ungodliness and world∣ly lusts,Tit. 2.12. I may live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world: looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and thee our Saviour Jesus Christ. Now unto him that is able to keep me from falling, and to present me faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, to the only wise God our Saviour, be glory and majesty,Jude 24, 25. dominion and power, both now and ever. Amen. But when there is time to do the whole, you will not spend it, I hope, in any thing else, but such Meditations as these. Which, that they may be disposed in such order as every one of them may come in its season, you may make use of in this manner. Think you hear our Saviour speaking to you by the Bread and the Wine; when you see the one broken, and the other poured out. Then you may immediately imploy your thoughts in the four first (to∣gether with the second. Meditation set down in the second part) while the Minister is Communicating himself and others with him. The V. and the VI. will be season∣able
after you have received the Bread; and the VII. and VIII. after the Cup: to∣gether with those mentioned before in the same place. And the two last in like man∣ner, after you have withdrawn your self from the holy Table; or before, according as you can find room for them. And if your spirit be not able to hold out in so many thoughts, and expressions of the in∣ward sense and affection of your heart; you may single out those, which you find to give you the most lively touch, and lift up your heart highest toward the Lord. And at some opportunity, the rest perhaps may be as acceptable, or more welcome meditations: nay, you may feel your soul inlarged and run out in more pious thoughts and affections, than I can suggest or excite by all that I am able to say on this subject. But I desire you never to omit one meditation, when you behold the rest of the company receiving, which is; that all those, and the whole Church, who pertake of this holy Communion, are your Brethren. To whom you must stir up (as I directed you before) the most fervent cha∣rity, and the readiest disposition to relieve, counsel, assist, comfort, or admonish them; as there shall be occasion: And with whom you must resolve to live in the strictest Unity
and peace, as those who are Members of the very same body. When you think therefore that our Lord tells you, there is nothing he desires of you, but that you would continue in his love and friendship by keeping his Commandments, (as he said to his Disciples, Joh. 15.9, 10. &c.) remember that he adds presently, This is my Com∣mandment that you love one another, as I have loved you, v. 12. which he repeats again, v. 17. These things I command you, that ye love one another. And so, take them all in∣to your heart, with as much affection; as if the embracing each other in our arms, and giving the holy kiss of charity, were still in use among us. And let the Memory of Christs death for his Enemies, and of this di∣vine feast, together with him and your Brethren; ever kill all your Enmities, ex∣tinguish your anger, compose your diffe∣rences, sweeten the harshness of your Spi∣rits, &c. and make you live together as loving Friends that hope to live in endless love and immortal joys in the highest hea∣vens. Of which you may also look upon this Feast, as an earnest; and begin those joys in such thoughts as these, at the holy Communion: that, one day you shall keep an eternal Feast with our Saviour, in the happy company of the Saints and Angels;
who will all joyn in the chearful praises of the blessed and only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords;1 Tim. 6.15, 16. who only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto, whom no man hath seen, nor can see: to whom be honor and power everlasting, Amen.
PART IV. Containing several other Meditations, together with Prayers sutable to this Action. BY this time, I hope, you see, that it is good for you to draw near to God, at his holy Table: if you have any desire to be good Christians, or any savour of spi∣ritual pleasures. You must wholly cast away all remembrance of your duty, and be lost to all sense of rational satisfaction, or else be strongly inclined (considering what hath been said) to take the pains to prepare your selves, or rather to keep your selves in a constant preparation, for frequent Communion there with our bless∣ed Saviour. An innocent, holy, and use∣ful life cannot but commend it self to you, if it be but on this score, that you may be intertained with such a comfort, as to know the love of God in Christ to you; and be fit to be feasted continually with such delightful pledges of it. How is it possible for any considerate persons to de∣spise or neglect such means of their con∣tentment?
The Table of the Lord, me∣thinks, should be more acceptable to them than a stage; and they should run more greedily to this Divine feast than they do to the Theatres. He should have more guests and a greater croud to attend upon him, than those so much frequented places. For what do they see represented there, but some of the follies of mankind; the passi∣ons and misfortunes of a miserable lover; the wiles and subtle contrivances of some ingenious person; or such like things, some of which never were? But here is repre∣sented the great wisdom of Almighty God; the manifold wisdom of our Creator, into which the Angels desired to look, and of which they are gladsome spectators: The incomparable kindness of our blessed Sa∣viour; that ardent love which offered him up to God upon the Cross, and which he still continues now that he is in the Hea∣vens; as we see by these remembrances which he hath left us of it: The rare me∣thod of our Salvation: the wonderful way which Heaven hath contrived to bring lost souls again thither: the glorious con∣quest which the Saviour of the world, hath made over sin, the grave and Hell: All which we here behold his Captives, and our selves the prize which he desires to win
by all his labours. Do not men then ex∣treamly betray their infidelity; is it not plain that Christian piety lies languishing and dying; when such numbers will spend a great deal of time to prepare and dress themselves to be seen in the Theatre, and we cannot prevail, in some places, with any considerable company to meet us at this glorious representation, which we make at the Table of the Lord? They that will be at the pains to go to the former every day, content themselves, nay think it a great trouble, to put their souls in a po∣sture to come to this holy place once in a whole year. And God knows how many there are, that will not put themselves to that pains neither: who rarely appear be∣fore God at this holy Solemnity, and whose faces are scarce ever seen in the presence of our Saviour. O shameful ingratitude! which you that read these things, if you are believers, can never endure, I should think, to be guilty of. If you give any credit to this history of the love of God in Christ Jesus, recorded in the Gospel, you will spend some time sure to dispose your selves to make frequent acknowledgments to him, by receiving these holy Mysteries. You will be ashamed that so much time should be consumed in trimming up your
selves to see and to be seen in other places; and little or none that you may come be∣fore God, and behold the great things that he hath done for your souls. For the love of God consider, at what charge he hath furnished this Table for you: how often he hath invited you to it: how de∣sirous he is that you would shew him so much love, as not to refuse him your com∣pany there. Think how ill he must needs take it, if you will not accept of his singu∣lar kindness; nay, that you your selves will not be pleased, when you reflect and consider, of how much joy you have de∣prived your souls, by denying him so much of your duty. For there is no compare between all the jollities in the world, and this one single pleasure: of giving hearty thanks to God, for his unspeakable mercy to us in Christ Jesus. Do but come, and see. Satisfie your selves by waiting on him at his Table, with such thoughts as become his presence. If you have the least spark of goodness; you will find it shine and glow, and spread it self, to your infinite joy and contentment of heart. Among all the various degrees and condi∣tions of Christian people, there will none be found that come hither, with sincere affection to do this in remembrance of their
Saviour, but may go away rejoycing, load∣ed with many divine benefits. For we may apply to this heavenly nou∣rishment what the Jews say of their Man∣na, sent down by God from Heaven to them; which contained in it (as their tra∣dition affirms) all the tasts that any man desired and longed for: it being so suted to every pallate and constitution, that none could fail to be both fed and pleased; though they were of never so different tempers. This is not only a common story in the Books of the later Hebrew Doctors, but we meet with it in one of the Apocry∣phal writings, which is very ancient. Thou feddest thine own people with Angels food (saith the Author of the Book of Wisdom, chap. 16. 20, 21.) and didst send them from Heaven bread prepared without their la∣bour, able to content every mans delight, and agreeing to every taste. For thy suste∣nance declared thy sweetness to thy children, and serving to the appetite of the eater, tem∣pered it self to every mans liking. And in the great Comment upon Exodus they en∣deavour to prove it thus. It is said, Exod. 16.4. behold, I rain bread from Heaven for you, and v. 31. the taste of it was like wafers made with honey, and Numb. 11.8.
the taste of it was as the taste of fresh oyl. How can all these agree, that it should be like bread, and like honey, and like oyl? The answer is, the young men tast∣ed in it bread, the old men honey, and the infants oyl. Accommodate this now to that divine food which our Savi∣our hath ordered to be prepared for us, and you will find it true; that he hath de∣clared therein his sweetness to his children, by making it sutable to every complexion of mind and temper of Spirit: who may meet with what is agreeable to their wants, and will give content to their desires. The infant Christians are hereby marvellously cherished and incouraged: it pours on them the oyl of joy and gladness, and sets them forward in the wayes of God by the sweetness of its pleasures. It gives strength and power to the young men, and is the bread of life unto them: that they may overcome the wicked one (as S. John writes to them 1.2.14.) and never yield to the temptations of the world, the flesh and the Devil. And to the Fathers or more aged Christians, to those who have had long experience of the Service of God; it gives a singular rellish also: and makes them say, that his Commandments are sweet∣er than the honey and the honey comb;
and that in keeping of them there is great reward. Their hopes of immortal bliss are hereby exceedingly advanced, and they receive the foretastes of it; as the Israelites did of the land flowing with milk and ho∣ney. For therefore, the Hebrews say well, the Manna had the taste of honey, that it might be a representation and earnest of that pleasant countrey to which they were going, and which was so described by Mo∣ses to them. Young and old, weak and strong, if they do but in such a manner, as hath been now directed, feed on Christ in their hearts with Thanksgiving, (as the Minister of this Sacrament exhorts them) will feel all the graces of Gods holy Spirit plentifully nourished and increased in them, to their great satisfaction. Their Faith, their Hope, their Charity, both their love to God and to their Brethren; will all be raised to an higher pitch. From every one of which, it would be easy to shew, there must needs flow abundance of divine joy, and the last of them will be an eternal spring of pleasure. If a man had only an assured confidence wrought in him, that Al∣mighty wisdom and goodness will take a fatherly care of him, and provide for him as long as he lives; what a satisfaction would it give to his heart? in what peace,
freedom and contentment would he enjoy himself? now no man can understand what he doth at this holy Communion, and doubt of this. If God hath given us his Son, as here we profess to believe; we may well conclude, how shall he not with him give us all things? If he give us this holy bread, the bread of life; will he not give us the common bread of every day? will he invite us to such a rich, such an heavenly feast, and not bestow on us our ordinary food? will not he that at so vast a price hath pro∣vided for us this spiritual cheer, give us that which is so cheap, that every Raven, every Crow and Cormorant hath plenty of it? I can never question this, will every pious soul say. I will never in the least distrust his tender care and providence more. Our heavenly Father knows that we have need of all these things: and will not deny them to us. By this you may judg how much strength and life every other part of divine Faith may derive from hence: and with what joyes likewise the hearts of true Believers offer up themselves in love to God; and wait for the consummation of his love at his se∣cond coming, when they shall see him as he is.
But it is not the business of this treatise to demonstrate these things, which you may find done in other Books. I only con∣clude from hence that this is a great reason why many that have some good desires, some good purposes at certain seasons; yea, begin to do well; remain so weak and feeble, so languishing and dull in their devotion, nay, grow cold and indifferent again; because they do not come to this holy feast, that they may cherish, incou∣rage and confirm what God hath wrought in their hearts. They are easily overcome and drawn away by the flatteries and vio∣lent temptations from abroad; and so bring a reproach upon the wayes of God, breed an ill opinion of them in themselves and others, perswade themselves they cannot do better, but that there is a necessity of sinning: because they will not use the means which God hath appointed for the strengthning their inward sense of spiritual things; or because they will not frequently use them, when they are invited and have opportunity to come to the Table of the Lord. This would mightily quicken and enliven them; it would bind and tye them fast to their duty; it would make it a plea∣sure to them to do the will of God; it
would ingage the power from above to come to their assistance; and being full of faith and love, no temptation in the world would be able to enter when it made its assaults. The Devil himself would flee away from them: according to that of S. James and S. Peter, Resist the Devil, and he will flee away from you. Whom resist stedfast in the Faith.Jam. 4.7. 1 Pet. 5.9. And here I might represent the sordid∣ness of those souls that perfectly imitate the stupid Israelites; who preferred the Onions, the Garlick and the Cucumbers, before the heavenly Manna; even after they had tasted of it. That had rather, I mean, enjoy the delights of sense, than these spi∣ritual pleasures; and after they have been at this feast, call it (as they did Manna,) light bread; a thing which hath no solid sa∣tisfaction in it. Which can be imputed to nothing else, but a careless, negligent and superficial use of this holy nourishment. They do not excite their appetite and stir up their desire; they do not employ their Faith, and raise their hearts to a due esteem of the divine benefits; or having tasted how gracious the Lord is, they do not often reflect upon his goodness, and remind themselves of their promises and
their hopes. For otherwise they would increase in knowledge and judgment, and grow strong in the grace of the Lord Je∣sus, and be furnished to every good word and work. They do with this as S. James saith many do with the Gospel: who like a man that beholds his natural face in a glass, and taking but a short glance of himself, goes away and straightway forgets what man∣ner of man he was. Whereas if he would not only look into the perfect Law of liberty, but continue to look therein; being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work: he would be blessed in his deed, Jam. 1.23. &c. It is the design therefore of this last part of my discourse, to furnish you with some apt matter for your Meditation, and with sutable Prayers: whereby you may both quicken your selves, in your private clo∣sets, when you are preparing to go to the Table of the Lord; and likewise preserve alive those godly affections and resolutions which are excited there, after you are come home again. That so by continuing to look upon what you have done, and what your Saviour hath done unto you; and behold∣ing as in a clear Mirror the great love of God in Christ Jesus, and your great obli∣gations to him; you may never forget him,
nor the duty you owe him, but be blessed in a faithful observance of both. And that no man may have the excuse which the wanton Israelites pretended, who were cloyed with the same thing, repeated over and over again; I have taken the pains to compose variety of Meditati∣ons and Prayers (some longer, some shorter;) for every Month in the year, and the prin∣cipal Festivals in remembrance of our Sa∣viour. Which you may either make use of, if your infirmity require it; or else stick constantly to such as you like best, and find most apt to move your hearts. No mans thoughts are alwayes alike, neither his that writes, nor his that reads; and therefore sometimes one may be most a∣greeable to you, sometimes another: but there will be no time, I hope, wherein you may not be able, among them all, to fit your self with a Meditation and a Prayer, that may stir up and further your Devoti∣on towards God. And he that will be at so much pains with himself, as to follow some such method as this, will never be able to say hereafter, as too many wretch∣ed souls have done; that they have fre∣quented this holy Sacrament, but were never the better for it.
January. Meditation before the Sacrament. COnsider with your self, some time be∣fore you intend to Communicate, that you are invited to come, not only in∣to the presence but, unto the Table of God: to be one of the guests of the Lord of the whole world. What a grace; what an honour is this? Shall any business, any pleasure on earth put by the thoughts of it? It is impossible, if you remember what the great God is who calls you to him; and that he sets the body of his Son before you upon your Table; and that your Cup is filled with his Blood: That the Angels think it not below them to waite on you and minister to you; and the divine Spirit will be ready to breath upon you, and fill you with such holy love, that you shall send up your soul in joyful hymns of Praise and Thanks to God our Saviour. With what admiration should you receive the news of this invitation? With what reve∣rence ought you to approach him? With what forwardness of love; with what gladness of heart should you go to meet
our blessed Lord? Was there ever any kindness (should you think with your selves) like unto that of his? Did there ever such a furnace of Love (if I may so represent it) burn in any heart? could he do more than die the bloody and shame∣ful death of the Cross for to save sinners? How is it possible that the remembrance of this tender love and compassion should ever die? or that any heart should freeze over such a fire? unless we be willfully care∣less, I see that he will have our love: he will not suffer any thing to rob him of the purchase of his blood. For lest we should prove so ungrateful as to let him slip out of our mind, he hath left himself still among us in sensible signs and representations. By these he shews us his bloody death and passion: he makes himself present to our faith: and we may see that he is desirous to do more than die for us; having con∣trived a way to live for ever in us, and be firmly united to us. What manner of love is this that Hea∣ven hath manifested unto us? who can refrain from tears of grief and sorrow to think of his own ingratitude; and from tears of joy to think of the wonderful kindness of the Lord? can you look on him
who was pierced for our sins, and not la∣ment and mourn? can you see his bleeding wounds and not be troubled? no pious heart can be so hard. And yet when you consider that by those stripes you are healed; that he hath washed us from our sins in this blood; that faithful souls may take sanctuary in his wounds, and be se∣cure and safe: you cannot chuse but re∣joyce in the Lord, and be glad in his Sal∣vation. Call to your Soul then and bid it awaken in it self the liveliest thoughts of him, and the devoutest affections to him. Call to it, to put it self in tune, to string (as I may so speak) the instruments of joy and praise; and to stir up all the graces of the holy Spirit. That so you may go with a deep humility; a godly sorrow; a perfect hatred of all sin, both of the flesh and of the spirit; a strong resolution against them: with a lowly faith; and in the heights of love; with enlarged desires, and great longings to this holy Feast. Ask your Soul, what dost thou think of? what dost thou love? what dost thou long for? with what intentions art thou going to the Lords Table? are the Treasures of Chri∣stian wisdom and knowledg, more in thine
account than thousands of gold and silver? Dost thou heartily believe the holy Gos∣pel of Christ Jesus; and love him and his Religion in sincerity? Is all sin already bleeding to death in thee, and hadst thou rather die than willingly offend thy Savi∣our that died for thee? Art thou going to hang all remaining affection to them upon his Cross; that there they may be perfectly crucified, and never taken down till by con∣tinued Meditation on it, they be quite dead? Resolve then to go and tell him as much: to declare and shew to him that this is the sense of thine heart. Only ask thy self again; what appetite dost thou feel in thee? Art thou going as a thirsty man to his drink; or a hungry man to his food; or a Bride to the marriage of a chosen soul, dearer than all the world beside? or dost thou feel something like these things in thine heart? what is it that thou hungrest and thirstest after? Is it the tasts of the love of God? Is it his Divine Grace and holy Spirit? Dost thou long to be more like him, and made pertaker of his divine Nature? Art thou going to make a new resignation of thy self to him; to be made one Spirit with him, never any more to de∣part from him? Then think how the Bride-groom will welcome thee: how our Savi∣our,
I mean, will declare and set forth his love to thee; and give thee assurances that his mercy indureth for ever; and bid thee rejoyce and be exceeding glad in what he hath done already, and in the hopes thou hast of what he will do hereafter. And here you may call to mind how the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us: how he manifested forth his glory by his wonderful works: how he taught us the way to eternal life; and at last was betray∣ed and delivered into the hands of sinful men, and was crucified and dyed for us: with all the rest that concerns the know∣ledg of Christ. That so you may have it more ready in your thoughts, when you come to his Table; to do this in Comme∣moration of him. In this manner also you may bewail the sins of your former life; sue for a pardon of what is past; and beseech the grace of his holy Spirit, to assist your resolutions of well doing for the time to come.
The Prayer. O Eternal and most blessed God, the fountain of being and bliss; infinite in perfection; and highly ex∣alted above all our words or thoughts. I am astonished at the thoughts of the brightness of thy glory: and justly afraid to present my self before so great and holy a Majesty. Even that abun∣dant grace which invites me to thee, abashes me too; when I reflect upon my shameful ingratitude to such unde∣served love. It becomes me to ly down in dejection of Spirit and mournful silence; rather than confidently to lift up mine eyes towards Heaven to speak unto thee. But since thou art so rich in Mercy, as to require repenting sinners to draw nigh to the Throne of Grace; I prostrate my self in the humblest re∣verence before the searcher of all hearts. Not to excuse, thou knowest, but to
aggravate my faults: to acknowledg the justice and equity of thy Laws; to condemn my self for opposing thy Soveraign authority; and to vow to thee the most sincere and hearty obe∣dience for the rest of my life. I have done so much evil and so little good; been so eager in the pursuit of the things of this world, and so cold and unconcern'd many times about those of eternity; so unmindful of my promises, unthankful for thy benefits, and unfruitful in the knowledg of the Lord Jesus: that it is a wonder of thy patience, that I am still alive, and not cut down like a barren tree that cum∣bers the ground. For ever adored be thy sparing Mercy, which hath born so long with an unprofitable servant: who hath so many ways offended, in thought word and deed against thy divine Ma∣jesty—Here rec∣kon up those perti∣cular sins, you are conscious of, I have not given thee that honour, worship and service, which I
owe to my Almighty Creator. Nor laid to heart, as I ought, thine infinite love in Christ my Redeemer. Nor du∣ly followed the godly motions of thy holy Spirit; which thou hast sent to renew and sanctifie my affections, and draw me to thine obedience. I have not lived according to the faith which I continually confess: But behaved my self too oft as if I dreaded not the threatnings, and valued not the promi∣ses of my Lord Christ: as if I feared not his vengeance, nor cared for his glorious rewards; and as if he would not come to judg the world, and render to all men according to their works. The stupid insensibleness of mine heart, even now that I remember these things, brings new accusations against me. It testifies that I know not, as I ought, the terror of the Lord: but am apt rashly to mention thy Name, without an awful and conside∣rate
regard to thy infinite greatness, power and holiness, before which I approach. I am no more worthy to be called thy servant; much less to pre∣sent thee with any offering; or receive the least of thy blessings. Nothing but shame and confusion of face belong to me: and it is only of thy tender mer∣cy that I am not lamenting those follies in weeping, wailing and gnashing of teeth; which I speak of now with so little grief and bitterness of Spirit. Mercy, Mercy; still more Mercy, good Lord, I most humbly beseech thee. O that a greater fear and dread of thee may now fall down mightily upon me, and overspread me! O that I may feel such a strong sense of thine incomprehensible Majesty pressing up∣on my heart, that may bear down all other thoughts; and sink me low, and make me abhor my self in thy sight! I know the Sacrifices of the Lord are a broken Spirit; a broken and a con∣trite
heart, O God, thou wilt not de∣spise. And Jesus hath also offered himself a sacrifice for us, in whom thou hast declared that thou art well pleased. For Jesus his sake dispose me now to offer unto thee that acceptable Sacri∣fice. And give me grace ever to fear thee, and to walk humbly with thee; to preserve a tender sense of my duty toward thee, and conscientiously to obey thee: that so, by vertue of his Sacrifice of himself, all my sins may be done away and remembred no more. Blessed be God, that I have any hope of that great mercy. Blessed be God, who by him hath given us everlasting consolation and good hope through his grace. By him I will offer up to thee continually the sacrifice of praise, giving thanks to thy Name. Yea, the mercies of thee my God move me, to present my body a living sacrifice, ho∣ly, acceptable unto thee, which is my reasonable service. I dedicate my self
absolutely to thy obedience. I vow that I will never willingly depart from thy precepts. Assist and strengthen me mercifully with thy grace that I may perform my vows: and never be so unreasonable as to return to those sins, which are the burden of my heart, and grieve thy holy Spirit; which rent the flesh and shed the blood of the Lord Jesus; and which I have so often and so solemnly protested against. And now that I am going to thine holy Table, to commemorate the Sa∣crifice of my Saviour; to give thee farther testimonies of my love to thee; and receive new tokens of thy love to me: O Lord, vouchsafe to make thy self powerfully present to my mind. Represent thy self and thy Son Jesus so lively to my thoughts, in all thy wisdom, power, goodness, holi∣ness and truth; that I may never for∣get thee any more: but most seriously
reverence thee, and love thee, and re∣joyce in thee, and trust thee and obey thee, all the dayes of my life. Imprint the very image of thy Son upon me: that I may carry him ever in mine heart, and have his life and death con∣tinually before mine eyes; and in all things conform my self to his will, and fashion my self after his holy example. Come, Lord Jesus, and possess thy self of my whole man. Purifie me from all remaining filthiness either of the flesh or of the Spirit. Bring in all thy heavenly graces along with thee into my soul. And be my perpetual de∣fence, by giving me a fuller commu∣nication of thy holy Spirit, and more mighty aids to do my duty towards thee and towards all men. And for that end, compose mine unsetled thoughts before I approach to receive the holy Mysteries. That I may attend thee with a full and clear
conception of their meaning; with an actual belief of thy whole Gospel; with most sensible love to thee, and de∣sire to be more like thee; with thy high praises in my mouth, and joy unspeakable in mine heart. May I presume, most gracious Father, to ask such tastes and rellishes of thy won∣drous love, that I may never be able to delight in any thing so much as in the remembrance of it. But mine eyes may be ever towards the Lord; and I may hunger and thirst perpe∣tually after thy righteousness: till I am perfectly made pertaker of thy divine nature, and rendred meet to be transla∣ted to that high and holy place; where I shall see thee not as now in mysterious representations, but openly and face to face. Amen, Lord Jesus: who art able to save to the uttermost all them that come to God by thee. In thy most blessed name and words I continue my humble prayers. Our Father, &c.
A Meditation after the Sacrament. WHen you come home or some time after, ask your soul, what went∣est thou out to see? where hast thou been? and what hast thou been doing? Bid it never forget, that thou hast been with the Lord of life; and that before God, Angels and Men thou hast acknow∣ledged him, and devoted thy self to his obedience. That he hath vouchsafed to represent unto thee his marvellous love, the pains he hath taken for thy salvation, and the great desire he hath to see thee with him in immortal glory. Of which he hath given thee such earnests and pledges, by making thee pertaker of his body and blood; that thou mayst say of that place where he was pleased to meet thee: This is no other than the gate of Heaven: I have been in the porch of his dwelling place, and begun to enter into the joy of my Lord [Here you may read over again, that which I said our Lord might be conceived to speak unto you there: and then go on and say] How shall I escape if I should neg∣lect such great salvation! God forbid that I should receive this grace in vain. As I
have received Christ Jesus the Lord,Col. 2.6. so will I walk in him. I will endeavour to keep my self holy and unblameable before him in love; and to have my conversation as becomes the Gospel. There are no joys like to the joys of God. No pleasures comparable to those of Christian piety. All his Commandments are sweeter than the hony and the hony-comb; and in keeping of them there is great reward. Shall I cease then to delight my self in the Lord, and to do good? Shall I leave off to do the rest of his will, now that I have done this in remembrance of my Saviour? Shall I go away from him, now that I am gone from the place where his honour dwelleth? Alas, whither shall I go, thou,Joh. 6.68. Lord, hast the words of eternal life. Thou art the author of eternal Salvation to all them that obey thee.Heb. 5.9. I will go in the strength of the Lord God:Ps. 71.16. I will make mention of thy goodness, even of thine only.1 Thess 4.1. As I have re∣ceived how I ought to walk and please God, so I will abound more and more.Ephes. 4.15, 24. I will grow up into him in all things who is the head; till I perfectly resemble him in right∣eousness and holiness of truth. Here you may meditate upon all the parts of his holy life, and the compleat
example he hath set us of all divine ver∣tues: more especially those which shone at his death. And, as I have known some do, you may single out one or two, for your daily meditation all this month: that you may bring your self to an habitual imi∣tation of him [suppose in his great HU∣MILITY] and tread in his steps who did no sin,1 Pet. 2.22. neither was guile found in his mouth. And as you have begun the New year well, so resolve you will continue it, and become a new man; by leading a more exactly holy course of life,Mat. 26.41. Watch there∣fore and pray, that you fall not into tempta∣tion. And often represent to your self the great love of Christ, that it may con∣strain you, because you thus judg; that if one died for all, then were all dead:2 Cor. 5.14, 15. And that he died for all, that they which live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again.
The Prayer. O Most Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty; Heaven and Earth are full of the glory of thy Ma∣jesty. I most heartily joyn with all the Saints on earth, with the Angels in Heaven, and the holy ones that are above, in giving blessing, honour and praise unto thee. Glory be unto thee, O God most high, thou great Creator and possessor of Heaven and Earth; thou preserver of all things; thou spring of an eternal Mercy: who hast made Angels and men to know thee, and acknowledg thee, and praise thee, and love thee, and be beloved of thee for ever; who hast so loved mankind, that thou hast opened thy bosom, and sent thy dear Son to convey thy charity to us. All laud and praise and thanksgiving be to thee, O Father of Mercies, who hast now made me taste how gracious and good thou art.
And glory be to the Son of God, who took on him the form of a ser∣vant; who died for us upon the Cross; who purged away our sins by his blood; who hath left us so many re∣membrances of his love; and given us his body and blood to preserve our souls and bodies to eternal life: who lives for ever to make intercession for us; and hath promised to come again and take us up unto himself. And blessed be the holy Spirit, the mighty power of God; the Author of all good thoughts; the inspirer of all heavenly desires; the light and com∣fort of our minds; the purifier of our hearts; the guide and strength of our life; who hath given us the earnest of the eternal inheritance. Thus will I praise thee whilst I live.Psal. 63.4. I will sing of the mercies of the Lord
for ever.Psalm 86.12.89.1.71.23.86.5. My lips shall greatly rejoyce when I sing unto thee, and my soul which thou hast redeemed. For thou, Lord, art good and ready to forgive: and plenteous in mercy unto all them that call upon thee. I have now tasted of the abundance of thy grace and dearest love: the savour of which, O that it may remain fresh for ever in my heart: that I may live for ever in thy love, and be ready to die for thy love: that I may delight to do thy will, O God, and be content to suffer it, as the blessed Jesus did. And, O that I may never forget to feed on him daily by faith and love, till he indeed live in me and I in him; and all the powers of my soul and body be imployed by his coun∣sels and not my own. O that my life may be an exact imitation of him, and express his perfections, and shew forth his vertues, and declare to all how much I love him. Especially endue me with great humility and modesty of Spirit;
that I may live in a constant remem∣brance of thee my Creator: and con∣sidering that thou art the author of eve∣ry good gift, may never be puffed up, nor do any thing through strife and vain-glory;Phil. 2.3, 4, 5. but in lowliness of mind esteem others better than my self. O that the same mind may be in me, which was also in Christ Jesus: who being in the form of God, made him∣self of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant; and hum∣bling himself became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross. That so thou mayst exalt me in due time to glory and honour, as thou hast highly exalted him: and when thou shalt call me from this delightful im∣ployment of worshipping, praising and serving thee here on earth, I may pass into the company of Angels and Saints: whose work it is with eter∣nal joy to glorifie thee our Creator and Redeemer.
Let thy way be known upon earth,Psal. 67.2, 3. and thy saving health unto all nations. Let the people praise thee, O God: Let all the people praise thee. Let the earth rejoyce, and the multitude of Isles be glad, because the Lord Je∣sus reigneth, and governs the world in righteousness and truth. O that all the kingdoms of the earth, may be∣come the kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ. That Turks, Jews and all Infidels may be converted unto thee: and that all who name the name of Christ in every place may depart from all iniquity. Communicate especially to all Christian Kings, Princes and Go∣vernors a large measure of wisdom, justice and goodness. That they may think it their greatest Crown and glory to be thy faithful Ministers: and imi∣tate the charity of our Lord Jesus, by imploying their power in doing good to all that are under their charge. O
that thy Priests may be clothed with righteousness, and thy Saints shout aloud for joy. That the poor may be satisfied with bread; the fatherless find mercy with thee; the widdows be comforted and protected; the discon∣solate refreshed; the sick eased and re∣stored; the prisoners delivered; the captives redeemed; the oppressed sup∣ported and relieved; and all men, in every estate and condition of life, con∣tented, bettered and amended. Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abun∣dantly above all that we ask or think,Ephes. 3.20, 21. accord∣ing to the power that worketh in us, unto him be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world without end, Amen.
February. The Meditation before the Sacrament. THink with your self, it is now a month since our Lord did me the honour to entertain me at his Table. Where have I been ever since that happy time? What have I been doing? Have I never gone to return him thanks for that grace bestowed on me? Have I been a perfect stranger to him, who loves me so much, who spake so kindly then unto me, and gave me such assurances of his everlasting kindness? O shameless ingratitude! How shall I be able ever to look him in the face any more? I shall sink and die under the load of such a fearful guilt. But I hope the case is not altogether so bad with me. Have I not sometimes re∣flected on his incomparable love? Have I not endeavoured to preserve some memo∣ry of the benefits he hath done unto me? Is there not still a little sense of them re∣maining in my heart? I would fain incou∣rage my self to wait again upon my Lord. Pardon me, O God, if I presume again to
enter into thy gates with thanksgiving, and into thy Courts with praise: to eat of the bread which came down from Heaven; to shew forth the Lords death; to repre∣sent to my God the Sacrifice he made for the atonement of our sins; and by vertue of it humbly to expect the continuance of his pardon; to renew my Covenant with him, and to receive new confirmations of the truth of his promises to me. Awake, Awake, O my soul, all thy holy thoughts, thy Faith, thy Love, and every other grace, till thou canst say with David, My heart is fixed,Psal. 57.7. O God, my heart is prepared, I will sing and give praise. Go, and shew him how thy heart hath been wounded with the thoughts of his love; how all thy sins have been bleeding to death; how ready thou art to offer up thy self again in Sacrifice to him. Shew him how resolved thou art to walk on still more steadily in his holy wayes; to employ all the renew∣ed strength thou shalt receive in his hearty service; and to go forth in the joy of the Lord to do his will with greater freedom and cheerfulness of Spirit. Then thou mayest think thou hearest that voice of wisdom which saith,Prov. 9.5. Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine
which I have mingled. Or that of the di∣vine Lover; Eat, O Friends, drink, yea,Cam. 5.1. drink abundantly, O beloved. Let your soul be satisfied as with marrow and fatness,Psal. 63.5. and your mouth praise him with joyful lips. For Christ himself saith, Blessed are the poor in Spirit:Matth. 5. for theirs is the kingdom of Hea∣ven. Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth. Blessed are they which do hanger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled. Blessed are the mer∣ciful: for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God. Blessed are the peace makers: for they shall be called the children of God. Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake: for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven. As he will one day say to such, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world: So now he authorizes his ministers to say, come ye blessed souls, receive the tokens of his love, some earnests of future bliss; and rejoyce in hopes of his heaven∣ly kingdom. He hath not only prepared for you a kingdom, but, as the Psalmist speaks in another case, he hath prepared a Table for you, and anoints your head wish oyl (that gladness where with our royal
high-Priest is crowned) and makes your Cup (his coelestial blessings poured on us) to run over. Let us go then and humbly receive that Cup of blessing, to which he invites us. Let us bless the Lord and speak good of his name: desiring that all mankind may be blessed in him:Psal. 72.17 all nations may call him blessed. Psal. 50.16, 17.To the wicked indeed God saith, what hast thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou shouldst take my Covenant in thy mouth? Seeing thou hatest instruction, and castest my words behind thee.Rom. 8.8. They that are in the flesh, cannot please God. And the works of the flesh are manifest which are these,Gal. 5.19. &c. Adul∣tery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emu∣lations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, en∣vyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings and such like. For them that do such things there is a cup in the hand of the Lord, and the wine of it, saith the Psalmist, is red, but it is the cup of indignation,. 16.. and the wine of the fierceness of his wrath. True, my soul; but let us go therefore and renounce all ungodliness, and worldly lusts. Let us crucifie the flesh with all the affections and appetites thereof. Let us
ingage our hearts in that Covenant, which we have often taken into our mouths: and protest and vow that we think it our hap∣piness to be his most obedient servants. Then make no doubt, but that he will accept thee, and send thee away with his blessing;1 Thess. 1.10. and bid thee wait for his Son from Heaven, whom he raised from the dead, even Je∣sus which delivered us from the wrath to come.
The Prayer before. O Most holy and ever blessed God, who art brighter than the Sun in its greatest strength; and dwellest in that light, which no man can ap∣proach unto; whom no man hath seen, or can see. But in thine infinite goodness hast condiscended to shew us thy glory by manifesting thy self in our flesh; so that our weakness may look upon thee and live. I thy poor Creature, incompass∣ed with darkness, adore as I am able, that unspeakable love: though I have just rea∣son to tremble even at the presence of my humblest Saviour, and to be afraid when I have before mine eyes the to∣kens of his dearest love. For I have not duly weighed his infinite kindness, nor rejoyced in the light of his blessed Gospel, nor loved his Command∣ments, nor feared his threatnings, nor setled my hope and satisfaction in his
pretious promises, as I ought to have done. A great part of my life, I ac∣knowledg, hath held but little confor∣mity with the faith which I profess. I have not remembred so frequently as becomes me, my dependance upon thee as my Creator, and my subjection to thee as my Soveraign Lord. I have strangely forgot thy fatherly love in sending thy Son to dwell among us: and his tender love to us in all his ago∣nies and sweat and wounds, and bitter passion for our sake. O the folly I have been guilty of in listning to the inordinate desires of the flesh, rather than to the motions of thy holy Spirit. How many neglects [if not injuriesHere you may men∣tion, that earning, wrath, conteton, aria∣ censu∣. &c.  ha  guilty of. have my Brethren to accuse me of? How little have I been concern'd for the honour of Religion, and the good and inlargment of thy Church. I have not glorified thee with body and spirit, as if I believed the Resurrection of the dead, and expected from Christ
Jesus forgiveness of sins and everlast∣ing life. How shall I stand in that great day of judgment, which I have so little thought of? whither shall I go, when the remembrance of my Savi∣our is now so astonishing, and the re∣membrance of thy love so sad and af∣flicting? It is some small comfort to me, that I am something confounded and ashamed in my own thoughts. Thou hast not taken, I hope, thy ho∣ly spirit from me.Psa. 138.8. Thou wilt not forsake the work of thine own hands, but perfect that which concerneth me.Phil. 1.6. As thou hast begun a good work in me, so thou wilt finish it, I humbly hope, to the day of Jesus Christ. Pierce my heart with a more mortifying sense of what I utter with my mouth. Work in me a deeper sorrow for all my sins, a godly sorrow that worketh repen∣tance, never to be repented of. Turn my heart, Good Lord, turn me quite away from them: that I may loath and abhor that which is evil,Rom. 12.9 and cleave to that
which is good. I expose my soul here unto thee, as an object of thy tenderest pitty and compassion. I spread my wounds before thee, that thou mayst cleanse and heal them. It is not thy pardon alone which I desire; but that I may be thoroughly renewed and chang'd in my mind, will and affecti∣ons. I long for a strong and setled apprehension of thee, to over-awe and rule me in every thought, word, desire and action of my whole life. For a stedfast love to thee, that may move me willingly and chearfully to obey thee. And for an active hope in thee, which may constantly excite me to pu∣rifie my self, even as thou art pure. Great, O Lord, is the levity of my mind, and the fickleness of my thoughts; which makes me afraid lest all these holy desires should presently vanish. Wretch that I am, how of∣ten have I started from my purposes, and forsaken my own resolutions? I am
going  more unto thy Ata to er my soul and body to thee▪ to renew my Covenant with thee; and to put my self into thy hands, that thou mayst preserve these thoughts and purposes in my heart for ever. Accept, most loving Father, of these holy intentions. Meet them there a∣gain; and visit me from above with a more plentiful effusion of thy holy Spi∣rit, to confirm and strengthen me in all goodness. I beseech thee by the pretious blood of Jesus Christ, the price of our Salvation; by thy won∣drous and ineffable love which gave him for us; to pour down upon me the abundance of thy grace, that I may ever hereafter walk before thee with a perfect heart in newness of life. As thou hast invited me to that holy feast in remembrance of him, so dispose my soul to approach unto it with such re∣verence and holy fear; with such pure devotion and fervent love; with such
spiritual gladness and joy; that tasting the pleasures of thine house, I may ne∣ver thirst for any thing so much: but delight my self alwayes in the Lord, and do good. Lord, what wait I for? truly, my hope is in thee: that I shall encrease in the faith, and be rooted and grounded in love, and stick unto thy testimonies with my whole heart, and run the wayes of thy Commandments till I have finished my course with joy. Come, Lord Jesus, and seat thy faith in my mind and will, as in its throne. Establish thy Laws and Government there: raign and rule in me for ever. That armed with thy power, all thy ene∣mies may flee before thee, and no evil thing may dwell in thy sight: but I may overcome the world, the flesh, and the Devil, and serve thee without fear in righteousness and holiness all the dayes of my life. Hear my words, O Lord, consider my meditation.Psal. 5.1.17.1. Give ear unto my
prayer that goeth not out of feigned lips. And make me to know and feel that Jesus who dyed for me,Rev. 1.18. is alive from the dead and liveth for evermore: and that he is an eternal fountain of life and strength, of comfort and refreshment, to all those that by him believe in God,1 Pet. 1.21. who raised him from the dead and gave him glory, that our faith and hope might be in God. In his most powerful name I sue unto thee, for all that is comprehended in his own holy words; saying, Our Father, &c.
Meditation afterward. SOmetime that day, and as often as you can after, reflect upon your own thoughts, resolutions and vows: and con∣sider, that there may be but a few dayes, perhaps hours, remaining; before you must appear at the Tribunal of him, who hath now entertained you at his Table. The next sight you have of him, may be upon his throne,1 Pet. 5.5. as one that is ready to judge the quick and the dead. Put your soul in mind of the great account you must then give, of all that you have done in the body; and of your sacred actions, no que∣stion, as well as of the rest. And therefore ask your self in the most serious manner, and bid your soul tell you, with what af∣fection hath the death of the Lord been now remembred? Hast thou as sincerely renounced all thy evil wayes and consecra∣ted thy self to the life of Christ, as thou hopest to be saved? As God shall judge the world in righteousness, art thou resolved and determined to become a new Creature, and to pass the time of thy sojourning here in fear? O how dreadful will he then ap∣pear, to those who return with the dog to
his vomit, after they have eaten of this holy bread, and drunk of this holy Cup? who can stand before him that hath known and remembred his transcendent love, and yet loved his ease, his pleasure, his money or any other thing, better than him and his eternal life? It concerns me nearly, O my soul, to keep him ever in my thoughts, and to express him in my life. That when he comes he may see himself in me, and behold his own image, in righteousness and true holiness, fairly ingraven on my heart. For many will say unto him at that day, Lord,Luke 13.26, 27. We have eaten and drunk in thy pre∣sence, and thou hast taught in our streets. But he will say, I tell you I know you not whence you are; depart from me all ye wor∣kers of iniquity. Most dismal change now he invites, now he saith come; but then he will say depart: if we come not to his Table with hearts to entertain him, to suffer him to dwell in us, and to be the sole disposer of all our actions. God for∣bid that ever that terrible voice should sound in mine ears. This one word DE∣PART from me; how confounding will it be! It must needs strike the stoutest soul into eternal sorrow. The searcher of my heart knows that I
went unfeignedly thither, to give him pos∣session of it: and here again I confirm the gift. Let him command what he pleases, and I will obey it. Let him bring his Cross along with him; I will submit unto it. Come poverty, come reproaches, come imprisonment, come pains and tor∣ments, come death it self: rather than be so miserable as to depart from the living God. Depart from me,Psal. 119.115. rather, ye evil do∣ers; for I will keep the Commandments of my God.Psal. 101.2, 3. I will walk within my house with a perfect heart. No wicked thing will I set before mine eyes: I hate the work of them that turn aside, it shall not cleave to me. All my delight shall be upon the Saints, that are in the earth;Psal. 16.3. and upon such as excel in vertue. And that you may preserve these good purposes, let your heart be often there, where they were conceived and made; though your body cannot. Look often back upon the Table of the Lord, and say with the same holy Psalmist, O when shall I come and appear again before thee.42.2. Early will I seek thee, O my God:Psal. 63.1, 2, &c. my soul thirst∣eth for thee; that I may see thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in the San∣ctuary. Because thy loving kindness is better
than life: my lips shall praise thee. Thus will I bless thee, while I live: I will lift up my hands in thy name. My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and with fatness: and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips. And to furnish your soul with greater plenty of good thoughts, you may often reflect upon the example which Christ hath set you in his death as well as in his life. And perticularly resolve to spend this month in meditating every day upon his great CHARITY,2 Cor. 8.9. who though he was rich, yet for our sakes he became poor, that by his poverty we might be rich. In this God commended his love to us,Rom. 5.8. that while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us. Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends.Joh. 15.13 But we when we were enemies, were reconciled to God by the death of his Son:Rom. 5.10. and there∣fore shall much more be saved by his life. Excite in your self hereby, a great and compassionate love to all mankind: especially to your Brethren, with whom you are knit in one body. That you may be strongly inclined to do good, as occa∣sion is offered; to refresh the bowels of the poor and needy; to comfort and
support the feeble minded; to live with all in unity and peace: till your Christian friendship be perfected in endless love, in the other world. Remember that God is the God of peace, and Christ is the Lord of peace. Often meditate on the words of our Lord, that it is better to give than to receive: and upon these words of a good man, that He is the best Merchant who layes out his time upon God, and his money upon the poor.
The Thanksgiving and Prayer. I Cast my self down before thee, O Lord, in the deepest humility of soul; to worship and praise thee toge∣ther with all the heavenly Host, saying: Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God, Al∣mighty; Heaven and Earth are full of thy glorious goodness. Thou art the joy of all those happy creatures above, who continually behold the brightness of thy glory: and thy pre∣sence, and the light of thy countenance makes Heaven upon earth to us thy ser∣vants, whom thou admittest thus near unto thee. Glory be to God in the highest, who to all other blessings hath added the gift of his dear Son; and delivered him up for us all. Glory be to the Son of God, the Prince of peace; who hath loved us and given himself for us, to redeem us from all iniquity: and left us such remembrances of him∣self,
and pretious pledges of his never failing love. And thanks be to the holy spirit of grace, the power of the divine love; which draws us unto God, and inflames us with his love, and raises up our hearts towards Heaven. Blessed, for ever blessed, be thine infinite wis∣dom, power, and goodness, which all the world proclaims unto us, and which thou hast more particularly ma∣nifested in Christ Jesus.Psal. 73.29 There is none in Heaven that we can desire, but thee; nor in earth besides thee: that we may know thee, and intirely love thee, and be made like unto thee, and be loved by thee, and made meet to live for ever with thee. O that the sight I have now had of thee, may make all things here below seem mean and contemptible in mine eyes, in compare with thy favour and good will towards me. That no temptation in the whole world may be able to draw my heart from the obedi∣ence I have vowed to thee: but I may
ever think of thee, and ever seek thee, and ever speak of thy goodness, and esteem my self happy in being beloved of thee, the possessor of Heaven and earth. It is the serious purpose of my heart to cleave to thee; and to spend my days in humility and heavenly-mindedness, in prayer and praises, in temperance and chastity, in works of justice and mercy, in doing of good and forgiv∣ing evil, in meekness and peaceable∣ness, contentedness and thankfulness, patience and forbearance, and in all other fruits of thy holy Spirit. And therefore I humbly waite on thee, O Father of mercies, for the continued help and assistance thereof,1 Pet. 2.9.1.5. that I may be able to shew forth the virtues of thee, who hast called me out of darkness into thy marvellous light. Thou wilt preserve me, I hope, by thy mighty power through faith unto Salvation: And so mightily assist me by thy grace, that I may keep my self unspotted from the world; and
never do any thing to offend thee, and cause thee to depart away, or hide thy face from thy servant who is devoted to thee.Coloss. 3.12, 13, &c, O that I may never forget to put on, as the elect of God, bowels of mer∣cies, kindness, lowliness of mind, meekness, long suffering; and above all those things cha∣rity, which is the bond of perfectness: with∣out which whoever liveth, is as dead before thee. Pour into my heart more and more of this most excellent grace; that according to my ability I may do good, and be rich in good works,1 Tim. 6.18. ready to di∣stribute, willing to communicate; laying up in store for my self a good foundation against the time to come, that I may lay hold on eternal life. And, as this Charity binds me, I most heartily desire the good of all mankind: especially of the Universal Church, which Christ hath purchased by his blood. That the devil may not devour his inheritance; and Christians may not bite and devour one another,
by hatred and strife and bitter envy∣ings: but the peace of thee our God may rule in their hearts, and all agree together in godly love. It pitties thy servants to see her bleeding wounds; her miserable rents and divisions. O that the sweet and loving spirit of the Lord Jesus may inspire every part of thy Church. O that all who call up∣on the name of Christ may be indued with uniting principles, and listen to healing counsels, and be filled with bro∣therly affections and dispositions. Hear, O Lord, the daily prayers of every member thereof. Relieve the poor; pitty the groans of the sick; sup∣port the infirmities of the weak; take compassion upon the sighings of cap∣tives, the cryes of the Fatherless and widdows, the distresses of the stran∣gers and friendless; and the various needs of all those that have no helpers. For which end, fill the hearts of all Christian Kings and Rulers with abun∣dance
of wisdom and charity; that they may have such a tender and mer∣ciful care of all their subjects, as Pa∣rents have of their Children: provid∣ing for their happiness and comfort to the utmost of their power. Give thy grace also to all the Pastors of thy flock, that they may stir up every one to do their duties; by their holy exhortations and godly examples: and the light of all Christians may so shine before men, that they seeing their good works may glorifie thee our heavenly Father. That the strangers to our Religion may come and submit themselves unto thee: and at last there may be one fold, as there is one shepherd; and the whole world with one voice and one consent may praise and magnifie thy glorious name. Now to him that is of power to esta∣blish me,Rom. 16.25, 26. according to the Gospel and preaching of Jesus Christ; to God only wise be glory through Christ Jesus for ever. Amen.
March. Meditation before the Sacrament. YOU may consider that when God intended to make a new Covenant with Man of more abundant grace and mercy than was ever known before; he was pleased to do like a Man. The word was made flesh, and he came and dwelt among us. He declared by the mouth of one taken from among our selves his great good will towards us. He entred into all imaginable bonds, to perform his part of that sacred Covenant. He gave us his word and his oath (two immutable things in which it was impossible for God to lie) He gave us his Son for a pledg; and his Son gave his blood for a seal, and his holy Spi∣rit for an earnest of his eternal love. Ado∣red be the goodness of God (should you say within your selves) who hath done so much to assure the hearts of trembling and unbelieving sinners. Adored be his goodness, who is so desirous we should be perswaded of it. Is there no way for us also to ingage our selves, and pass our word as solemnly to him? Can we find no bonds
that are sacred, wherein to ty our selves strongly to his service? Blessed be the Mercies of our God, who hath appointed two Sacraments: wherein we for our parts promise and seal to stand to the conditions of that Covenant of grace. But so ex∣cessive is his love, that he doth there again likewise ingage his fidelity to us, and se∣cures to us the blessings which he hath pro∣mised in his holy Gospel. O how excellent is his loving kindness, which hath given us such strong consolation! And how long is it now since I was first devoted to him, and received the first assurances of his love? TheseReckon from the time of  Bap¦tism, 20, 30, 40, &c. — years have I been called by his name; and made pertaker of his grace. In my baptism he began to shew his love to me; and there I entred into Covenant with him, and vowed to keep his Com∣mandments. What manner of person ought I to have been in all holy conversation and godliness; who am so deeply indebted to him; who have lived so long in his fa∣mily; and been often likewise entertained at his Table, and received there the re∣newed tokens of his dearest love? O how unwearied is his goodness, which calls me once more to pertake of that great favour! Canst thou find in thy heart, O my soul, to admire any thing, to love any thing
like unto him? Let us go with the forward∣est affection to testifie how much we value his kindness: to profess the sincerity of our faith in him; and most dutiful love unto him. Let us go and confirm the agree∣ment that is between us, and make a new choice of him for our only Master and Sa∣viour, and take upon us to be eternally his Servants. Nay, render him our most hearty thanks that he will admit us to that honour; and with the most passionate admiration make him our acknowledgments, that he would do so much to deserve our Service. Is not this thy mind and intention in ap∣proaching to his Table? Doth it not grieve thee that thou hast at any time offended so great love? Hadst thou not rather die and be crucified as he was, than willingly break the least of his Commands? Dost thou not in heart and resolution forsake every thing, that would hinder thee from doing his will? Art thou not purposed to follow Jesus in all the actions of an holy, humble and mortified life? Let us go then and wait upon him; and shew him the love that we bear unto him. Let us give him thanks, even for this good mind which he hath put into us; and for all the hopes we have that he will continue it to eter∣nal life. Be not discouraged; for when the
wicked forsakes his way,Isa. 55.7. and the unrighte∣ous man his thoughts, he himself hath said that, he will have mercy upon him, and mul∣tiply to pardon. He will pour more abun∣dantly of his holy spirit on us to strengthen our resolutions. He will make us grow in grace, and bring forth all the fruits of righteousness. He will abundantly sa∣tisfie us with the fatness of his house,Psal. 36.8, 9, 10. and make us to drink of the River of his plea∣sures. For with him is the fountain of life; in his light shall we see light. He will con∣tinue his loving kindness unto them that know him; and his righteousness to the up∣right in heart.
The Prayer. O Most holy and ever blessed God; the fountain of good, the highest object of our love, the rest and satisfaction of all rational desires; infinitely greater than all we can see, and all we can conceive. I bow my self before thee, and humbly worship thy incomprehensible Majesty. It was thy goodness which brought me into being; and thy patience which hath continued me in it unto this time; and a greater mercy which hath not suffer∣ed my being to be miserable to me; but heaped on me innumerable good things. But I have no fit name for that superabundant love, which thought of making mankind so very happy by thy Son Jesus. It is a won∣der, O Lord, that thou wouldest be at such expense about those, who had chosen to be any thing rather than such
as thou madest them. None but infi∣nite compassion could be so tender of those who despised thy Image, and loved to live like the beasts that perish. None but thou, O merciful God, could think of bestowing greater benefits on such brutish sinners. And nothing but a stupid negligence and unaccount∣able inconsiderateness, could ever re∣fuse to be made pertakers of such end∣less happiness as thou designest to us. I am one of those strange things that have forsaken thee, and know not why. Who was long insensible of thy grace, and unmoveable under thy greatest importunities to return to thee. And since thou hast prevailed with me, am too much inclined to content my self with a small degree of likeness to thee: and apt to find out little pretences and excuses, for the doing of my own will, rather than thine. And that though I am so solemnly consecrated to thee, and have been instructed in
thy blessed Gospel, and put in hopes of such glorious rewards, and receiv∣ed such incouragements at thy Table; where I have frequently promised chearful obedience in all things. Blessed be thy inconceivable love, O most gracious Lord, who hast shed thy blood for those who sin against that love; if with all their hearts and all their souls they return unto thee. For ever magnified be thy mercy, who hast given us so many assurances of the truth of thy love to us; and so many opportunities to testifie the truth of ours towards thee. Thou art plea∣sed not only by thy word, thy promise and oath to give us ground of hope: but even by outward and sensible signs to incourage our weak and justly fear∣ful faith. For who can but tremble to think, that he hath at any time offended the majesty of Heaven and earth? and yet who can but hope, that hears the
voice of thy Son inviting us to come unto thee, and promising a pardon to returning sinners? O thou who callest me now again to thy holy Table, and there hast made such rich provision for us: assist I most humbly beseech thee all the Meditations, desires and re∣solutions of my soul in that holy action. That I may remember all that the Lord Jesus hath done and suffered for me, with such an humble admiration, a lively faith, and a thankful love; that I may feel my heart tied faster to him with the cords of his love; and sent up to Heaven, as the whole burnt of∣ferings, to the Lord. Draw me, O God of love, more powerfully to thee and fill me more with wisdom and goodness; that my mind may more clearly discern between things that dif∣fer; my will may become more easy to all that is good, and more obstinate against all that is evil; and that every affection and passion may be more
gentle and submissive to the govern∣ment of thy holy Laws. Possess my heart against all the force of tempta∣tions by a never dying sense of thy goodness, and a remembrance of those joys which thou hast prepared for those that love thee. O that all my graces may receive increase of nourishment: that I may more perfectly imitate the humility, the meekness, the patience, the charity, the resignation and abso∣lute obedience of my Lord and Ma∣ster Jesus Christ. He hath bidden us believe, that thou wilt give thy holy Spirit to those that ask it; as readily as an earthly parent gives bread to his children. O let the power of that at∣tend upon me; to fix my wandring thoughts, to raise up my heavy and dull affections, and to form all my ho∣ly purposes into a setled disposition and temper of heart, to comply with thy blessed will in every thing. I am not worthy, I confess, of the smallest
crumb of thy mercy: but thou hast made me to hope for these great blessings, through thy grace declared unto us in Christ Jesus. In whose words I further recommend my self unto thy merciful kindness; saying, Our Father, &c.
The Meditation afterward. WHen you have leisure to retire alone by your self, you may say to your self as the people did, when they beheld the sick man at our Saviours word take up his bed and walk (Luke 5.26.) I have seen strange things to day. I have seen the marvellous love of Heaven to us sinful dust and ashes. I have seen how the Son of God dyed for the love of us: how the blessed Jesus was hanged and bled upon a Cross for our Salvation. I have beheld him presenting himself unto me; and of∣fering to make me pertaker of all his be∣nefits. With what affections did I meet and receive his strange love? Did not my heart burn within me when he opened the Counsels of his heart to me? Did it not melt and dissolve into love, when he shewed me how passionately he loved me? Did I not offer my self both soul and body to him, and promise to be his faithful servant? Did I not remember that I was his already, and renew my vows to cleave unto him in loyal obedience? O what a transforming sight was it, to behold Jesus who was made a little lower than Angels for
the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honour, and promising by patient con∣tinuance in well doing, to lift me up also at last unto glory! Lord what is man that thou takest knowledg of him!Psal 144.. or the Son of man that thou makest account of him? How is it possible to forget this love, or my own ingagements? For what pleasures shall I leave these, of Communion with God and my gracious Master Christ Jesus? You offer too little, all ye flattering temptations up∣on earth, that would draw my affections from so great an happiness. There can be nothing comparable, to being beloved of the undoubted Lord of Heaven and earth. One thing have I desired of the Lord,Psal. 27.4. that will I seek after; that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the dayes of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to in∣quire in his temple. This is sufficient to indear an holy life unto me; that I may be always fit to be one of his guests, to feast with him at his Table, to be filled with his comforts, and live in hope to live with him in endless joys. And could  but see what things he hath prepared for those that love him; the height of his glo∣ry, the attendance of his Ministers, the pleasures that are at his right hand; there would be more spirit in me. This little
that I have seen makes me say,1 King 10.8. Happy are those thy servants, that stand continually be∣fore thee.Psal. 65.4.84.3. Blessed are they whom thou hast chosen, and caused to approach unto thee; that they may dwell in thy heavenly courts; they will still be praising thee. I will never foregoe the beginnings of this bliss. For a day in thy Courts is better than a thousand. I had rather be a door-keeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of wicked∣ness. For the Lord God is a Sun and shield:Psal. 84.10, 11, 1 the Lord will give grace and glory: no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly. O Lord of Hosts, blessed is the man that trusteth in thee. And here it will be fit to remember, how every deliberate sin after such fresh experi∣ences of Gods goodness, new obligations from him, and new resolutions and vows to him; will be of a more crimson die, and a bloodier nature. And therefore you must be sober and watch unto prayer. And re∣member withal, on the other side, that every good action will be the more accep∣table, when it proceeds out of mere love to our Master Jesus, who hath loved us so much. And therefore always indeavor to quicken the one by reflecting upon the other. More particularly you may resolve
to meditate all the Month following upon the great MEEKNESS of the Lord Jesus. Who was dumb as a sheep before the sheerers,Isa. 53.7. and as a Lamb that is brought to the slaughter. He was oppressed and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth. When he was reviled, Pet. 2.23 he reviled not again: when he suffered, he threatned not; but com∣mitted himself to him that judgeth righte∣ously. And so labour to tread in his steps and to imitate him in this lovely grace. To speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, but gentle, shewing all meekness unto all men. For we our selves also were sometimes foolish,Tit. 3.3, 2. and disobedient, and deceived, &c. This vertue the Apostles, there and in other places1 Pet.  15., require us to exercise especially toward Rulers and Governours. And S. Peter recommends this to Wives as the most handsome and becoming attire; even the ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit,1 Pet. 3.4. which is in the sight of God of great price.
The Thanksgiving and Praye PRaised be God. Let all ∣tures in Heaven and Earth praise the name of the Lord. For his name alone is excellent; his glory is above earth and heaven. Glory be to thee, O God most high, the Creator of all; the Father of mercies; who openest thy hand and fillest every living thing with good. Blessed be thy name, O Son of the Father, the ever blessed Je∣sus, to whom I humbly bow my self, as the Image of God, the brightness of his glory, the redeemer of our souls, the Mediator of our peace, and our intercessor at the right hand of the Ma∣jesty on high. O thou holy Spirit of grace, the Almighty power of God, inspire my heart, that I may know, that I may acknowledg, that I may love, delight in, obey and praise the Lord our God from henceforth and for ever.
Thanks be to the eternal goodness for the everlasting Gospel; for the constant services of thy Ministers; for the happy Communion of Saints; for all the comforts of food, and health, and peace, and friends; above all for the death, resurrection, ascention and exaltation of our Lord Jesus; for all the fruits of them; and for the earnests and pledges I have received, of for∣giveness of sins and immortal life. One day is too short to recount thy Mercies. While I live I shall never be able to find out, how much thou hast already loved me; how many blessings thou hast loaded me withal since I came into this world. And yet in the care∣ful improvement of these, thou inten∣dest to bring me to higher and end∣less felicity. O that the remembrance of what I have seen and felt of thy love, may always cleave unto my mind: and that I may every day see and be
made sensible of more. That the pow∣erful operation of it in my heart, may defend me against all the allurements of the world and the flesh: and no∣thing may be able to intice me from my duty, nor be hard and difficult to do for thy mighty love. Incline my heart, O Lord, continually towards thee; that I may know I love thee, by thinking often of thee, and delight∣ing to be with thee, and studying in all things, to conform my self to thy blessed nature and will. That having thee always before mine eyes; thy ho∣liness and righteousness may move me to purifie my heart thoroughly from all worldly and fleshly lusts: thy great∣ness may breed in me, much reverence, fear and humility; and thy tender mer∣cies, incline me to pitifulness, bowels of mercies, and readiness to do all good. Give me such apprehensions of thy truth and faithfulness, that I may in∣tirely trust thee, and rely upon thy pro∣mises:
of thine unerring wisdom, that I may resign my understanding to thee, and be perfectly contented with what∣soever thou appointest. Dispose my soul so, that a serious sense of thine omniscience, may on all occasions over∣awe every thought of my mind, and motion of my will into order and obe∣dience: and thy patient goodness sup∣press all angry affections in me; and make me gentle, long-suffering, and forbearing others in love. Represent thine infinite fulness, O Lord, conti∣nually unto me; that it may ingage me in eternal thoughts of thee; and make me rejoyce in the happiness of being one of thy children, and an heir of thy glory. There is nothing more my heart can desire; but only that I may still receive more pledges of thy father∣ly love: and have grace to keep my soul so pure and undefiled, that our Lord may delight to manifest himself to me, and make his abode with me.
Reign in me, O blessed Lord, and in all the world. Subdue all the ene∣mies of thy Cross. Advance it above all the crowns of the Kings of the earth: that they may become thy obe∣dient subjects. O that those of them, who call upon thy name, may be nur∣sing Fathers to thy Church: and pro∣mote Christian piety by their high au∣thority and great examples. Illumi∣nate all the Bishops and Pastors of thy flock; that they may feed thy people with wisdom and understanding, and lead them in the ways of righteousness. Bless all my Friends: pardon and change all my Enemies. Comfort and relieve all sorts of miserable people. And grant us seasonable weather, that the earth may bring forth her increase. Accept of my hearty thanks which I tender thee again for all thy mercies both to my soul and body; which are
more than thought can number. Ac∣cept of the oblation of my whole self, which I have devoutly consecra∣ted unto thee: desiring to render all praise, thanksgiving, love and hearty service to thee eternally. Now the God of all grace, who hath called us unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus,1 Pet. 5.10, 11. make us all perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle us. To him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.
April. The Meditation before the Sacrament. AMong the innumerable swarms of people that are upon the face of the earth, how few are there that know the great love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord, And among those few that know it, alas, how small a number are there, that re∣member it, and celebrate it constantly with those praises and thankful acknow∣ledgments, which it eternally deserves. O what a grace is this, which I am perta∣ker of,Eph. 2.19. that I should be made a fellow-Ci∣tizen with the Saints and of the houshold of God!Coloss. 1.27. That I should know what is the rich∣es of the glory of this Mystery; which is Christ among us the hope of glory. I am in∣finitely indebted to the divine goodness which inclines my heart also to go and commemorate this love in the assembly of his Saints; who all like a spiritual buil∣ding fitly framed together,Eph. 2.21. grow into an holy Temple in the Lord. There the Lords name is continually praised. There he de∣lights to dwell, and hath chosen them for his habitation. There is the voice of joy
and gladness: and there he showrs down the blessings of his goodness.Psal. 95.6. O come, my soul, let us worship and bow down: Let us go and kneel before the Lord our Maker.66.8. Let us exalt the Lord our God,96.8. and make the voice of his praise to be heard. Let us give him the ho∣nour due unto his name,100.5. and worship the Lord with holy worship. For the Lord is gracious and his mercy is everlasting, and his truth indureth from generation to generation. Thy reverence, thy faith, thy love, thy holy resolutions, thy hunger and thirst, are all, I hope, still alive: wherewith we ought to approach into his presence. Thou hast not forgot sure the meaning of this holy Feast: the sweetness of which may well preserve a memory of the ends for which our Lord invites thee to it. Let us go then with an humble confidence, to ad∣mire and proclaim once more, the infinite love of God our Saviour. Let us openly declare that we are his friends and follow∣ers: and bid defiance to all his enemies. Yea, let us bind our heart to his Altar with the cords of his love; and make an obla∣tion of all we have unto him. It is but just and reasonable; since we have receiv∣ed so much from him. It is but right, meet and our bounden duty to praise him con∣tinually; to glorifie and serve him with
body and soul which he hath redeemed. Let us go and thank him therefore that he would come down from heaven to us: that he will accept us for his servants; and set any esteem upon our poor obedience: and that he will still from heaven visit us; and not leave us comfortless without his holy presence with us. So may we rejoyce in his salvation, and represent with gladsome hearts his sacrifice to God for our expa∣tion; and fix our eyes upon that glory where he is inthroned: hoping we shall one day sit down with him in the kingdom of the Father, and keep a perpetual feast with him in heaven. What should hinder us, O my soul, from going to begin to be so happy? Search and try, examine and prove thy self. Hast thou not a mind to know and do the whole will of God; with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength? Dost thou not chuse to be poor in spirit, meek, merciful, pure in heart, a peace-maker, a patient sufferer for righteousness sake? and art thou not desirous to make an in∣crease of all these by going to his holy Table? Be not discouraged then,Psal. 4.3, 5, 6. but know that the Lord hath chosen him that is godly, for himself. The Lord will hear when I call upon him. Go and offer the Sacrifices of
righteousness; and put thy trust in the Lord. There be many that say, who will shew us any good? But let thy voice be, Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon me. Open thou mine eyes,Psal. 119.18. that I may behold wondrous things out of thy Gospel. Make me able to comprehend with all Saints,Eph. 3.18, 19. what is the breadth, and length, and depth and height; and to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledg. This shall put gladness in my heart, more than in the time when their corn and wine encreased. For thine are riches, and power, and honour and pleasure: and they whom thou lovest, can want nothing that is good.Psal. 5.12. Thou Lord wilt bless the righte∣ous; with favour wilt thou compass him as with a shield.22.26. The meek shall eat and be satisfied: they shall praise the Lord that seek him; your heart shall live for ever.
The Prayer. O Lord; who fillest all things, and delightest to pour out thy bles∣sings upon all thy works; especially in∣to humble spirits; who empty them∣selves of all their own desires, that they may be filled with thy holy truth. Be∣hold a poor soul, that opens it self to thy bounteous goodness; though with much shame and confusion of face, when I remember how much of thy grace I have refused, or in vain received. Thou hast sent me, I acknowledg, un∣asked innumerable benefits; and I have found thee in my very heart, when I sought not after thee. Often have I felt holy thoughts springing up in my mind; and pious affections carrying my heart away from all these earthly vanities. Many godly purposes hast thou wrought in me; and made me to taste how happy a thing it is to love
thee, and be beloved of thee: O God, thou hast taught me from my youth,Psa. 71.17. and early instructed me in the knowledg of thy truth. Thou hast prevented all my desires; and secretly disposed my will, to chuse the ways of vertue and piety. Hitherto I have declared thy won∣drous works; and every day brings along with it, new testimonies of thy most fa∣therly care and providence. But all this only reproaches me, for my shameful negligence, ingratitude, and unfruit∣fulness in the knowledg of the Lord Jesus: and makes me despair of re∣ceiving any more of thy grace; unless thou wilt magnifie the riches of it, in thy patient and long-suffering charity towards me. Thou hast required us to put on bowels of mercy, kindness, condescention;Coloss. 3. forbearing and forgiv∣ing one another, if any man have a quarrel against any. And hast taught us such charity as is kind and suffereth long, Cor. 13. and beareth all things. And
therefore I am incouraged to fly unto thee and to hope in thee, who hast made thy self, the pattern of tenderness and compassion to us in Christ Jesus. There is something of thy self likewise still re∣maining in me. I feel my heart in∣clining towards thee; desiring to have a more lively knowledg of thee, and to be made thoroughly good and per∣fectly like thee. Which emboldens me the more to wait upon thee, and to open my heart for new communicati∣ons of thy holy spirit to me. O thou who givest food to all flesh, who sa∣tisfyest the cravings of every living thing: deny not the desires of an immor∣tal soul which hungers and thirsts to be filled with the fruit of the Spirit,Ephes. 5.9. in all goodness, and righteousness, and truth. It is not thy pardon only which I crave, and humbly hope for, through thy mercy in Christ Jesus: But a power from above continually to assist the holy re∣solutions, thou hast wrought in me;
to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world.Tit. 2.12. I have chosen O Lord, the way of truth: thy judgments have I laid be∣fore me.Psal. 119.30.10..38. Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin against thee. I have gone astray: but now I will meditate in thy pre∣cepts, and have respect unto thy ways. I will delight my self in thy statutes:Psal. 17.5. I will not forget thy word. With my whole heart do I seek thee: O let me not wander from thy Com∣mandments. But stablish thy word unto thy servant, who is devoted to thy fear. Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my foosteps slip not. And give me leave, good Lord, to approach to thy Table, and there to dedicate my self again unto thee; and receive fresh tokens of thy grace and favour towards me. I am not wor∣thy, I confess, to be seen in thy sacred presence. But since thou hast wrought in me a will to please thee in all things;
I desire that I may humbly appear and profess it before thee: and wait upon thee for a power to do, according to the purposes of my heart. O thou who searchest the hearts, and knowest what is in man; deal with me accord∣ing to the sincerity of my soul. And open mine eyes that I may see it, if there be any evil way in me: any pride, any covetousness, any impurity; any ha∣tred or uncharitableness. For I re∣nounce them all; and unseignedly re∣solve to do justly, and to love mercy,Mic. 6.8. and to walk humbly with my God.Ps. 19.14. Let these words of my mouth, and meditations of my heart be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord my strength, and my redeemer. And when I come to thy holy Table, may I feel that thou hast accepted them: by inspiring me with stronger purposes to continue in thy obedience; and lifting me up to an higher degree of love to thee and my blessed Saviour. Raise me, O Lord, so high, that I may be out of the reach
of the temptations of the world and the Devil: or at least, they may ne∣ver be able to draw me down to fol∣low any sinful lusts and desires.Dan 9.19. O Lord hear; O Lord forgive: O Lord, hearken and do, according to thy infi∣nite mercies declared in Christ Jesus; and the most comprehensive meaning of his own holy words, in which he hath taught us to pray, saying, Our Father, &c.
A Meditation afterward. THE next time thou visitest thy soul, ask it if it observed well that glori∣ous person who feasted thee at his Table: and marked the kind and gracious words which he spake unto thee, by the repre∣sentation of his broken body, and blood that was shed for thy sake. Alas! wilt thou say, I should not have been here, if I had had a clear view of his glories. He would have carried me to heaven with him, if my heart had been possessed with the fulness of his love. My eyes are too weak to behold his perfections: my thoughts too narrow to comprehend the unsearcha∣ble riches of his grace. But hast thou not seen something of him? Did not many of his beauteous gra∣ces shine fairly in thine eyes? Did he not even force upon thee some sense of his wondrous goodness and charity? And hath he not put himself, by sensible tokens, in∣to thy very hands; nay, entred into thine heart, and told thee; that he hath desired it for his habitation. Where is he then? what hast thou done with him? are the
thoughts of him vanished already out of thy mind? Doth the love of him languish and die thus soon in thy breast? Art thou content to let him go, and see him no more; till the same solemnity come about again? How wilt thou be able then to appear before him, at that time? with what face wilt thou look upon him, whom thou slight∣est so much; as to love any company bet∣ter than his? Will it not confound thee to think that thou art but a stranger to him, though thou hast been so often with him? and that he can find nothing of himself in thee; no, not after so many professions of the greatest love and friendship to him? O let him see, that he hath not bestowed himself on one that knows not how to va∣lue so divine a guest. Preserve an ever∣lasting memory of his dying love. Never fail to thank him for it every day, with the greatest passion thou art able to excite. Look on him seriously and study to be like him. Never take off thine eyes from his beauties, till all his lovely qualities be im∣printed on thy heart. Imitate his humility and great condescention to us of low estate. Learn of him to be meek and lowly in heart.atch. 11.20.  5.2.  Walk in love, as Christ also hath loved us, and given himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling
savour. Purifie thy self,1 Joh. 3.3. even as he is pure.Heb. 13.5. Let thy conversation be without covetousness;Psal. 37.3. and be content with such things as thou hast. Trust in the Lord, and do good: make him thy hope, and thy portion. That as long as thou livest; Christ Jesus may be seen among men. O what a goodly sight would it be, to behold our Lord still walking up and down in the world! To see the loving, the peaceable, the meek, the merciful, the holy Jesus again upon the earth! Do thou resolve to be that blessed man, in whom he shall appear. Let not his Image and likeness be lost, whilst thou art in being: and labour to leave it upon others when thou art dead and gone. Particularly thou mayst resolve all this month to meditate often on the PATI∣ENCE of our Lord; under ah the rude affronts and cruel pains he endured from his enemies: and the great dulness, unto∣wardness, and slowness to believe, which he found in his Disciples. That so Patience may have its perfect work in thee; to the end thou mayst be perfect, and entire,Jam. 1.4. want∣ing nothing. For we have need of Patience,Heb. 10.36 that after we have done the will of God, we may receive the promise. Rest in the Lord therefore, and wait patiently for him:Psal. 37.7. fret
not thy self because of him who prospereth in his way, because of the man who bringeth wicked devices to pass. Resolve not to be discouraged in thy Christian course, what∣soever it be that thou art to do, or suffer. Warn them that are unruly; Tss. 5.14. comfort the fee∣ble minded; support the weak; be patient toward all men. Remembring that this is the character of those, who received the heavenly seed with honest and good hearts;Luke 8.15. that they brought forth fruit with patience. And we know that the fruit of pa∣tience is experience;Rom. 5.3, 4. and experience work∣eth hope; and hope maketh not ashamed.
The Thanksgiving and Prayer. ALL thy works praise thee, O Lord; they proclaim thy great∣ness, thy wisdom, thy power and goodness, throughout the world. There is no place in heaven or earth where their voice is not heard. But the mouths of rational creatures ought most to be filled with thy praises: whom thou hast made to understand the wis∣dome and majesty of all thy works. We our selves, O Lord, are fearfully and wonderfully made. Thou hast adorned mankind with most noble perfections, and given us dominion over the works of thy hands. And after we had despised this honour which thou didst us, chusing to be∣come like the beasts that perish; thou wast pleased to do us a greater: and to demonstrate an infinite wisdom, power and charity in our recovery by
Christ Jesus. I bless thee, O God, for that abundant grace; and for that part and portion, which thou hast given me in it. That thou wast pleased to come so lovingly, and dwell among us; and appear in the likeness of sinful flesh; to what can I ascribe it, but thine in∣comprehensible love, and readiness to do us good. I most heartily thank thee, that thou wouldt so mercifully comfort us by thy divine presence a∣mong us; and incourage us to hope in thee, that wouldst not destroy us. And that thou hast proclaimed as much by thine eternal Word, and bidden us to hope in thy mercy. Above all, that thou hast assured us by his Death and Passion, that thou wilt pardon our sins; and by his Resurrection, that thou wilt bestow on us eternal life. There is no end, O Lord, of thy lov∣ing kindness. For thou continuest to give us new assurances and tokens of thy good will towards us: and hast
now entertained me at thine own Ta∣ble, with his most pretious body and blood. It is too little, O God of all grace, to give thee my self, if I had any more to give. All that I can do, is again and again to give my self to thee. And as I have at thine Altar offered my whole soul and body, to be employ∣ed according to thy holy will and plea∣sure: so I continue here to renew my devotion to thee; and to oblige my self by repeated vows to be thy servant. I hope I shall never suffer thy love to slip out of my mind; nor forget the promises wherein I stand ingaged to thee. Yea, that thou in thine abun∣dant goodness wilt always accompany me by thy holy spirit, (which our Lord hath bid me expect from thee,) to preserve alive his memory in my heart: that I may ever be a follower of him in poverty of Spirit; in meek∣ness; in mercifulness; in purity of heart; in peaceableness, and studying
to be quiet.2 Thess. 3.5. And the Lord direct my heart to the love of God, and the patient waiting for Christ. That I may endure all the troubles of this life with a composed, constant spirit; and never repine at any thing that befalls me. That I may chearfully suffer for righteousness sake; and taking up my Cross,Heb. 12.1, 2. run with pati∣ence the race that is set before me, looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith; who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the shame and is set down at the right hand of thy throne of glory. Rom. 15.5, 6, 7.Now the God of patience and consolati grant us all to be like minded one towards an∣other, according to Christ Jesus. That a Christian people may with one mind a one mouth glorifie thee our God: and receiv one another, as Christ also received us, un thy glory. Unite our hearts in love and charity: and give us grace to follow afte those things which make for peace,Rom. 14. and thing
wherewith one may edifie another. O that the power of all Christian Kings and Rulers may be employed to be a terror to all evil doers; and to give praise and incouragement to all that do well. That all the servants of the Lord in holy offi∣ces, may be gentle unto all men, apt to teach,2 Tim. 2.24. patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves. And all those that are under their care,1 Thess. 5.13. may have the grace to esteem them very highly in love for their works sake: and laying apart all filthiness,Jam. 1.21. and superfluity of naughtiness, receive with meekness the en∣grafted word, which is able to save their souls. I recommend to thy mercies all the poor, the sick, the fatherless and widdows; and whosoever are in any distress: that they may remember the words of the Lord Jesus,Luk. 21.19. and in their patience possess their souls. And the Lord deliver us all from every evil work, and pre∣serve us unto his heavenly kingdom:2 Tim. 4.18. to whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen.
May. Meditation before the Sacrament. CAst your eyes now on the beautiful face of the earth, and see how all things smile upon you. How God hath crowned the year with his goodness, and cloathed the pastures with flocks, the gar∣dens with flowers and fruits, and the val∣lies with corn. How the little hills, as the Psalmist speaks, are girded with gladness;Psal. 6. and every creature shouts for joy and sings. And then think with thy self, how uncom∣ly it is that thou shouldst be the only dull and silent thing: whom the Lord hath a∣dorned with greater riches and honour; and set over all the works of his hands. Think what nobler beauties he hath made thee to behold, and set before thy mind even himself in all his glory, which shines upon thee in the face of Jesus Christ. Think how he calls thee to a Paradise of delight, now that he hath invited thee to his holy Table: where he represents unto thee the Son of his love, the express image of his person; and all the happy fruits of his manifestation in our flesh. Bid thy
soul therefore awake, and meditate on his humble descent from Heaven for our sake, with the acclamations of all the hea∣venly host; on all his miraculous works of charity; his holy and useful life; his bitter passion; his bloody and shameful death; his glorious resurrection and ascen∣tion; his power at the right hand of God; and all the benefits he hath by these means obtained to us, and crowned our nature withal. Bid it sing aloud, and give praise, and shout for joy. Stir up all that is with∣in thee, to bless his holy name. That while all things round about thee are fresh and spiritous and full of life; thou mayest not remain the only dead and heartless creature: but spring up together with the rest, in all the acts of spiritual life. Say to thy self, what a new world do I see? God dwelling here among men. God in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imput∣ing their trespasses unto them. Friendship made between heaven and earth. Death swallowed up in victory. The gate of hea∣ven set open to all believers. Jesus our fore-runnner, there already inthroned: waiting for all his faithful followers; and filling them now with good hope, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.
O what a glorious sight is this: which the Angels themselves admired! what a new heaven and new earth should this have made, wherein dwelleth righteousness? what ailes us, that we do not all become new creatures? And beholding as in a glass the glory of our Lord, are not changed into the same image, from glory to glory; even as by the spirit of the Lord? I am ashamed of my barrenness in the knowledge of Christ Jesus: into whom I was ingrafted long ago. It is high time to be more fruitful in all good works. For he hath said that, every branch in me that beareth not fruit,John 1.2, 8. my Father taketh away: and every branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit. And herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit, so shall ye be my disciples. I will go therefore and open my heart to him who is the root and fountain of life; that I may derive new spirit, vigour, and strength from him. I will go and declare that I believe in him: that I have placed my hope, my comfort and satisfaction in his love; and value his favour and blessing more than all the world. I will shew him how I long to be changed more and more, into his divine image: and am resolved to abide in him,v. 7. and that his
word shall abide in me. I will give him all the assurance of it, I am able: by re∣newing my covenant with him; and mak∣ing a chearful oblation of all that I am, and have, and can do, unto his service. Then sure he will communicate more of himself unto me. I shall feel his divine power and vertue quickning me: and be∣cause he lives,John 14.19. I shall live also. The Sun when he returns to visit us with his warmth, doth not more revive all things, and re∣new the face of the earth, than I shall find him inlivening and renewing me; that I may have my fruit unto holiness,Rom. 6.22 and the end everlasting life. For he himself hath said,Joh. 15.7. If you abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you. Be it unto me, O Lord, according to thy word. I ask nothing, but that I may still have the grace to continue in thy love, by keeping thy Command∣ments. That I may grow and increase in wisdom and Holiness; and be filled with all the fruits of the Spirit. With love, joy, peace,Gal. 5.22. long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: and that they may abound in me more and more, to thy praise and glory. Amen.
The Prayer before. O Most blessed God, who art most lovely in thy self and in all thy works: and full of love and kind∣ness to us whom thou hast made to understand thy glorious perfections. Thou art beloved of all those that se∣riously fix their eyes on the beauties of thy holiness, wisdom and goodness; and observe thy bounty to all thy crea∣tures. Thousands of Angels and Saints thou hast, whose hearts burn continu∣ally with love to thee: and thou hast had many faithful servants that have dyed for the love of thee. I am one of those fools and senseless wretches, that have loved every thing better than thee, my Creator, and merciful Savi∣our. While others have burnt in the fires for thee, I have been unwilling sometimes to take the pains of a few serious thoughts about thee. And my
mind at best, is apt to start away from that most heavenly employment: it is hard to think, even of thy surpassing kindness to me, without interruption, but for a few moments. I am too un∣like the ancient Disciples of the Lord Jesus: being prone to content my self with reading or hearing thy word, with speaking of thee, or praying to thee: and all many times without any love, or but with little affection to thee. Yea, while I make mention of thy love, I am not so much in love with thee, as it deserves. I have beheld the Sun of righteousness shining upon me, and received the dearest pledges of thy loving kindness; without that warmth and heat of love which it might have excited. The liveliest Truths have not penetrated so deep, as they should, into my heart. But though thou hast been pleased to in∣treat so earnestly, and promise so li∣berally, as if thou shouldst be indebted
to me for my love; it hath many times but little stirred this dull soul towards thee. Thou hast loved us so much as to purchase our love at any rate: having redeemed us with thy Sons blood, which is the greatest price; and called us to thy kingdom and glory, which is the greatest reward: but alas! how unconcern'd have I been, too oft, in all these wonders of thy love? I am ashamed of my self. I blush to think that after so long acquaintance with thee, I should love thee and de∣light in thee to no higher a degree. Which is the only thing, next to thy grace which pitties our weaknesses, that gives me hope I shall at last love thee far better. Still make me more ashamed, that after all thy care and pains thou shouldst see so little of thy self in me. And assist me by the power of a mighty grace, which I will endeavour to improve, to fix mine eyes more sted∣fastly
on thee, and to stay my thoughts with thee; till I love thee so much as to be changed into thy likeness. Now that I am going to commemorate thy love in Christ Jesus, let not my ingra∣titude provoke thee to absent thy self from me: but according to the graci∣ous Covenant thou hast made with us in his blood, be merciful to my sins, and remember not mine iniquities against me. Make me know and feel that thou dost pardon me, by exciting holy resolutions in me to purifie my heart more perfectly; and disposing me in∣tirely to love thy holy nature and will, and conform my self unto it in all things. O that all carnal affections may die in me, and all things belonging to the spirit may live and grow in me. That I may have power and strength to have victory and to triumph against the Devil, the world and the flesh. That I may utterly hate every thing that is evil; and cleave most affectionately to that which is good.
Yea, that I may hate even Father and mother, and the dearest thing in this world, rather than sin against thee and forsake thee. That no relation, no pleasure, no profitable injoyment, may ever turn my heart from thee, but ra∣ther draw me to thee, and make me more in love with thee. All thy crea∣tures may justly complain of me, if I should not love thee above them all. But how shall I answer it to our Lord Jesus, if his love should not constrain me? O that the spirit of thy ancient Saints may hereafter possess my heart. That I may cry out after God,Psa. 131.6. even the living God. That I may watch for thee, more than they that watch for the morning: And my soul may follow hard after thee:63.8. and even break for the longing it hath to thy judg∣ments at all times.119.20. That I may be a dili∣gent follower of their Doctrine,2 Tim. 3.10. manner of life, purpose, faith, long suffering, and patience.Psal. 119.103. O that the words of thy mouth may be sweeter to me than the honey and the
honey comb.Psal. 119.47. That I may delight my self in thy Commandments which I have loved. And the light of thy counte∣nance may be better to me than life it self. Amen. Confirm and strengthen, good Lord, all the holy desires and dis∣positions which thou hast wrought in my heart; that they may ripen into all the fruits of righteousness, which are by Christ Jesus to thy praise and glory. In his holy words I further recommend my self to thine infinite mercies, saying, Our Father, &c.
The Meditation afterward. O Love, what hast thou done? said an holy man, when he thought of the Mercies of God in Christ Jesus. Thou broughtest the Son of God down from Heaven, and made him appear in the like∣ness of man. Thou broughtest him to his Cross, and made him an offering of a sweet smelling savour unto God. O Love, what wouldest thou not do (mayest thou say to thy self) if thou didst but possess our hearts? That which made him like to us, and brought him down hither, would make us like to God and carry us up to Heaven. If I did but love God, what could he demand of me which I should not immediately do? How naturally should I study to please him? How easie and de∣lightful would it be to comply with his will? And what a favour should I count it, that I might know his will which I am o do? None of his Commandments would be grievous to me; but all his ways pleasant∣ness, and all his paths peace. And will it not be very strange, if I should not love him, who hath loved me so much, and is still demonstrating his kindness to me? I
must forget my belief if I should not love him: and that he will not let me forget; but calls me often to his holy Table, and feeds me with the sweet remembrance of him. There he represents to me, that which I continually profess to believe. That he is the Father Almighty, of whom the whole family of Heaven and Earth is named. That Jesus is his only Son our Lord; that he was conceived by the Ho∣ly Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suf∣fered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified and put to death, rose again, ascended to Gods right hand, and will come at last to judge the quick and dead. This is my Faith. May I never make confession of it,Gal. 5.6.2.20. without feeling it excited to work by love. May it alway call to mind the vows I have made to live by this Faith of the Son of God.Acts 15.9. May it purifie my heart; that when he shall appear again and come to judge the world,1 Pet. 1.7. my faith may be found to praise, and honour, and glory. Amen. This was the reason, you may here con∣sider, that good men anciently advised all Christians to repeat the Creed every morning. Not as a Prayer, or a Preser∣vative from sin, meerly by the force of the words: but to put them in mind that they
were the followers of Jesus, who had done and suffered so much for them; and to quicken themselves to love and to good works, which are the natural fruits of saith in Christ. Resolve therefore to re∣flect on it, for this end. Shew that thou dost willingly remember the Lord Jesus, and studiest to stir up his love in thy heart: and hast not only some sudden flashes of it forced upon thee, by the meer greatness and power of his love. Think that thy love to him will grow faint and cold with∣out these endeavours: so that it will be a doubt to thy self (O how uncomfortable is that!) whether thou lovest him or no. And the better to preserve it, thou mayest resolve particularly to Meditate of∣ten, all this month, upon this piece of Christs love, in instituting and ordaining, just before he died, these HOLY MY∣STERIES at this Divine feast, as pledges of his love, and for a continual re∣membrance of his death, to our great and endless comfort. O what a kindness was this, mayest thou think with thy self! what wonder of love, which is here fairly represented to us and set before our eyes! what a pleasure is it to see our selves thus beloved of the Sovereign of the world! to
behold our selves in the arms of the Al∣mighty, the only wise, and all-sufficient good! who will never fail to take care of us, provide for us, direct, support, assist, comfort and protect us; yea, and eternal∣ly bless us. This is love indeed, that we have such pledges given us of his everlast∣ing kindness; that we shall see him in the other world, where we shall know him and love him as much as we can desire. Nay, what an happiness is it, that we can love him at all? And that he will take such care to excite our love to so great an height in this world? O what pleasures have I felt in loving him; and offering my heart with sincere affection to him? How doth my will sweetly melt into his; when I think how good he is, and how much I am obliged to him? We should never have praised him so much, if he had not thus re∣presented his love to us: And that, toge∣ther with intire friendship and concord (to which he also here ingages us) is the happiness of Angels and glorified Spirits. I will never cease to think of these plea∣sures, that I may never cease to injoy them: but be still more and more praising thee, till I come to praise thee in the com∣pany of the Blessed.
The Prayer and Thanksgiving afterward. O Most holy and ever blessed God; Thy name alone is excellent; thy glory is above the Earth and Hea∣ven. All the heavenly powers conti∣nually proclaim thy greatness; and raise themselves, not thee, by admiring, lo∣ving and praising thy eternal Majesty. I most humbly adore and extol thy un∣searchable Wisdom, thy uncontroul∣able Power, thy boundless Goodness, and thy unspotted Holiness and Truth. It is a shame, I acknowledge, that ever I should think of esteeming or loving any thing like to thee, who art so infi∣nitely above all the world; and it be∣ing so impossible for me to be safe or happy, but in thy love. And it is no less shame to make mention of thy Name, without the greatest joy and sa∣tisfaction of heart in thy love and fa∣vour. For thy wisdom is the surest
guide and most certain director: thy Power is our strength and safeguard: thy good Providence is our all-suffici∣ent treasure: thy holiness and truth is our security: thy goodness is our hope and comfort: thy unerring will is our satisfaction, in all events that here be∣fall us. I cannot wish, when I seri∣ously recollect my self, to live in a world without thee. It would be better not to be at all, than to be forsa∣ken of thee, and left to the conduct of my own childish thoughts and desires; and to the protection and provision of my own weakness. How much do I owe thee, even for this knowledge of thee? And I have had daily, yea mi∣nutely experience of thy loving kind∣ness, ever since I had a being. A great number of thy creatures serve me, and minister unto my content and comfort, by thy command. And thy own Son is become a Servant to me, and submitted himself to the vilest state
and condition for my happiness. I deserve not to live, if I should not love thee intirely. For thou art every day adding new fuel to my love, and ta∣king care that it may never go out. What tokens of thy love hath this day brought along with it to my Soul? Thou hast given me leave to wait up∣on thee, and feast with thee at thy own Table: To see the love that the Lord Jesus bare and still continues to me; that I may be still more induced to love thee, and strongly ingaged to be so happy, as to continue in thy love by cordial obedience to thee. Who can look on thee, O blessed Lord, and not love thee? Who can think of what thou hast done unto us, and not de∣vote himself eternally to thy love and service? But alas! our eyes are weak; our thoughts are short and transient; we are soon weary of beholding, and thinking even on thy love. Direct my thoughts therefore by thy mighty
power, more strongly towards thee. Fasten in my mind a more lively re∣membrance of thee: that I may, at least, be often looking back unto thee, and delight to reflect upon thy won∣drous love.Psal. 119.37. Turn mine eyes from beholding vanity, and quicken thou me in thy way. And, O that all my love may be chang∣ed into obedience; that I may be ever very fearful to displease thee; and care∣ful to omit no part of the duty I owe thee: but I may spend my days in acts of holy love towards thee and towards all men.1 Thess. 5.15, 16, 17, &c. That I may rejoyce evermore: pray without ceasing: in every thing give thanks: prove all things; and hold fast that which is good: never rendring to any man evil for evil: but ever following that which is good, both among our selves, and to all men. And I desire the happiness of all mankind: especially that the Faith of all Christian people may grow exceeding∣ly,2 Thess. 1.3. and the Charity of every one towards each
other may abound. That so they may adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour in all things:Tit. 2.10. and recommend his Religion effectually, by their good and inno∣cent lives, to all the world. Give the King thy judgments, O God:Psal. 72.1, 2, &c. that he may judge thy people with righteousness, and thy poor with judgment. That the greater powers may bring peace to thy people, and the lesser also, by righteousness. That they may judge the poor of the people, and save the children of the needy, and break in pieces the oppressor. That we may all fear thee, as long as the Sun and Moon endure, throughout all generations. Now unto him that hath chosen us t Salvation,2 Thess. .13.1. through Sanctification of the Spi∣rit, and belief of the truth: whereunto he hath called us by the Gospel, to the obtaining of the glory of the Lord Jesus Christ, be thanks and praise, and love and obedience ren∣dred, world without end. Amen.
June. The Meditation before the Sacrament. IS it possible that the great God should be manifested in the flesh?1 Tim. 3.16. Act. 20.28 And that he should purchase those who were his Crea∣tures, sinful Creatures, with his own blood? Surely we do not believe this. How joy∣ful, how thankful should we be; how ho∣lily, how purely should we live; if we thought our selves so nearly related to him? What faith, what hope should we place in him? How confidently should we trust our selves and all we have with him? How willingly should we resign our selves to his pleasure, who hath not thought this too much to do for us? And how conten∣tedly should we want what he pleases not to give, who hath done us such an honour, as to marry us to himself? If he had taken hold of the Nature of Angels, and laid down that life, that pretious life which was spent for us, for their redemption; how much would those heavenly creatures have loved him? And yet, now that he is desirous of our little love, he cannot have it. O my soul, what is become of that
love which thou lately professedst to him? I thought the last time we were at his Ta∣ble, that thou wast mightily sensible of his love, and wouldst never cease to love him. Didst thou not protest, that nothing was so dear unto thee as thy Saviour, and his Commands and pretious promises? That thou hadst rather lose thy life, than lose his favour? And didst thou not resolve that thou wouldst preserve it as thy life, by all the acts of love to God and man? O how easily do we forget the greatest benefits? How apt are we to pay him only with li∣beral promises? If he had not made us this new invitation to his Table, it is pos∣sible we might have forgotten, that we have any obligations to him. But this sweet voice of thy Saviour, which calls upon thee, saying, come, do this in re∣membrance of me, how doth it awaken and revive that love, which sometime I felt in my heart to him? Thanks be to his good∣ness for this new opportunity to acknow∣ledg his love, and to profess my own. I hope in time I shall love him to the height of my desires: and by these frequent re∣membrances of him, become perfectly like him. Though very unworthy therefore of this
new favour, who have been so unmind∣ful of the old, I will go into his house, and present my self at his Altar: if it be but to declare that I belong to him; and am not willing to lose his blessing. I will shew him, at least, that I do not quite for∣get him; and have a mind to become a better Christian. But how is it possible, that I should see the representation of his mighty love, that I should behold his pains and agonies for my sake; and do no more than tell him, that I keep him in mind, and intend to obey him. I cannot chuse but vow my self intirely to him. I must bind my self, in the most sacred Covenant, to keep his Commands. I can do no less than assure him again that I love righteous∣ness, and hate iniquity: and will chuse death, rather than to displease him. Nay, I will resolve never to cease to renew these vows; and multiply my ingagements: and then at last, sure, I shall become stedfast in his Covenant,Psa. 112.1. and delight my self great∣ly in his Commandments.Psal. 119.167, 48, 44, 162, 127, 72. My soul shall keep thy testimonies, and love them exceed∣ingly. My hands also will I lift up unto thy Commandments which I have loved: and I will meditate in thy statutes. So shall I keep thy Law continually, for ever and ever. I will rejoyce at thy word, as one that findeth
great spoil. And love thy Commandments above gold, yea above fine gold. The law of thy mouth shall be dearer unto me, than thousands of gold and silver. Let us go, my soul, and thank him heartily, as for other benefits of his passion, so for these hopes I have of becoming so perfectly in love with him, that I shall exactly resem∣ble him.Ps. 42.11. Hope in God, for thou shalt yet praise him, who is the health of thy counte∣nance, and thy God. If I regard iniquity in my heart; the Lord will not hear me. But verily God hath heard me:Psal, 66.18, 19, 20. he hath at∣tended to the voice of my prayer. Blessed be God, which hath not turned away my prayer, nor his mercy from me. The Prayer before. O Most high and Holy one; who canst not be comprehended by our shallow thoughts, nor by any o∣ther thing, but only thy self. Though inconceivably beneath thine infinite Majesty, and also a miserable sinner, I make bold, in the name of the Lord Jesus who is my hope, with humble
reverence to prostrate my self before thee. Acknowledging that thou art my Maker, my Lord and Soveraign; and that I being the work of thy hands, must needs be thy servant and subject. Yea, thou hast given me leave every day to call thee Father, and ownest me for thy child. With what fear and astonishment, with what grief and sorrow, doth it become me to ly in thy presence? How heavily have I con∣demned my self by these acknowledg∣ments? For I have not always honour∣ed and served thee as my Creator, nor loved and delighted in thee as my most gracious Father, nor obeyed and sub∣mitted to thee in all things, as my So∣veraign Lord and Master. I have too oft rebelled against thine Almighty power and authority, and spurned a∣gainst the bowels of thy love, and bro∣ken thy most holy Laws, and violated that faith which I professed in my Bap∣tism, and have many times since plighted
unto thee. Thine Almighty mercy ac∣cuses me. The passion and torment, the death and resurrection, the threat∣nings and promises, all the love of my dear Saviour condemns me; and so do the mighty works and the gracious inspirations of the Holy Ghost. And yet I have no whither to fly, nothing to trust unto, but that Almighty mercy; the passion and love of our Lord; the power and grace of the Holy Ghost. How shall I hope for pardon from that love which I have offended? and look for mercy, from those tender mercies which I have too much slighted? With what confidence can I expect a remedy from that power which I have resisted? O the long-suffering and pa∣tience of my God! O the infiniteness of thy mercy! and the pretiousness of that blood, that can wash away so ma∣ny transgressions against it self. I adore thee, I thank thee, O God, who hast set forth Christ Jesus to be a propitiation,Rom. 3.25.
through faith in his blood. By his Cross and Passion, Good Lord, I hope to be delivered: and wait on thy mercy for the power of his holy Spirit, to wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity,Psal. 51. and cleanse me from my sin. Assist me there∣by, I most humbly beseech thee, to purifie my self from all filthiness both of the flesh and of the Spirit:2 Cor. 7.1. to purge my mind, my affections, my passi∣ons, from whatsoever is offensive to thy pure eyes, who canst not approve of iniquity. For I would have no un∣cleanness, no inordinate affection,Col. 3.5, 8. no evil concupiscence and covetousness, no anger, wrath, malice or evil speaking to be found any more within me. And now that I am about to remember the death of Jesus, help me to mortifie all these more perfectly, and to hate them worse than death. Behold, O Lord, I abandon all worldly lusts. My soul is open; and I have emptied my heart, to receive the fulness of thy grace.
Take an absolute possession of me; rule in me by thy laws; guide me by thy counsels; fill me with thy love; satisfie me with the comfort of thy promises; and refresh me with thy divine joys; that I may have a great delight to be thy faithful and obedi∣ent servant. O that I may feel, at thy Table, the liveliest apprehensi∣ons awakened in me of what thou hast done for my soul. Hold my thoughts close unto thee; inspire me with devout Meditations; strengthen and increase in me all good resolu∣tions; and inable me to bring them to good effect. I know thou never failest those that heartily seek thee. Our Saviour hath bid us ask and we shall receive, seek and we shall find, knock and it shall be opened to us. Fulfil then, O Gracious Lord, all my petitions: so give unto thy ser∣vant what he humbly asks, let him that seeks find, open the gate to him
that knocks; that I may be made par∣taker of Christs most blessed body and blood. And feeling the comforts of holy fellowship and friendship with him, and studying to maintain it by a pure and blameless life; I may now and ever triumph in thy Salvation, and sing thy praises in thy Church on earth, and among thy Saints and Angels in heaven: giving honour, blessing, power and dominion unto thee, O Father Almighty, and unto thy Son Christ Jesus to all Eternity. Amen. Our Father, which art, &c.
A Meditation afterward. DOst thou mind, O my Soul, wha thou sayest, when every day thou callest God, Father: thy Father which is in Heaven? How happy art thou, if thou art beloved of God Almighty? So belo∣ved, that the Lord of Heaven and Earth is thy Father? What is there that thou canst desire, what canst thou long for beyond this? How well satisfied and contented shouldst thou be in the poorest condition; how well assured that all shall be well with thee, if thou art sure of this one thing, that he is thy Father? And what should make thee doubt of it, though so great an honour? Where hast thou been now? what hast thou been doing? Hast thou not been with Jesus? Hast thou not professed thy self a Christian? Joh. 1.3. And truly their fellow∣ship is with the Father, and with his Son Je∣sus Christ. He hath shown thee the love which God bears to thee. He hath bid∣den thee, by those tokens, rest assured that he will never cease to love thee. For he hath given himself to thee; and thou hast given thy self to him. The Cove∣nant of friendship and eternal love hath
been renewed between us. Thou hast made oath again of fidelity to him, and he hath sworn in his holiness, that he will not take his loving kindness from thee, nor suffer his faithfulness to fail. O how rich is he, that possesses God; and is heir of his immortal glory! How chary should we be of this inestimable wealth? How void should we be of all other cares, but only this; to preserve the love of our heavenly Father? What should covetousness do in that heart, which enjoys such a Treasure? What should ambition, what should vain∣glory do in him; that can boast of the ho∣nour, of having God for his Father? Need he fear that he shall want, who is so well provided? Should he murmur or repine, who hath such fulness? Is there any cause of anger, if our Father be not angry? Shall we be uncharitable to any, who par∣take of such great charity? Watch, O my Soul, and walk circumspectly, that thou lose not such exceeding abundant grace, as this which is bestowed on thee. Go forth in this new strength and comfort which thou hast received, and perfect thy conquests over the world, the flesh, and the Devil: and resolve that nothing shall separate thee from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Well mayest thou stand to this resoluti∣on, if thou remembrest that he is thy Fa∣ther. For what is it that hath tempted thee, and drawn thy heart at any time from him? Nothing but a little short pleasure. Nothing but a vain, and many times fool∣ish, breath of a mortal man; whose breath is in his nostrils, and must shortly die, and all his thoughts perish. Nothing but that which the Moth can corrupt, or the rust consume, or a Thief despoil us of. No∣thing but a fading beauty, which sickness or time will certainly bring to decay. What are all these to the pleasure of plea∣sing God? to the commendation and praise which comes from unerring and eternal wisdom? to the durable riches, honour and beauty which our heavenly Father will give us for our portion? Our hopes in him now are infinitely better, than any thing else. The love of such a Father is more worth, than all that the whole World can do for us. Value thy self highly then, upon this account: and never call him Fa∣ther more, but with the greatest joy and contentment of heart. Be careful for no∣thing:Phil. 4.6, 7 but in every thing by prayer and sup∣plication with thanksgiving, let thy requests be made known unto him. Look often in∣to
thy heart, and ask if he be there: and say, it is enough; God is my Father, in this will I rejoyce. The peace of God which passeth all understanding, shall keep my heart and mind through Christ Jesus. And here you may resolve all this month, to meditate often, upon the great FAITH and confidence which he reposed in his heavenly Father, and expressed when he died, saying; Father,Luke 23.46. into thy hands I com∣mend my Spirit. He trusted himself with him, that he should have a blessed resurre∣ction. His flesh rested in hope,Acts 2.26.31. that he would not leave his soul in hell, neither suffer his holy one to see corruption. Though he was then scorned, abused, made the vilest of men, and shamefully put to death upon a Gibbet; yet he took Gods word for it, that he should rise, and reign, and be glo∣rified eternally; triumphing over all his enemies, Hell and Death it self. Do thou labour to imitate him in this holy Faith, both for all the things of this life, and of that which is to come. Form thy self to an habitual trust in Gods careful Provi∣dence, and precious Promises; and com∣mit thy self unto him in well doing. Take care of that only; and leave all the rest, with an assured confidence, to him. Let
thy conversation be without covetousness; be content with such things as thou hast:Heb. 13.5, 6. for he hath said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. So that we may boldly say, the Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what man can do unto me. This is the promise that he hath promised us,1 John 2.25. even eternal life. And these things saith the AMEN, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the Creation of God;Rev. 3.14, 20, 21. If any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne. The Thanksgiving and Prayer afterward. I Return unto thee, O most great and glorious God, all praise and thanks, for thine infinite, unspeakable Mercies to us the children of men. It is but just and reasonable that I should acknowledge thee with the heartiest af∣fection, and the greatest chearfulness or Spirit, who hast made us, and redeem∣ed us, and sent thy holy Spirit to san∣ctifie
us, and designed us to immortal glory. All the host of Heaven is con∣tinually praising thee. The Thrones, the Dominions, the Principalities and Powers; the Apostles, the Prophets, the Martyrs and all the blessed, rest not day nor night, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy,Rev. 4.8. Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come. Thou ever wast, and ever wilt be the fulness of wisdom, pow∣er, bounty, holiness and truth: and therefore it is not only my just duty, but my happiness to unite my heart with all that glorious company: and to bless thee, O Father of Mercies, who hast brought me forth out of Nothing, and made me such an excellent Crea∣ture; and sent thy Son to seek and to save me when I was lost; and pur∣chased me to thy self by his Bloud; and washed me in the laver of regenerati∣on; adopted me for thy child; in∣structed me in thy holy Gospel; guid∣ed me hitherto by thy faithful Mini∣sters;
admitted me to the Communi∣on of Saints; and fed me with the Body and Bloud of my dearest Savi∣our. Blessed be that Goodness, which hath sent the Holy Spirit so often to visit me, to comfort, assist and con∣duct me through the dangers of this world: and which still continues its grace unto me; though I have not al∣ways given that reverence, attention and obedience, to its heavenly moti∣ons, which I ought. Every day gives me new occasions to speak good of thy Name. And now, particularly, I am bound to render thee my thanks for the sweet refreshments of that holy Feast, of which I have been partaker; for the new resolutions thou hast wrought in my heart; for the fresh pledges of thy love; for the assurances thou hast gi∣ven me, that thou art my Father, who wilt ever take care of me;Here pause a little, that your heart may be transported and over∣joyed in the thoughts that God is your Fa∣ther. — for the joys I feel in thy Fatherly love; for the comforts of Brotherly kindness;
for all the pleasures of thy House; the fore-tastes of Heaven, and the hope of Everlasting life. I will greatly praise the Lord with my mouth, yea,Psal. 109.30. I will praise him among the multitude.116.1. I will love the Lord because he hath inclined his ear unto me: I will call upon him as long as I live.119.164. Seven times a day will I praise thee: because of thy righteous judgments. I will trust thee; and commit my self entirely to thee. I will always hope in thy mercy; and depend on thy power and faithfulness; and satisfie my self in thy kindness, care and fatherly Providence; and glory in this,Jer. 9.24. that I know and understand that thou art the Lord, which exercises loving kindness, judgment and righteousness in the Earth: for in these things are thy delight. And there∣fore I wait on thee, from whom com∣eth my help and my salvation, for the constant supply of thy Holy Spirit, which I believe thou wilt give to those that ask it, to strengthen and enable me to pay thee my vows continually. Main∣tain,
good Lord, such a sensible re∣membrance in me, of thee and of thy love; that my heart may always be in∣clined to thy testimonies;sa. 119.36. and not unto cove∣tousness. That I may serve and please thee in all purity, heavenly-minded∣ness, simplicity, charity, humility, con∣tentedness of spirit, faith, hope, and joy in the Holy Ghost.56.10. In the Lord will I praise his word.119.114.38. In thy word do I hope. Sta∣blish thy word unto thy servant, who is devo∣ted to thy fear. And I heartily desire the Salvation and welfare of all mankind: especially that all Christian people may under∣stand their happiness; and walk worthy of the Lord,1 Thess. 2.12. who hath called them to his King∣dom and Glory. And as thou hast given Kings and Princes a Supream Autho∣rity over others: so their spirits may be raised to a greater height of Christian wisdom; that they may think it their truest glory to be like unto thee, in do∣ing
much good to all their subjects. Bless our Sovereign with a happy and prosperous reign; that in his days the righteous may flourish: and abundance of peace;Psal. 72.7.12. that the needy may be delivered when he cri∣eth; the poor also and him that hath no helper. A Father of the fatherless, and a judge of the widows, is God in his holy habitation.Psal 68.5. Thou, O God, hast prepared of thy goodness for the poor. Thou givest food to the hungry and loosest the prisoners; and preservest  strangers; and raisest them that are  down; I recommend them, and  ¦serable people unto thy  and protection, who reg  all for ever and ever. Let  seek thee, rejoyce, and be glad in the  such as love thy salvation say continua  God be magnified. Blessed be the  the Lord, from this time forth and for  more. Amen, and Amen.
July. The Meditation before. HOW can I think that I love my Saviour so dearly, as I ought? And without love who can be welcome guests at his holy Table? They are often in my thoughts, whom I love with a sensible passion. My mind is perpetually looking towards them. I delight in their compa∣ny and conversation; and ever labour to recommend my self to their affections, by conforming my self to their will and hu∣mour. How do I study to please them? And if they will tell me what will please them, O how glad am I of the opportu∣nity to serve them? Nay I can cross my self and my own inclinations, to follow theirs. I love they should be honoured and esteemed by all. I am much cast down, if I have given them any disgust: and not a little troubled, that others have offended them, or done them any wrong. O that I felt but this little sign of a tender love and regard to my sweet Redeemer! that my heart were wounded (now that I am going to behold his wounds) for the
just offence I have at any time given him; and the great forgetfulness and ingratitude of most of those that are called by his Name. He may well be displeased, if it be but for the defects of my love, and the coldness of my affection to him; who hath deserved to be remembred with the great∣est passion. For I have long professed love to him. I have received many testimonies of his special kindness to me; and given many assurances of mine to him. And yet how pale and dim are those marks of a great love to him, which are plainly visible in me to others? Am I ever casting mine eyes towards him? Doth he often present himself before my mind, and feelingly touch my heart? Am I never better pleas∣ed, than when I am going to him? Is the question rather what will please him, than whether I shall do it? He hath declared his will in his holy Gospel; Am I glad to hear of it, and read it, and very desirous to know it in all things? Can I forsake my own will chearfully, to follow his? And doth it grieve me much that his excel∣lent laws are not observed; and that all Christians do not love and honour him? O Lord, thou knowest our weakness; and how hard it is to keep our minds and
hearts so stedfastly fixed upon invisible things. And in great pitty therefore hast ordained holy mysteries, for a frequent remembrance of thee; and to represent thy self and thy love more sensibly to us. By this means I hope to grow in time to a perfect love: ever bearing thee in mind; and delighting to give thee thanks and praise; and conforming my self to thy blessed will; and desiring and studying that thy name may be hallowed and ho∣noured by me and by all men else through∣out the world. This hope incourages me to go to thy Table, though very unworthy to be entertained by thee. There I hope also, my Lord will meet me, and speak kindly to me; as one that loves him, at least, a little better than any thing beside; and is resolved and determined to love him more and more. He invites us thi∣ther to increase our faith, and to nourish our love, and to strengthen our hope, and excite our gratitude; and exercise all our graces: and therefore I will not re∣fuse his kindness; even because I desire and long to love him so much. But first, my soul, let us examine our selves, whether we be sure that this, in∣deed, is the very sense of our heart: that
we really love to please him in every thing; and heartily mean to proceed in this love, to the most ready and willing obedience to all his Commands. And doth it not become us humbly to confess the foolish wandrings of our affections from him; to blush for shame that we fall so short of our own resolutions; and to ex∣cite our selves to greater watchfulness and diligence in well doing? Ought not the very remembrance of our former cold∣ness, to put a greater heat into us? And our former backwardness, make us to be more forward and zealous? Should we not vow our hearts again to him? And let him know, that we shall not think we live when we do not love him; and that we shall be willing to die that we may more love him? But how can we hope to grow still better, by these new expressions of his love to which he invites us; with∣out his gracious assistance, which ought to be faithfully implored? Let us go then to him before-hand, and desire him to raise up those thoughts and affections in us, which we cannot produce in our selves: that we may bring an heart full of love to him and carry it away full of joy, to find it more inlarged to love and serve him.
The Prayer before. O Most holy and ever blessed Lord of heaven and earth; who art good and dost good to all thy Creatures, and to us above all the rest, who are most unworthy of thy loving kindness. It is but a part of my duty to admire and praise thy great and glorious perfecti∣ons; to reverence thee, to worship thee, to love thee, and with heart and tongue both here and eternally to ac∣knowledg my dependance on thee, to give thee thanks and speak good of thy Name. But it becomes me no less to debase my self in the lowest manner before thee; because all that I speak in thy praise, declares my foul ingratitude to thee my Creator and constant bene∣factor. There is nothing that I can justly call my own, without thy leave, and I have received exceeding much from thy bounty, and thou hast made
me that I might enjoy satisfaction in thee, the most Soveraign good, and taken care to bring me acquainted with thee; which ought now to be remem∣bred with the greatest humility, thank∣fulness, and joyful resignation of my self and all that I have to thy obedience. But alas! how little do I feel thee, though I live and move and have my being in thee? Though I have tasted of thine abundant goodness every mo∣ment, how late was it before I seriously thought of my obligations to thee? Now that I see thou hast sent thy son, the express image of thy person among us, how little is it that I know of thee, and what a stranger am I still to thee? I have been too willing to receive but small benefit by his appearing; and to content my self with a little measure of that purity, wisdom and goodness, which he came to impart unto us. Thus foolish and ignorant have I been: and it was but fit that we should sink into
the greatest stupidity, when we were such fools as to leave thee, and follow the counsels and desires of our own hearts. For ever adored be thy infi∣nite charity, who art not willing to lose us, when we are so forward to lose thee and our selves. Blessed be the exceeding abundance of thy grace in Christ Jesus, which con∣tinues to invite even such senseless wretches to come unto thee; who have so little esteemed it, or know how to value the unsearchable riches of it. The marvellous greatness of thy for∣bearing and pardoning mercy, if no∣thing else, will incline and excite my heart, I hope, to love thee much above all things. That so at last I may love thy blessed nature, and perfectly un∣derstand that it is my happiness, to have thy image renewed in me, in righteousness and true holiness. Thou hast often convinced me, praised be thy goodness, that it is impossible for me
otherwise to be happy. Thou hast wrought many strong resolutions in my soul, to be guided and governed by thine unerring wisdom, and holy will. And I have felt the comforts of a pure, humble, meek, merciful, peace∣able, and loving disposition of heart. Perfect, good Lord, what thou hast wrought in me: that all the pious incli∣nations of my soul, may settle in a firm and lasting habit of well-doing. Our righteousness, I know, cannot profit thee; but thou delightest to communi∣cate thy self to thy creatures; especially to those who think it the greatest trea∣sure to be inriched with thy wisdom, and to be made partakers of a divine Nature. O thou who hast given me this knowledg, who hast given me a will to chuse thee for my portion, make me compleatly happy in being made exactly like unto thee. Meet me graciously when I approach to thy Table, and represent thy Son
Jesus so feelingly to me; that my mind may be more clearly illuminated to un∣derstand the beauteous perfections of his holiness, and my will more strongly bent to cleave unto him, and all the powers of my soul mightily inlivened to follow and imitate him to the end. I go with a desire, O Lord, to learn of him; that I may henceforth have low thoughts of my self, as having received all I have from thy fulness; and low thoughts of all enjoyments on earth, as a small part of that happiness to which thou hast designed me; and hateful thoughts of every sin, as that which is opposite both to thee and to my own happiness. O that the thoughts of thy goodness, may ever hereafter make me partaker of more of thy holiness: that thy mercy and indulgence may never tempt me in the least to offend thee, but rather affright me into thy obedience: that I may love thee so much as to feel it a satisfaction to cross my own desires,
to fulfil thy will and pleasure. O that it may be a comfort to me, to be able to deny them; and that I may account it the greatest victory to overcome my self; my highest triumph that thou, Lord, conquerest, and makest me thy willing subject. I hope to be subdued perfectly unto thee, and enabled to maintain a soveraign dominion over all things here: so that I may use them all soberly, moderately and with due acknowledgments to thee, and charity to men, but be brought in subjection un∣to none. Amen, Lord Jesus; who livest and reignest for ever, with the Father and the holy Spirit, in power and glo∣ry:Heb. 10.13. from henceforth expecting till all thine enemies be made thy foot-stool. In his most holy name and words, I sue for mercy, desiring to be heard, accord∣ing to the largest sense and meaning of them. Our Father which art, &c.
The Meditation afterward. WHat makes thee sigh, my Soul, now that thou hast been with thy Saviour? Is it because thou art departed from that holy place, where thou sawest his glory, and beheld how he loved thee? Alas! we cannot endure always to dwell in his house: we are too weak, while we are in this fleshly Tabernacle, to remain in the heights of love. Saint Paul came down again, when he was caught up into Paradise, and could not stay in the midst of those joys. But thou art afraid thou shalt forget Him, now that those sensible repre∣sentations are removed from thine eyes. And that thy love and thy joy will vanish, now that thou art gone from his blessed presence. Be of good Comfort: for he is every where, and will not absent himself if thou art so desirous of his company. His word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth,Rom. 10. and in thy heart. Look into his holy Gos∣pel, and read again and again the story of his love. Look into thy self, and see what he hath already done for thee, and he will not fail to be ever doing more. He hath given thee a well of living water,Joh. 4.1.
springing up into everlasting life, if thou be∣lievest the Gospel, the word of his grace: And thou mayest feed continually on the remembrances, which he hath now given thee of himself. He desires thou wouldst make him like thy daily bread, and be ever drawing life, and power, and joy from him, the fountain of life. Doth not he love Holiness, better than thou canst do thy self? Is it not his own life, his image, his nature formed in thee? Did he not live, did he not die, did he not rise again, and is he not at Gods right hand, and hath he not an unchangeable Priest∣hood,1 Pet. 3.18 Heb. 7.19. Tit. 2.14. that he may bring us to God, and pu∣rifie to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works? Be confident of this very thing,Phil. 1.6. that he which hath begun a good work in thee, will finish it until the day of Jesus Christ. Do but let him know every day that thou lovest righteousness and hatest ini∣quity,Heb. 1.9. and he will crown thee with more of this grace. For it is the character he hath given of himself; and he will love to beautifie his own image, and make it fairer and clearer wheresoever he finds it. Do but work out thy salvation with fear and trembling,Phil. 2.12.15. lest thou shouldest neglect such great salvation,Heb. 2.3. now that he worketh in thee to will and do of his good pleasure: and thou
needest not fear, but that he will continue to work in thee for ever. That little light which is in thee shall increase to a perfect day. Thy love, though but like a spark, shall burn and flame: and thou shalt shine as a light in the world,1 Thess. 5.24. in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, holding forth the word of life. Faithful is he that calleth thee, who also will do it.Phil. 4.4. And therefore, Rejoyce in the Lord alway: and again he saith, Rejoyce.Neh. 8.10. For the joy of the Lord is our strength: and they that rejoyce greatly in his holy Comforts shall go from strength to strength; every one of them shall, in the high and holy place, appear before God. And here remember, that the more thou canst forgo thy own will to satisfie his; the more assured thou wilt grow that he delights in thee, and will rejoyce over thee to do thee good: and so thou canst never fail to find thy joy in him to be full. Therefore resolve particularly all this Month to meditate often upon his absolute RESIGNATION to his Fathers will in all things: of which he hath given such a perfect example from the beginning to the end of his life.Heb. 10.5.7. When he came into the World, he said, Lo, I come to do thy
will, O God. When he preached among men he protested,Joh. 5.30. saying, I can of mine own self do nothing: because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me. And when he was an hungred he protested again;Joh. 4.34. My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work. And when he was in his bitterest Agony, from which nature was passionately averse, he submitted himself nevertheless with the greatest meekness,Mark 14.36. Luke 22.42. saying, Not what I will, but what thou wilt. Not my will, but thine be done. Labour thou to form thy self to the same mind and disposition, both in do∣ing and in suffering: Remembring the word that he said unto his Apostles, The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord.Joh. 15.20 Matth. 10.24. Joh. 13.17 It is enough for the Disciple that he be as his Master, and the Servant as his Lord. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.
The Prayer and Thanksgiving afterward. ALmighty and most Merciful Fa∣ther; the Fountain of all life and happiness: who bountifully commu∣nicatest thy blessings, and every where overflowest in thy mercies to all thy creatures. More especially to the sons of men, who are surrounded with an Ocean of them, the bounds of which we cannot see, and the depth whereof we cannot fathom. And the more thirsty any Souls are, and humbly de∣sirous to receive them, the more it pleases thee to pour out thy mercies upon them; the more thou delightest in the issues of thy bounteous goodness to them. I thine unworthy servant, encompassed about with thy salvation, come to make my humble acknow∣ledgments, and such returns of love and dutiful affection, as I am able, to thy Divine Majesty. If I had the Spi∣rits
of all Creatures united in me, I could not conceive, or worthily express thy loving kindness. Who hast raised me out of Nothing, to an excellent de∣gree of being; indued me with reason and wisdom; instructed me in the Christian faith; and therein let me see such things as eye never saw,1 Cor. 2.9. ear ne∣ver heard,Psal. 68.18. nor did it enter into the heart of man to conceive: that the Lord God should dwell among us,Ephes. 1.20.21. and our Nature be exalted at his right hand, far above all Angels, Principalities and Powers, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come. Blessed be the infinite wisdom and goodness of God, which sent his Son Jesus, born of a woman, to die for us, and to be a propitiation for our sins: and by means of death, hath crowned him with glory and honour, that we might have a blessed hope of glory, honour and immortality toge∣ther with himself. I ought to be over∣whelmed with the thoughts of thy mer∣cies,
which I cannot comprehend. The great load of them, The exceeding great load of them, ought to press my heart continually, to send them all back again in eternal love and obedience. Accept, good Lord, I beseech thee, of such poor expressions of them as I have now made unto thee, and of my vows, at thy holy Table, to render unto thee better. There thou hast been pleased to give me a sweet remembrance of thy past loving kindness, and assurance of the future. Bestow upon me likewise such a wise and considering heart, that I may sink my thoughts deeper and deeper into the vast Sea of thy mer∣cies: and think my self happy when I am filled with such a great sense of them, that all my thoughts, desires and actions, are under the power of Hea∣venly love. O that the love of God my Saviour may be ever admirable in mine eyes! that I may delight to think of thy love, to speak of thy love,
and to imitate thy love: so that all in∣ordinate affections may die in me, and I may perform most ready and easie obedience to all thy commands. Thou hast laid also great ingagements upon me, in that whilest thou makest this extraordinary provision for my Soul, thou hast not neglected my Body: but taken care that a world of good things should serve my needs and pleasure continually. O that my heart were but duly sensible of all thy goodness! I know then, that I could not deny thee any thing thou desirest, who hast open∣ed thy hand so liberally to me, even be∣yond my desires. I could not but trust thee; and resign my will wholly to thee; and be contented with what thou orderest for me; and in every thing give thanks, which is thy will in Christ Jesus concerning me. All that I have and can do is too little to give thee. I can love thee but
a little; and therefore I desire that all the world would love thee, and wor∣ship thee, and glorifie thy name. For thou art great and dost wondrous things.Psal. 86.10. thou art God alone. O that all the Kings of the Earth would praise thee, O Lord. Yea,138.4, 5. that they would sing in the ways of the Lord: for great is the glory of the Lord. That they may think it their greatest honour to be the Subjects of our Saviour, and their greatest security to obey him and ob∣serve his Laws: That being intrusted with thy divine power, they may im∣ploy it to right those that suffer wrong, to ease the oppressed of their burdens, supply the wants of the poor, defend the fatherless and widow; and com∣fort all mankind in their miseries. I recommend this Church and King∣dom, our Sovereign and all his Sub∣jects, to thy most powerful Protection: beseeching thee to endue us all with thy Heavenly grace, to dispose us to love thy true Religion, and to be zealous of
good works: that our Lord and Ma∣ster may be honoured by us, and all men may know we are his Disciples, by our loving one another. Now to the most High God,Dan. 4.34, 35. who liveth for ever, whose dominion is an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom from generation to generation: before whom all the inhabitants of the Earth are re∣puted as Nothing: and he doth according to his will in the Army of Heaven, and among the inhabitants of the Earth; be blessing, and honour, and praise rendred, by me and by all Creatures now and eternally. Amen.
August. The Meditation before. DOTH it not seem long, my soul, since thou wast at the Table of the Lord? With what thoughts, with what affections then, dost thou receive this new invitation to it? See what joy, what de∣light it raises in thy heart, that thou mayst know, whether indeed thou lovest him or no. His love is so great, that one would think it should never slip out of thy mind. Our Lord hath done such great things for us, that we may be tempted sooner not to believe them, than to forget them. But this is one piece of the greatness of that love, that it hath taken care it should be alway remembered. He hath not thought it enough to die for us, but he hath left us a representation of it; and a command to shew forth his death until he come. What dost thou think of that command? Is it a burden to thee to yield obedience to it? Dost thou unwillingly hear the motion to go and do this in remembrance of him? What? Is it a sad thing to think of declar∣ing the goodness of the Lord? To mag∣nifie
the love of God our Saviour? To celebrate his praises? To profess our selves his servants, and to ingage to him our fide∣lity? Doth it make thee sigh to think of going to receive the tokens of his love? To represent the death and satisfaction of Christ Jesus for thy sins? To wait on God for the pardon of them? And to be put in assured hope of immortal life? Thou art not such a stranger, sure, to thy own hap∣piness; but knowest better things; even things that accompany salvation. Give glory therefore to the Lord that he calls thee again so graciously to shew forth his death: Let him know that thou meanest to obey him; (to attend him at his holy Table,) and thank him too. But with what blushing should we look there upon that love, which we have sometime slight∣ed? With what hatred, upon those sins which murdered the Lord of life? With what joy should we think of the hope there is, that they may be pardoned? And how should we stand admiring at that wise good∣ness, which made that blood, which sin∣ners shed, to be the expiation for their sins? Sure we do not believe these things: or else we shall begin already to feel our heart burn with love to him; and ready to offer it self in Sacrifice, before we come to his
Altar. Excite thy Faith; that it may stir up thy Love: and that may carry all the passi∣ons of thy heart along with it to him. Shew him that the desire of thy heart is to the remembrance of his Name; that thy care is to please him; thy fear to offend him; thy joy to do his will; and thy sorrow that thou canst do no more for him. Let it be a great comfort to thee, that he knows thy sincerity, and sees into the very secrets of thy heart: how affectionately thou studiest to be like him; what a pleasure it is when thou canst stedfastly think of him; how it grieves thee when thy thoughts are bro∣ken, thy affections heavy and dull, and thy power falls so short of thy will and de∣sires. And be assured that he pitties thee; that notwithstanding this he will kindly entertain thee; and receive the poorest oblation thou art able to make him at his Table. Eat and be satisfied, and bless the name of the Lord. He hath invited thee; he expects thee; he loves to see thee there; and will make thee know that he loves thee, and delights to do thee good. Let us go, my soul, and declare before Angels and men that we are Christians; and mean to live and die in his holy Reli∣gion. And let us now take shame to our
selves that we have at any time contra∣dicted our belief. Let us acknowledg the breach of that Faith into which we were baptized: and declare before we go how great a trouble it is to us, that we love him no more; and how desirous we are and fully resolved to love him better and better. The Prayer before. O Eternal God, the Lord of life, of grace, peace and all our com∣forts. It is of thy great mercies alone that I am not consumed; or that I lie not now groaning on a bed of sickness: but am invited to feast at thy holy Ta∣ble. I might have distasted and loath∣ed even the ordinary food of my body; and thou continuest an opportunity, and some appetite to receive the preti∣ous food of my soul. The grave might have been my dwelling, the worms my companions, and I been turned into rottenness and corruption: but now I am going to thy house, to be the com∣panion
of thy people, and to communi∣cate with thee and my blessed Saviour; that I may be nourished to a blessed immortality. This is nothing else but thy marvellous Mercy, and because thy compassions fail not: For I have too many ways violated thy holy Laws, broken thy covenant, resisted thy grace, and unvalued thy eternal life. Thou hast adopted me early for thy child, sown the immortal seed of thy word in my heart, sent thy holy Spirit to further its growth and increase to that never dying happiness and bliss. But how little have I recovered of thy image in wisdom, righteousness and holiness, which hath been miserably defaced? How coldly have I some∣times entertained the motions of thy holy Spirit? And been barren and un∣fruitful in the knowledg of Jesus Christ? How often have I heard of that great and dreadful day of reckoning; and been prone to follow the little pleasures
of this life, as if I lookt neither for joy nor misery in the other world? That Faith which should save me, might justly condemn me: and Jesus my most compassionate Redeemer, without in∣finite mercy, become only a severe Judge towards me. Adored be thy patience and long-suffering to sinners. For ever magni∣fied be that Grace, which gives me the least hope in thee: and presents me with another opportunity of humbling my self before thee; of intreating thy favour; of deprecating thy displea∣sure; and vowing my self again to thy service which I have covenanted to pay thee. O merciful God, have mer∣cy upon me; have mercy upon me: according to the multitude of thy mer∣cies, in Christ Jesus, blot out all my iniquities. I have not offended thee be∣yond the heighth, and depth, and length and breadth of thine incomprehensible
love in him declared to us. And there is still remaining in my heart some esteem of that love, and an in∣clination to love thee above all things; with an hearty desire to be purified and sanctified throughout both in body and in soul and spirit. Though not by works of righteousness which I have done, yet by thy mercy I hope to be saved, through the washing of rege∣neration, and more perfect renewing of the holy-Ghost. That renewing vertue from above I most humbly wait for, and earnestly desire to be more abundantly poured on me. Deal with me according to my unfeigned re∣solutions to study to purifie my self, even as thou art pure: to walk before thee hereafter in all sobriety, righteous∣ness, humility, meekness, peaceable∣ness, charity; indeavouring to perfect holiness in thy fear. Vouchsafe me some earnests of this grace, when I pre∣sent my self before thee, to commemo∣rate
the death of thy Son Jesus; who was wounded for our iniquities, and bruised for our transgressions. That my heart may be deeply wounded with a sense of sin; and hate the very thought of every evil way; and chuse to endure any misery, rather than of∣fend thy dearest love again. O that I might then feel my thoughts carried away from this world: that I could think then of nothing but thee; and the dying love of my sweetest Sa∣viour; and the greatness of that love which I owe to him, that died for me. Replenish my soul with holy thoughts; lift me up in heavenly meditations; and fill me with a multitude of devout affections: that I may be able here∣after to do and suffer all things for his sake; and never forget how good he is, and how good I have resolved to be. Without thee, I cannot ascend up unto thee: and therefore I look for thy holy inspirations to accompany
me in all my Meditations, and pray∣ers and praises, and thanksgivings, and resolutions. That attending upon this sacred service, with love, and zeal, and delight and devotion of spi∣rit; there may be an happy meeting between me and my Saviour: and such an inseparable Union contract∣ed, as may be at last consummated in eternal Love and Joy in his hea∣venly Kingdom. To which I hum∣bly hope to be brought by thy infinite Mercies in him, who hath taught me to call thee Father; and to say, when I pray; Our Father, which art in, &c.
The Meditation afterward. SEeing it hath pleased my Lord to tye me to himself, by one bond more; and I have added a new resolution to all the rest, and made choice of him again for my only Master; how careful ought I to be that I prove not a false Disciple? Hast thou never read or heard of an holy man, who never used the name of Jesus, but he im∣mediately added, not without the appear∣ance of singular pleasure, MY MA∣STER? This was his glory; this he thought the highest honour on Earth, that he served such a Master. Let this be one of thy thoughts every day: Let it work in thy mind, till the sense of these words be ingraven on thy heart, My Master JESƲS. Consider that when thou wast baptized, thou wast dedicated to his holy service. That if thou hast owned & confirmed that Sacred Covenant, thou hast renounced all other Masters, the Devil, the World, and the Flesh; and professed thou wouldst be a Servant of Jesus. And every time thou hast been at his Table, thou hast done this over again; and protested thou wilt have no other Master, but only him. Is there
any cause dost thou think, to repent of thy choice of following his service? Is it not a great preferment to be one of his family, who is Lord of Heaven and Earth, the Heir of all things, the Prince of all the Kings of the Earth, the Lord of Life, and the King of Glory? Dost thou not profess in thy daily Prayers, that his service is perfect freedom? Can any reward their servants, like to the blessed and only Potentate, who only hath im∣mortality? Do any servants in the world serve in such hopes, or enjoy such promi∣ses, or receive such earnests, as he is plea∣sed to bestow on his? Is not death the wa∣ges of sin; but the gift of God eternal life? What servants are admitted to such familiarity with their Lord, as thou art at his Table? Who are entertained with such a Feast, or live upon such delights, as they that receive his Body and Bloud? And yet how zealous, how diligent, how forward are they to do their Masters will, who serve only for the wages of unrighteous∣ness? How proud is a man of the honour to follow the Court of an Earthly Prince? But if he should be advanced to eat conti∣nually at his Table, the world would envy his too great happiness. What a shame will it prove then, if thou art not fervent in spirit serving the Lord? If thou dost not
think thy self honoured enough, and art not well contented in any condition, who fol∣lowest such a glorious Master? Thou wilt not pardon thy self, if thou art unfaithful to him; or disgracest his service by mur∣muring, repining, dejection of spirit; or any other unworthy behaviour toward him. For what Master ever merited so much at his Servants hands? We have heard of Servants, that have died for their Masters; but where did we ever read or hear of a Master that freely died, even for his re∣bellious Servants? The business was, Jesus would purchase us to himself by his own Bloud: and make us, if we have but any good nature in us, to be most entirely de∣voted to his chearful obedience. Ask thy self therefore every morning, whose Ser∣vant am I? What did I promise my Master such a day? If I call him Lord and Master, why do not I do the things that he saith? And shall I go about my Masters business with a drooping countenance, and an hea∣vy heart? Shall I sigh when I hear his voice, though he bid me deny my self, and take up my Cross and follow him? Shall any of his Commandments seem grievous to me, after so many, so solemn professi∣ons of love to him? God forbid that I should cast such reproach upon him. I have
not so learned Christ Jesus, whose I am, and whom I serve: who hath said,Joh. 12.26. If any man serve me, him will my Father honour. Can there be words of greater grace than these? God be thanked,Rom. 6.17, 18. that I was the ser∣vant of sin, but have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was delivered me. It is a favour to be the servant of righteous∣ness. I ought to account it an honour to receive his commands: and to study to do his will on Earth, as it is done in Heaven. How comfortably then shall I live? how comfortably shall I die? How will it make my heart leap for joy, to hear that voice of his;Matth. 25.21. Well done thou good and faithful ser∣vant: enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. Here you may resolve to meditate all this Month, how our Lord and Master himself took upon him the form of a SER∣VANT; and being found in fashion like one of us, became obedient unto Death,Phil. 2.7, 8. even the Death of the Cross. That absolute OBEDIENCE of his you should set always before your eyes for a pattern: that you may not live as if you were asha∣med of his service, or thought any thing below you, or too mean to submit unto, which he requires at your hands. Never suffer your reputation, your ease, your
wealth, no nor life it self to stand in com∣petition with his commands: But presently remember, that though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience, by the things which he suffered:Heb. 5.8, 9. And being made perfect, he became the Author of Eternal Salvation unto all them that obey him. And remember again, that The Disciple is not above his Master:Luk. 6.40 but eve∣ry one that is perfect shall be as his Master. The Thanksgiving and Prayer afterward. FOr ever hallowed be thy great Name, O Father of mercies, the God of love, the fountain of all good and blessedness. All the heavenly host delight continually to praise thee. They never cease to ascribe wisdom power, dominion, riches, honour and glory unto thee who livest for ever. O how great is thy goodness, who in∣vitest us, that dwell in houses of clay, to bear them company in their praises and thanksgivings? They can add no∣thing at all unto thy fulness: but it is our happiness to spend our days here,
in loving thee, in speaking good of thy Name, in doing thee honour and ser∣vice; and to pass the life of the other world, in the perfection of admiration, love, thanksgiving and obedience to thee:Psal. 126.3. who hast done such great things for us, of which we are glad. Blessed be the Name of God our Father, who hath raised us out of Nothing; and hath not appointed us unto wrath;1 Thess. 5.9 but to obtain Salva∣tion by our Lord Jesus Christ. And of God our Saviour, who hath redeem∣ed us from the hands of all our ene∣mies; and purchased us with a great price unto himself. And of God our Sanctifier, strength and assister, the God of our Salvation, who keeps us every moment from ruine and destru∣ction. I thank thee, O Lord of Heaven and Earth, for that liberal portion which thou hast given me, thine un∣worthy servant, in thy grace and fa∣vour. For the knowledge of thy holy Gospel, which hath brought life and
immortality to light: For all the good instructions I have received from thy Ministers [and the tender care,You may mention these and others, if you have had this benefit. reli∣gious education of my Parents, Tutors and Governours:] For all seasonable reproofs, wholsom counsels, good ad∣monitions, and every truth I have re∣ceived from my Friends or Enemies: For the pious examples and good con∣versation of any of my Neighbours; for all holy opportunities, and the lei∣sure I have to attend upon this heaven∣ly employment: For thy merciful cha∣stisements, and thy wonderful delive∣rances: For all the good Books thou hast brought to my hands; and the good advice which I have any way re∣ceived: For all my Benefactors; all those that love me and pray for me: And above all for thy gracious inspira∣tions from above, the holy thoughts thou hast put into my mind, and the pious desires and purposes thou hast stirr'd up in my heart; with all the fur∣therances,
helps and assistances thou hast vouchsafed me in my way to Hea∣ven: particularly now at this holy Feast, where thou hast made me know and feel how good thou art, beyond the compass of all our thoughts. What shall I return unto thee for all thy love? What shall I give unto my Lord, who hath given himself for me? I have given thee my whole self, and now devoted all the powers of my soul and body to thy service: that all my thoughts, my words, my desires, my passions, and actions may be disposed according to thy will and not my own. And I think my self happy, O blessed Jesus, in the choice I have made of thee for my Lord and Master. I re∣joyce in the disposal I have made of my self to thy service and obedience. For a world I would not revoke my consent to be absolutely ruled and governed by thee, as long as I live. Sin shall not
reign in my mortal body,Rom. 6.12 that I should obey it in the lusts thereof. But here I come again to yield my self unto thee my God, and to profess thy service to be the most perfect freedom, and the no∣blest employment. To beseech thy pardon for all mine unfaithfulness; and the constant power of thy Holy Spirit to assist me in the doing thy will here on Earth, as it is done in Heaven: that all my resolutions may be persevering, my endeavours successful, and my obe∣dience perfect and compleat in all things. Lord Jesus do what thou pleasest in me, and what thou pleasest with me. Truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant: and I will make my boast con∣tinually in this, that I serve the Lord Christ. May I but ever love thee, and stedfastly cleave unto thee, and chear∣fully obey thee, and faithfully live to honour thee. I desire nothing else. Come prosperity, or adversity; come sickness, or health, life or death; so
that I may but glorifie thee, and be made conformable to thee, and bear thine image in holiness here, and in glory hereafter. And let all the Earth stand in awe of thee, thou Lord and Ruler of the whole world. Let the hearts of all people submit themselves to thy King∣dom and Authority.Psal. 45.3, 4. In thy Majesty ride on prosperously, O thou most mighty, be∣cause of truth, and meekness, and righteous∣ness: till all thine enemies fall under thee, and think themselves happy in thy most just and merciful govern∣ment. I commend thine own family to thy gracious and powerful protecti∣on: and this part of it especially in these Kingdoms. That we thy servants be∣ing hurt by no persecutions, may ever∣more give thanks unto thee in thy holy Church, and triumph in thy praise; saying,Psal. 48.14. This God is our God for ever and ever; he will be our guide even unto Death.
Now unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own Bloud, and hath made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father;Rev. 1.5, 6 to him be Glory and Dominion for ever and ever. Amen.
September. The Meditation before the Sacrament. SHall we not be too bold in going so oft to the Table of the Lord? May we not offend him by our forwardness to approach into his presence? No sure, not if love carry us thither, and accompany us there. And who can want that, who knows and considers how forward he was to do that, which we remember? When he came to offer himself a Sacrifice for us, he saith, Lo, I come:Psal. 40.7, 8. in the volume of the book it is written of me: I delight to do thy will, O God. And when he eat the last meal with his Disciples, he said again,Luk. 22.15. with desire I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer. Behold what a hearty vehemence there was in his love! what an ardor in his desire; to be made an offer∣ing for us, and to be remembred by us! With what love should we commemorate his dying love? with what desire should our souls approach to his holy Table in remembrance of him; who took such con∣tent in dying for us, and was so desirous to institute this holy feast, for a perpetual
remembrance of his death? With the same joy that children use to welcome a Festi∣val; with such an hunger and thirst, as a labouring man goes to his supper; ought we to go to the Supper of the Lord: that we may chear and refresh our souls with the memory of our Master and only Savi∣our; with praises and joyful thanksgivings; with the love of God and of our Brethren; with the hopes of his Mercy here and eter∣nally. Awake, awake then thy Faith; call up thy love: quicken thy desires: excite all that is within thee to bless the Lord and speak good of his name. Say with a great joy, Lo, I come, according to thy command: and delight to do thy will, O God. With desire I have desired to do this in remembrance of my Lord: to declare thy mighty acts, and shew forth the greatness of thy love; to profess my self thy servant, and to glory in the holy name of my Master Jesus; to offer up my self unto thee, an oblation of love; to renew my covenant with thee, and with all my Brethren; to give thee thanks that I am one of thy family, and for all the benefits I received, and thou hast still in store for thy faithful servants. But who is able to tell how much he hath done al∣ready for us? Or find out all that he de∣signs
unto us? Who can praise him accord∣ing to his excellent kindness, and his wonderful works for the children of men? The thoughts of Angels are not wide enough to comprehend them. And if we had their spirits, and could love him and acknowledg him, with their inlarged af∣fection, it would be too little a present to make unto him. O give thanks therefore unto the Lord, for he is gracious, for his mercy endureth for ever. O give thanks unto him, who is so desirous of us, such narrow souls, such little hearts, that can hold so little love unto him. Let us go to him, and desire that he would inlarge them; or that he would fill them to the heighth with his love. Since he is content, if he may but lodg and dwell in our breasts, and have the government of us in his hands: let us go and vow, that he shall possess us solely to himself; that no affection, no de∣sire shall dwell in us, without his leave; and all be ordered by him just as he pleases. And let us shew him now, that we have prepared no less gift than our whole selves to be bestowed on him: that we are very desirous of the honour to be commanded by him, and to do him service; and that if he will make us more desirous, more resolved and stedfast in these holy purposes,
we will never cease to thank him in this manner as long as we live. And approaching thus, with all humili∣ty to him, may we not hope that he will accept us, and receive us as his friends, and embrace us with real love, and inclose us, as we desire, unto himself? Nay, he will hold us fast tied in the bonds and cords of his love: not to fetter and impri∣son us; but to unlock and open our nar∣row hearts by the power of it, that they be inlarged into the true liberty of love to him and to all the world. We may hope at last, that it will become as unnatural to offend him, as it is to kill our selves, or kick against the bowels of a most indulgent parent: that obedience shall be our delight: that all good things on earth, which have been our hindrance, shall prove our in∣couragement and provocation to an holy life: and that our watchfulness over our selves shall be so strict and severe, that we shall not be easily surprised; but continu∣ally worship him, by presenting him with a spirit like his own, innocent, harmless, and delighting to do all good.
The Prayer before. O Most mighty Lord, the high and holy one who possessest eternity: who dwellest in the purest light, and whose Majesty is enthroned in the midst of all the heavenly host, who are continually celebrating the praises of thy name, which is most excel∣lent throughout the world. The light of thy countenance, I believe, is better than life: and one day in thy courts better than a thousand. If thou wilt graciously shine upon me, when I enter into thy gates to go unto thy Table; if thou wilt fill me with the joys of Faith and love and holy hope; I shall account that day the beginning of the eternal life, and remember as long as I live how gracious thou art. But I have little reason to expect to be so highly favou∣red by thee, who have forgotten oft∣times that reverence and fear that I owe
to thee my Creator; and that love and dutiful affection which I owe to my Redeemer; and been too disobedient to many good motions of the holy Spi∣rit of grace. I have thought so much how to please my self, and so little of pleasing thee; spent so much time in the affairs of my body, and so little in those of my immortal soul, that I may rather sink into dejection of spirit to∣ward the place of darkness, than hope to be lifted up toward heaven, to be∣hold the light of life. I am apt to think that if I knew thee as the Angels do, I should be filled with their love, and readily disposed to thy obedience, and spend my self in thy endless praises: whereas now that thou hast revealed those things to us which the thoughts of Angels entred not into, and hast sent thy dear Son in our nature and not i the nature of Angels, and given him to die for us, and to open the kingdom of heaven to us, I have not loved thee
with the love of men. I have felt some∣time so little love to thee, that I have been apt to doubt whether I love thee. It hath been but a little spark in my heart, scarce to be discerned; and hath not shone, as it ought to do, in my life before men — But thy gracious pardon, O Lord of love, I hope will make me admire thee; and love thee exceedingly. Some small tast and savour of thine extraor∣dinary kindness, will inkindle in me the most ardent affection towards thee. And it is already the hearty desire and study of my soul, thou knowest, that I may love thee above all things; and that all my love may run into ingenu∣ous, free and chearful obedience to eve∣ry one of thy Commands. They are all holy, just and good: they are most lovely and gracious in mine eyes. I esteem thy precepts about all things to be most equal, beneficial, and highly
conducing to the perfection and hap∣piness of our natures: and chuse most joyfully to submit my self to the Sove∣raign Authority of such tender love and good-will towards us. O pitty and pardon an humble suitor to thee, that his heart may ever be under the power of thy holy Commands; and being captivated from all things here below, may become a subject of thy love. I wait on thee for the power of thy holy Spirit now to come upon me, to fill me with thoughts, desires and affections sutable to the duty which I am about to render to thee. That when I think of those sins, which killed the Lord of life, I may vehe∣mently abhor and utterly renounce them. And when I think of thy love, it may wonderfully raise and ex∣alt my heart to love thee, delight in thee, and gratefully acknowledg thee. And when I think of thy holy Com∣mands, my heart may humbly bow,
and gladly resign it self to be govern∣ed by them. And the dying of the Lord Jesus set before my eyes, may make me an offering holy and accep∣table to thee for ever. I am sensible how oft I fall short of my own desires and resolutions: and therefore again look up unto thee, with a humble Faith, for thy powerful presence with me. To inlighten my mind more clearly; to settle my wan∣dring and unstable thoughts: to a∣waken the conscience of my duty to∣ward thee, and toward all men; to compose and quiet all my turbulent passions and affections; and to con∣firm and strengthen all the holy purpo∣ses which thou workest in me. Vouch∣safe, most gracious Lord, to accept and assist the faintest, but honest, in∣deavours of my soul to please thee; to incourage and further every good in∣clination; to possess and fortifie me
against the most importunate tempta∣tions; and to enable me to quell and bring under the strongest oppositions to thy divine will. I deliver up my self absolutely with all my heart unto it: desiring and purposing to live insted∣fast union and conformity with it; to maintain an humble and reverend sense of thy greatness and goodness; sober∣ly to use all the good things thou in∣dulgest to me; to exercise righteous∣ness, charity, meekness and gentleness to all men; to possess my soul in pa∣tience; to be contented with my por∣tion; to pray without ceasing; and in every thing to give thanks, which is thy will in Christ Jesus concerning me. Sanctifie, I beseech thee, the greatest worldly blessings to me; support me under the heaviest afflictions; fit me for the most sudden or lingring depar∣ture out of this life, and for whatsoever thy wise providence shall order for me while I stay in it; and by all these
means prepare me for everlasting glory. And, O, that the nearer I approach unto it, the brighter sense of it may shine in my heart; chasing away the fears of death, and the cares of life. And that I may now begin it, by praising thee in the company of thy Saints with joyful lips: and every day praise thee better; and long more for that happy state, where we shall have nothing else to do but love and praise thee for ever. The Lord Jesus Christ be with my Spi∣rit:2 Tim. 4. ult. in whose holy words I further re∣commend my self to thy wonted Mercies. Our Father, &c.
The Meditation afterward. IS there any need after all that thou hast heard, and thought, and said of thy bles∣sed Saviour, that I should call upon thee, and bid thee love him? Need I entreat and earnestly beseech thee, my Soul, to preserve the memory of his most obliging kindness; and exhort thee to go again and again, to praise him in this manner? Methinks, we may turn our thoughts and our speech to him; thanking and admiring the excess of his love, that he will let us approach thus near unto him. It is his love that he will at all regard us, and re∣ceive the love we offer to him. But it is a great marvel of his love, that he hath en∣treated us so often, and used so many ar∣guments to us, and laid so many obligati∣ons on us to love him. What are we, that he should seek after us on this fashion, who had a mind to lose him? It is strange that he will accommodate and address himself to our very senses, that our dull flesh may not hinder us from loving him. Good Lord! that thy delight should be with the Sons of men. Couldst thou not live unless we li∣ved also? Canst thou be at all the better
for us? Have we been kind unto thee, since thou hast done all this for us? Or do we use half so many entreaties to thee, to do us good; as thou hast done to us, to be good to our selves? O be astonished at the greatness of his mercy. Do but throughly affect thy heart with the heighth and depth of his love; and love will make more pathetical and moving exhortations to thee, than any thought can invent. I will leave thee under the power and con∣straint of thy love. Cease to love him if thou canst; if thou dost but think of his love. But think withal, what an hopeless condition that Soul is in, which the love of God in Christ Jesus cannot move and prevail withal to love him. And what may all thy Brethren expect from thee, who are partakers of the common Salvation toge∣ther with thy self? Canst thou find in thy heart to offend him, for whom Christ di∣ed? Wilt thou not open thy bowels of compassion towards others, when thou standest in so great need even of infinite mercies thy self? Shall some small differ∣ences between you, four thy heart; or blunt the edge of that affection, which is sharpned by the Divine love to us, when we were strangers and enemies to him by evil works? How canst thou chuse but be
ready to do good, and to forgive, even those that have done evil to thee? To bless them that curse thee,Luke 6.28.35, 36. and pray for them that despitefully use thee? Remembring that thy reward then shall be great, and thou shalt be the child of the Highest: for he is kind unto the unthankful, and to the evil. Be thou therefore merciful, as thy Heavenly Father al∣so is merciful. Here resolve to meditate all this Month, very often, upon that part of our Lords example, which he left us when he died, in PRAYING FOR HIS ENE∣MIES; his bitter enemies; his maliti∣ous and ungrateful enemies; his enemies, that with implacable wrath most Devilish∣ly contrived the destruction of the most in∣nocent, loving, obliging and bountiful person, that ever walked upon the face of the Earth. Remember also how sweetly and mildly he treated, even that villanous Traitor, his own Servant, who betrayed him with a base hypocrisie; saying no worse words than these to him,Matt. 26.50. Luke 22.48. Friend, wherefore art thou come? betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss? And let not either the greatness of mens malice; or their bar∣barous requital of the benefits they have re∣ceived from thee; or their treacherous
hypocrisie; or their vile dissimulation; or any other aggravation of their crime, hin∣der thee from following thy Saviour, and stifle thy love to thy enemies. And par∣ticularly express thy love by praying most earnestly for them, bewailing their folly and madness; pitying the ungodly hellish state wherein they are; and imitating the charity of Heaven to which thou recom∣mendest them. Open thy mouth with meekness of wisdom,Prov. 31.26. and let the law of kindness be in thy tongue. Speak to them graciously, who have disobliged thee: And if thine enemy hunger, feed him;Rom. 12.20, 21. if he thirst, give him drink: heap coals of fire on his head; that if it be possible he may be melted into better nature, and his evil may be overcome with good. The Thanksgiving and Prayer afterward. O Most holy and ever blessed Lord of Heaven and Earth, who only hast immortality, and dwel∣lest in light unapproachable by mortal eyes: shining in the glory of thy own perfections, and not needing any refle∣ctions
from thy Creatures. Thou art full beyond our thoughts; and ever communicating out of thy fulness, abundantly beyond all that we can con∣ceive. We cannot comprehend the vast number of Creatures which thou hast made, who all praise thee and de∣clare thy magnificent goodness; nor are we able to fathom the least part of that bounty which feeds them, and provides for them, and takes care of them every where. Much less can we comprehend thee, in whom they all live, and move, and have their being; and from whom they are continually supplied, without diminishing thy full goodness. We the children of men have received a more liberal share in thy blessings, than the rest of our fellow-Creatures, and had most large experi∣ence of thy never ceasing love and kind∣ness to us. For after we had spent and wasted those great treasures wherewith thou didst endow our na∣tures;
thou hast been pleased to grant us a new and better portion, and to raise us up again with the addition of many Talents. Having sent thy Son to redeem us, and to be the Author of a supernatural birth to us; to declare to us all the will of thee our Heavenly Father, and to give us exceeding great and precious promises, the expectati∣on of which might incourage us to do all that thou requirest of us. Thou hast sent him, blessed be thy goodness, to bring us Life and Spirit; to strengthen us against all the powers of Hell and Earth; to break the force of all temptations; to sanctifie even our afflictions to us, and the infirmities of our crazy bodies; to take out the sting of death; and to make it an en∣trance into an immortal life. Thou hast advanced him to intercede for us at thy right hand; to be our Advocate with thee, when by our weakness we sin against thee, or are afraid to ap∣proach
thee, to pardon us when we repent and return to thee; and to bless us by giving us repentance, and turn∣ing us from all our iniquities. And to all other benefits thou hast added the comforts and refreshments of thy holy Table, where I have now partaked of his most blessed Body and Bloud. Thou hast shown me the greatness of my Saviours love; and tied me in new resolutions to love and serve thee for ever; and given me strong assurance of thine everlasting mercies in Christ Jesus. These very acknowledgments will witness against me, if I should care∣lesly throw away this new portion, which thou hast given me in thy love. The remembrance of them will be in∣tolerable, if I should not improve this extraordinary grace which I have now commemorated. I flee unto thee therefore again. O most merciful Fa∣ther,
for the help of thy Holy Spirit, to continue in me a perpetual memory of that love which thou hast bestowed on me; and of the professions I have made of an unmovable love to thee. O thou inspirer of all holy thoughts and desires; O thou who delightest to in∣courage all those that seek after thee with thankful hearts; stop not the cur∣rant of thy bounteous love: but as thou hast drawn me to thee, and moved me to devote my self to thy obedience; so preserve and keep these thoughts and purposes in my heart for ever. I be∣lieve thou hearest me, and wilt be with me. And filled with thy power and might, and with constant hope in thee, I will walk and not be weary, and run the ways of thy Commandments, and not faint. To that Almighty goodness I commit my self, of which I have had such long experience. I will never doubt of thy readiness to as∣sist and further me: but always look
up unto the Heavens from whence cometh my help. My help cometh from the Lord, which made Heaven and Earth. The Lord shall preserve me from all evil:Psal. 122.2, 7, 8. he shall preserve my Soul. The Lord shall preserve my going out, and my coming in, from this time forth and even for evermore. O that all the ends of the Earth may see thy Salvation, and worship thy Name; for it is holy. And especial∣ly all those to whom is given a Kingdom,Dan. 5.18. Majesty, Glory and Honour, may evermore praise,4.37. and extol, and honour the King of Heaven; all whose works are truth, and his ways judgment, and those that walk in pride he is able to abase.Psal. 68.3. Let all the righteous be glad; let them rejoyce before God, yea, let them exceedingly rejoyce.35.27. Let them say con∣tinually, The Lord be magnified, which hath pleasure in the prosperity of his Servants. O that all mankind would praise the Lord for his goodness,Psal. 107.8, 9, 13. and for his wonderful works, to the Children of men. For he sa∣tisfieth
the longing Soul, and filleth the hun∣gry Soul with goodness. They cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he saveth them out of their distresses. Blessed be the Lord God,Psal. 41.13.68.19. even the God of our Salvation, from everlast∣ing to everlasting. Amen and Amen.
October. The Meditation before. HOw long is it since thou thoughtest of the best friend thou hast in the whole world? And what were thy last thoughts of him? Didst thou not a very little while ago long for his company; and wish the time would come wherein thou might∣est again enjoy him? Didst thou not count the days till that happy time, when he promised to return or to send unto thee? And suppose he be dead; with what passi∣on dost thou follow his memory? How art thou moved with the mention of his dear name? How glad to possess any re∣lique of him, though it be but his shadow? Or how oft dost thou look upon the lively picture of him, which is drawn in thy own imagination? And dost thou think it could fail to put thee in mind, of what he left thee in charge when he departed this world? Couldst thou forget the legacies he left thee, or the inheritance he be∣queathed to thee, as the heir of his love? O how long then is it, my soul, since
Jesus was in thy thoughts? Canst thou not tell? Was there ever such a Friend as he, that dyed to save thee? Can any one pre∣tend so much to thy love, or merit of thee so kind a remembrance? Who is there that ever died for the sake of his enemies? O how pretious, how dear, should the Name of Jesus be unto thee! with what joy shouldst thou receive the news, that he is coming to visit thee? How welcome must this invitation be from thy blessed Saviour, whom if thou lovest thou canst not but long to see? It is the voice of thy well-beloved, that calls unto thee, and saith; come and feast with me. Come, and see by these sensible signs, which I have left to represent me, how much my love hath made me suffer for thee. Behold the lively figure of my Body and Blood, which was broken and shed to redeem thee. I have caused it to be made on purpose, that thou mightest not forget me. What dost thou answer to him? Canst thou say, thou hast looked for this day? That thou thoughtest it long, till thou mightest go to his house? or at least wast desirous to go, and see him set forth crucifi∣ed before thine eyes? Why? What good did the last sight of him do thee? What
pangs of love didst thou feel in thy heart? what pleasure, what joy in the remem∣brance of his kindness? Did it call all his Commands to mind, and recommend them effectually to thy love? Did it stir thee up to do his will, and make thee more zealous ever since in working that which is pleasing in his sight? What didst thou think of the inheritance he hath given thee? An inheritance incorruptible,1 Pet. 1.4. and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserv∣ed in heaven for thee? Didst thou believe his word;Col. 3.24. and verily expect to receive the reward of this inheritance? How did that faith then work in thy heart? Did it give thee extreme content? Having hope to see him, did it make thee purifie thy self,1 Joh. 3.3. even as he is pure? Go then now as a friend of his, and do the same again. Renew thy remembrance of him. Shew him the be∣lief thou hast in him: the love thou bearest to his name and word: how resolved thou art never to forget him: and how happy thou thinkest thy self, in the portion he hath given thee in his grace and love. Pro∣fess to him, that his Commandments are dearer to thee than thy life: and that thou wilt sooner part with it, than not perform his holy will in every thing. Vow to him again that thou wilt be true and faithful to
him. Embrace all thy Brethren there as∣sembled with a kind affection, because they are his friends and followers. Desire that all the world should know him and be acquainted with him; and that a perpetu∣al memory of him may be preserved, by doing this, as long as the Sun and Moon endure. And canst thou do it without those passions, which the thoughts of a Friend are wont to raise up in thy heart? None of them, sure, will be absent upon this occasion. They will all attend thee in this holy action: and thou wilt feel the greatest gratitude to thy Saviour, who hath done so much to deserve thy love, which is so little worth to him. Then thou wilt hear him, as good as, say unto thee, Son, be of good chear, thy sins are forgiven thee. All that I have is thine. I will be an everlasting friend to thee, and make thee inherit all things. It is my Fa∣thers good pleasure, to give thee a king∣dom: and here I give thee the earnest of that purchased possession. What reason hast thou to doubt of the injoyment; if thou art my friend, by doing whatsoever I command thee? Do not friends partake in each others goods? My power which I have over all things in Heaven and earth
shall assist thee. My Angels shall be thy guardians. My spirit shall be thy guide and director. My comforts shall incou∣rage and support thee. Because I live,Joh. 14.19.10.10. thou shalt live also. For I came that my sheep might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. The Prayer before. O Most holy and eternal God; who art good and dost good: the whole earth is full of thy goodness. Thy mercy reacheth unto the Heavens, and thy faithfulness unto the Clouds. Thou art great in power, wisdom, and all other perfections: and there∣fore greatly to be feared, honoured and loved by all understanding creatures. When I consider how much thou hast done for me, or how much I have often promised to do for thee; I am on both hands confounded and ashamed in my own thoughts. Thou art my Crea∣tor, my Father, my Saviour, delive∣rer, and constant Benefactor: the God
of my life, of my health, of all my present comforts and future hopes. I have promised often to be thy faithful servant, and thy dutiful child: to honour and glorifie thee both with body and soul, and all the good things thou hast bestowed on me. In my Baptism I was dedicated unto thee; and have many times confirmed that gift, and renewed my engage∣ments to continue in thy obedience. In my promises, protestations and vows I have been very liberal: but how spar∣ing in performance, thou, who art ac∣quainted with all my ways, knowest. And I my self know so much of my negligence, that I may justly wonder, thou still retainest me in thy family, and lettest me enjoy the priviledg of thy children. Adored be thy great long suffering and patience, towards me and all mankind. Thanks be to the name of the Lord, who after our abuse of so many blessings, hath added the gift
of his dear Son, and sent him to pay a ransome for us. O the unconceivable greatness of that love, which hath so much befriended the most ungrateful enemies. I humbly mention the blood of his Cross, as a sufficient sacrifice, oblation and satisfaction, not only for my sins, but the sins of the whole world. I lift up my hands unto thee in his name, to receive that gracious pardon, which he hath purchased for me: hope∣ing thorough him, that thou wilt still continue thy love unto me, who am stedfastly resolved to love thee above all things. Far be it from me to think that the love of our Lord should main∣tain me in any rebellion against thee, or countenance my contempt of thy holy Laws. No, love me so much, good Lord, as to change my will, and renew my nature into thy own likeness; that I may be truly a friend of God. I wish for no greater happiness, than to feel my soul at peace and friendship
with thee, by an intire and unchange∣able love to all righteousness, goodness and truth. And I am going to re∣member his dying love; that with the heartiest affection I may devote my self wholly to thy love and service. I do as unfeignedly desire that all my sins may die; as I am glad that Christ died to be a propitiation for them. And I as sincerely offer up my self, my understanding, my will, my de∣sires and passions, and all that I have, unto thee; as I really believe that he offered up himself for me. O that the power of the holy Ghost may ac∣company me: and unite my thoughts and affections to make a most thank∣ful commemoration of his loving kind∣ness. Represent unto my mind most feelingly all that Jesus hath done and endured for our sake. Fix my mind and heart upon the inestimable bene∣fits, he hath obtained to me. That I may not only behold the outward fi∣gures
of him: but receive those pledges of his love, with the humblest reve∣rence, with such a lively faith, and ve∣hement love, and ready submission of my will to him; that Christ Jesus may be inwardly formed in me. I long for the happiness of knowing assured∣ly that I am a friend of his, by my de∣lighting greatly in his Commandments, and trusting my self and all my con∣cerns intirely in his hands, and con∣tenting my self in his love and good will toward me, and rejoycing in the Soveraign Dominion, power and glory which thou hast given him; with most earnest desires that all the world may love and obey him. Amen. Our Father which art, &c.
The Meditation afterward. WIth what unwillingness, are we wont to leave the company of a Friend in whom we delight? How doth the remembrance of him stick unto our mind? How often do we think of the kind words we heard from his mouth, and view the tokens he hath left with us of his love? Do we not use to cast our eyes behind us when we go from him, and look after him as long as he is in sight? Are we not glad to see but his back, when we cannot behold his face? O sweet Jesus (then shouldst thou say to thy self) who can be content to part with the thoughts of thee, when he sees the love thou bearest to us; and all the blessings thou impartest to thy friends and follow∣ers? What heart can endure to lose the sight of such happiness; or suffer thy re∣membrance to die out of its mind? I should look as far as heaven, rather than suffer thee to go out of my thoughts: and always be casting mine eyes to thy dwelling place; that I may behold, at this distance, though never so little of thy most excellent glory.
So one would think in reason: But this dull flesh begins to complain, that it is tired and cannot thus follow thee any fur∣ther. It makes me sigh to think, that I must lose this clear and lively sight which I have of thee. And yet, as heavy as it is, I will not cease to be often looking after my Saviour. What though I cannot always see him, so as I have now seen him in the sanctuary; yet I will never for∣get him. And the darkest apprehensions of his love and favour, shall ever be dear∣er to me, than any object in this world. Blessed be his goodness, which hath given me such pledges of it, as engage me to re∣member him. I will he ever mindful to keep the Covenant, I have made with him, and remember his Commandments to do them.Psal. 103.18. And as long as I do his will (though I cannot always lift up my thoughts and affections as I would unto him) I hope I am his friend. O sweet words which I have heard from the mouth of my Saviour; whosoever shall do the will of God,Mark .35. the same is my Brother, and my Sister, and my Mo∣ther. I have no other will, O Lord, but thine. And I will prove continually, what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of thine; that we may be eternal friends, by the constant union of our wills
in one. Let my Lord command what he pleases, it shall be obeyed. Let him do what he thinks good; my will shall be done, as well as his. Psal. 16.2, 3.O my soul, thou hast said unto the Lord, thou art my Lord: but my goodness extend∣eth not unto him; but to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent in whom is all my delight. They are his friends, and what thou dost to them, he accounts it as done unto himself. Think thy self happy, that thou wilt never want him, whilst thou enjoyest them. Thou feedest him, when thou feedest them. Thou goest to see him, when thou vi∣sitest them in their need and misery. Ve∣rily I say unto you (they are the words of thy Lord) in as much as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my Brethren,Matth. 25.40. ye have done it unto me. Resolve therefore all this Month to en∣deavour to excite BROTHERLY KINDNESS, which is the fountain of Charity. And look on it as a great part of the riches of the divine grace, that he is not only content to love us himself; but hath contrived wayes and means that all men else may love us, and commands them so to do, as they hope to be saved. Begin this Brotherly kindness then thy self, that
so thou mayst be able to say every day. O how great is thy mercy O Lord! that thou lovest me thy self, and wouldst have all the world to love me. O how great is thy goodness, that thou not only chargest them so to do; but ingagest them to love me, by thy love. Yea, to love me so, as thou hast loved me and them; and so, as they love themselves. How full, how in∣comprehensible is the love of my God, who would have me hated by none: but every man to be my friend, if I am in need, every man to do me good? How can I want who have such a Father, who hath made all men to be my Brethren? How happy would he make me, who labours to set all hearts open to me; that as many men as I see, so many lovers I may behold? Thou dwellest, O God, in love: and wouldst have me to do so too, by loving and being beloved of all. What returns shall I make to the Lord for his love? He tells me, that it is love. Love thy Brethren, love them with a pure heart fervently. This is the thing, which I would have thee do. And this will make thee blessed for ever: by loving me and all others, and by being beloved of me, and of all men else that love me.
The Thanksgiving and Prayer afterward. O Lord God Almighty, which is, which was, and is to come. Who art the happiness of men and Angels: and hast an innumerable company of beautiful Creatures always beholding thy glories, satisfied with thy love, delighting themselves in thy praises; and to eternity can desire no higher pleasure, than to be thy Friends and Servants. I cast down my self be∣fore thee, to joyn, as well as I am able, together with all that Heavenly Host, in lauding and magnifying thy great and holy Name; and rejoycing in thee with thanksgiving. Thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are, and were crea∣ted. Thou hast redeemed mankind by the Bloud of thy Son; and raised us out of the dust, that we might sit
with him in Heavenly places. Thou hast sent the Holy Ghost the Comfor∣ter, in signs and wonders, and divers Miracles; in gifts of knowledge, wis∣dom and prophecie; and in abundance of thy grace, to renew and sanctifie the hearts of thy faithful people. The Apostles and Ministers of reconciliati∣on were thy gift; by whom thou hast brought the glad tidings of Salvation into these parts of the world. The Sun of righteousness, praised be thy goodness, hath inlightened our eyes, who sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death. I have been thy constant care from my first conception and en∣trance into the world, until this mo∣ment. Innumerable blessings thou hast bestowed on me; and still I hear the voice of joy and gladness. I be∣hold my guides and instructors: and have the liberty to go into thy house: and I see my Saviour himself in the re∣membrances and pledges he hath left
me of his dying love. I will never cease to adore and extol thy mercy: who hast kept me from going down into the pit, and saved my Soul from the nethermost Hell. Blessed be thy goodness for the constant provision of thy House; the comforts of thy Holy Spirit; the society of thy children; the hopes of Heaven; and the tastes thou hast given me of immortal joys, in this holy Feast with my Saviour. As thou hast begun, good Lord, out of thine own undeserved love to make me hap∣py, so continue thy loving kindness to me, till it be finished in perfect friend∣ship with thee. Preserve in me, though never so weak, yet, a constant and prevailing sense of thy goodness; that I may most willingly obey thee, and chearfully do thy will in all things. That the very same mind may be in me, which was also in Christ Jesus: Whose meat it was to do thy will,Joh. 4.34. and finish the work of thee that sent him. O that God
would count me worthy of this calling,2 Thess. 3.11, 12. and fulfil in me all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of Faith with power.Coloss 4.12 That I may stand perfect and compleat in all the will of God: and the name of the Lord Jesus may be glorified in me, and I in him; according to the grace of our God, and the Lord Jesus Christ. I have given my self now again unto thee, and professed the strictest friendship with thee: Lord, help me to keep it without spot, and unrebukeable until the appearing of the Jesus. That both bo∣dy and Soul being preserved pure and undefiled, as the Temples of the Holy Ghost; it may be my constant guide, strength and comfort: and lead me safely through all the difficulties and dangers of this world, the enticements of the flesh, and the crafts and subtil∣ties of the Devil; to a place of peace and safety in the regions above, where I may for ever dwell in thy love, and sing thy praise. O that all the people did praise thee, O God; that all the
people did praise thee. That the whole Earth were filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea: and all those that know thee, did walk worthy of thee; as children of the light and of the day, ha∣ving no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness. Bless thy Church planted in these Islands; that we may not receive in vain that grace bringing Salva∣tion,2 Cor. 6.1. Tit. 2.11, 12. which hath appeared to us, teaching us, that denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world: But from the high∣est to the lowest have grace,Heb. 12.28 whereby we may serve thee acceptably, with reve∣rence and godly fear. Comfort all my Friends; forgive all my Enemies; relieve those that are in any misery; draw all sinners to repentance; and help all good men to perfect holiness in thy fear: that at last with one con∣sent, we may all unite our hearts and tongues in thy everlasting praises.
Now the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God,2 Cor. 13. ult. and the Com∣munion of the Holy Ghost, be with us all. Amen.
November. The Meditation before. WIth what wonder and admiration do we entertain those things which are strange and unusual? The very news of them carries great numbers to see them; and the sight of them fixes their eyes on them, as if they could never have enough of them. Behold here the wonder of wonders, which thou art called to see, and seed thine eyes and heart withal. God is come to dwell in Flesh. This flesh is made a sacrifice for the sins of the world. And he invites thee now to a Feast upon that Sacrifice; that thou mayest dwell in him and he in thee. O marvellous love! what eyes ever saw such a sight as the Son of God dying on a Cross? The only begot∣ten of the Father bleeding as a malefactor? The glorious King of Heaven laying down his life freely for his own subjects: Rebels I should have called them, and enemies to him? Where are all my thoughts? Where is my admiration? What is become of my love? Whither are all my desires gone? It will be a new wonder if they do not all
assemble themselves together, at the com∣memoration of such love: which doth me the grace to make me partaker of that Bo∣dy and Bloud, which was so offered up to God. Strange! that my thoughts should be so heavy, and my affections so cold! that my hunger and thirst should be no more excited, at the very motion to go to the house of God, to make a thankful re∣membrance of his death! We think the Angels lead an happy life, in their blessed employment of giving continual Praises to God: why do I not go then with a more forward joy into the Courts of the Lord to do this in remembrance of Christ, which those Heavenly creatures do not do? For he hath not taken hold of the nature of An∣gels,Heb. 2.16. but of the seed of Abraham; for whom he hath prepared also this Sacred food, of which they never tasted. Ʋnto which of the Angels said he at any time, thou art my Son,Heb. 1.5, 13 this day have I begotten thee? or sit thou at my right hand, till I make thine ene∣mies thy foot-stool? Art thou not desirous of honour and greedy of gainful prefer∣ment? Art thou not prone to seek great things for thy self? What greater honour or dignity can there be, than to be so near∣ly related to the Lord of all; to be mem∣bers of him that is Head of all Principali∣ties
and Powers? Behold the treasures of grace and glory which he offers thee: and by these signs of his Body and Bloud would make over to thee. Is not Love the very life and Soul of the World? Is it not the oy and satisfaction of hearts? Behold here the worthiest object of it that ever was. See how he would fill and possess thy whole Soul with perfect contentment. And lest thou shouldest be so unhappy, as not to dwell in love: see how he would engage thee by these bonds in which thou rt going to tye thy self, to love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, soul and strength; and thy neighbour as thy self. How doth he comply with thy most natu∣ral inclinations? How doth he study to gratifie thee in thy most noble desires? Call up thy best and purest thoughts. Strain thy self to the heighth of admiration. Endeavour to forget all other things, and only to look at present upon Jesus. If any thing can make thee love God, it must be his love. If any thing can make thee hate sin, it must be this Sacrifice for it. If any thing can make thee willing and obedient, it must be his obedience to the death. Think then when thou comest into his presence, that thou seest him hanging on his Cross. Think thou seest him spread∣ing
out his arms, and resigning himself to the will of God. That thou beholdest hi gaping wounds, and the Bloud trick¦ling down his Sacred body. That thou hearest him cry unto thee; Did I not love thee, when I bled to death for thee? Did I not love thee, when I endured this pain and sorrow to redeem thee? Could I do more than give my self, to deliver thee from death, and open the Kingdom of Heaven and Eternal life? And then what heart i there, that need be taught what it should say, and what it should do on this occasi¦on? Who can refrain himself from giving blessing, and praise, and glory in the high¦est to him? Who can want thanks to ren¦der him, for such invaluable benefits? O find in his heart to deny him his service Nay, who would not rejoyce to think o serving one that hath merited thus of him▪ and intends to reward his duty with that ve¦ry glory which the Father hath given him Our Lord cannot but expect to see thy mind fraught with Heavenly thoughts, and a most high esteem of him: thy hear mighty full of love, and vows, and reso¦lutions, ready to be presented to him: thy will bowing and submitting it self wholly to his disposal. And to all such he saith by his Ministers, Come to my Supper, for
all things are ready. Come, and take this holy Sacrament to your comfort. Re∣joyce with me and be exceeding glad; for I love you, and will love you to the end. The Prayer before. O Most holy Lord of Heaven and earth; the greatest and most desirable good; the only rest and sa∣tisfaction of our souls. Whom to know is the beginning of life: whom to love purely is our perfection upon earth: whom to possess in an un∣changeable wisdom, charity and puri∣ty is heaven it self. It was thy great goodness, to make us to know thee and ove thee and be like unto thee. And a greater, to sue unto us and intreat for our affections. But it is the great∣est of all, a miracle of thy love, that thou hast sent such a person as thy Son Jesus to beseech us, and to add mighty importunities to his intreaties;
that we would do that, which we ought to be desirous to be admitted to do, as the greatest happiness we are capable of. Lord, what is man that thou art thus kind unto him? we are very little things; hugely below so much of thy notice. We are natu∣rally infirm and crazed in our bodies. And our understandings are short sighted, our reasonings weak and childish, our passions easily disordered, our resolutions inconstant; and by sin we have made our selves worse, and turned these into greater mischiefs. So that if thou hadst been pleased, to shew but a little pitty and compassion to us, and not suffered us to become extream∣ly miserable, what could we have ex∣pected more from thy goodness? But that thou shouldest design to advanc such piteous and wretched things a we are, who know not how to valu and esteem thy benefits, to the stat and dignity of thy children; to mak
us like thy self in righteousness, good∣ness, and truth; and at last to give us a blessed immortality in soul and body; O how astonishing is this love! which thou hast shewn to us in the Son of thy love the Lord Jesus. I am ashamed to think that this grace hath waited so long upon me, and been no better en∣tertained and improved. That my apprehensions of it are still so dull; my reasonings of so little force, to con∣strain my whole soul unmoveably to love thee, and delight in thee, and to live to thee for ever. I most humbly flee to that grace which hath abounded thus towards me, for the pardon which it hath promised to those, who yield themselves to be governed by it. O let not thy unwearied goodness be pro∣voked yet to cast off the care of me: But continue to hold before mine eyes thy love in Christ Jesus, and the great glory which he hath purchased for us; till my heart be overcome and subdued
perfectly to his obedience. That I may abandon every evil way, which is inconsistent with the enjoyment of his favour and happiness; and it may be the very business of my life to puri∣fie my self as thou art pure: from all inordinate cares and fears; from sen∣sual lusts and bruitish passions; from anger and hatred; envy and malice; pride and vanity; falseness and dissi∣mulation; murmuring and discontent; and whatsoever is opposite to thy bles∣sed Nature and Will declared by Christ Jesus. O that the Faith of Christ, which thou hast already planted in my heart, may take a deeper root; that as I believe him to be the Lord of all, who died for me and bought me with a price, and is risen again to be the author of eternal Salvation to those that obey him, and will come to judg the quick and the dead: so I may constantly re∣verence him, and religiously keep his holy Commands, and stedfastly trust
him, and make him my hope, and love his appearing; that I may be found of him then in peace. And now that I am going to make him my renewed acknowledgments, and devote my self to his holy obedience; Lord, fill me with such worthy thoughts, affections and resolutions, that I may know that I love him, and may rejoyce in hope of his eternal love unto me. O that nothing may interpose when I am at thy Table, to hinder the effect of these holy desires; that no cloud may arise in my mind to obscure my sight of his love; no vain thought to draw me aside from meditating on his death and passi∣on for my sake: but I may be carried then and alwayes with a strong and ir∣resistable inclination to do his will. Let my prayer come before thee,Ps. 141.2. as the in∣cense; and the lifting up of my hands, as the evening Sacrifice. Hear me, O Lord,Psal. 143.1, . and give ear to the voice of my supplications: in
thy faithfulness answer me, and in thy righte∣ousness. And enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. Our Father, &c. The Meditation afterward. WHAT our Saviour said to the people concerning John the Bap∣tist, may be imitated by thee with a small alteration.Luke 7.24. &c. What went you out for to see? a reed shaken with the wind? (a thing of no moment?) But what went you out for to see? a man clothed in soft raiment? [Some worldly pomp and bravery] be∣hold, these are in kings Courts. But what went you out for to see? a Prophet? Yea, I say unto you, and much more than a Prophet? For among those that are born of women, there is not a greater Prophet than John the Baptist. Where hast thou been? mayest thou say to thy self. At an ordinary meal, or a common entertainment? What wentest
out to receive? a piece of bread and  cup of wine? that we have in our  houses. Or what wentest thou from  to see? a dumb shew, a silent gray  company of serious faces? Those w  see in them that mourn for any dead friend. Or what wentest thou out for to see? Bread broken and wine poured out, in a solemn and holy manner by the appoint∣ment of Christ Jesus? Yea, and much more than so. Christ himself, the Son of the blessed, under those signs and figures of his death. This is he of whom it is writ∣ten, behold, the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. Verily, there is none born of women like unto him, the only begotten Son of God, the heir of all things. And thou hast been at his Table; thou hast beheld the astonishing love of God in delivering him up to suffer for thee; thou hast received the pledges of his dearest love: and the earnests of all those goods that he possesses. Couldst thou see no beauty in him, that thou shouldst desire him? Nor taste no pleasure in hav∣ing friendship with him? Is it nothing to partake of the merits of his sufferings? To be made the Son of the King of Hea∣ven and the heir of his love, by being made partaker of his divine nature and
disposition? Where were thine eyes then? What were thy thoughts doing? None ever believed and considered this love that God bears to us; who was not moved and inflamed by it to love him above all things. For the Creator and Possessor of Heaven and earth to love thee: what a word is that? Who can hear it, and not be at once both amazed and transported? Especially when he loves thee so much as to send his own Son unto thee, yea his only Son, the Son of his love: who hath so loved thee, as to spend his dearest blood in thy service; and all this freely, without any motive but his own love; and to procure us the great∣est blessings, no less in conclusion than im∣mortal life. What heart can think of this and not be over-powered by it? And need he entreat thee, not to forget the love he hath shewn unto thee? to spend a few thoughts every day on such a Friend, that hath deserved so much of thee? A mean request; which should be granted, one would think, without the asking. And wilt thou be at no pains to preserve his me∣mory? Shall he slip out of thy mind, un∣less he force himself into thy company? It is easie to be warm by a fire side. It is almost impossible not to be moved, when the person we love is before our eyes. But
when we are gone from the fire, we must exercise our selves, not to grow cold again. And when a friend is at a distance from us, we must look upon the tokens we have re∣ceived of his kindness, or some other way bring him to our remembrance. Or rather our great love to him, will often present him before our imagination. Do but love  Saviour then in an hearty manner, and  canst thou fail to love him more?  little thing is all that he desires of  thou wouldst love him best; and  do even what thou wilt. For you may consider, that it is the na∣ture of all love, not to let our heart be joyned to any other object, which shall in any degree prejudice that which is princi∣pally loved. What never is esteemed ho∣noured and admied by us above all others; will not permit any thing to be entertained, that shall any wayes njure it in our thoughts and affections. We are naturally averse to any such objects, and reject them with disdain; as those which are inconsistent with our better desires. If thy Redeemer therefore be advanced and seated in thy heart, by an unfeigned love to him above all things on earth: it will ren∣der every thing despicable, which wo ld
draw thy heart from him, or in the least abate thy devotion to him. Thou wilt look upon it as a base temptation and an unworthy offer; which is not only to be slighted and rejected, but hated and loath∣ed. Thou wilt say, I am dead to sin, I cannot live any longer therein. I have done with all your adulterate pleasures. Je∣sus is my joy, my life and my crown: what pleases him; pleases me. His love is a Law within my heart: and therefore I delight to do thy will, O God. And the more to fortifie thy self, thou mayest often meditate all this month, upon the COURAGE and CONSTAN∣CY, the Fortitude and Magnanimity of Je∣sus in asserting the truth of God. For this is particularly remembered by S. Paul as a part of his character, that he witnessed before Pontius Pilate a good confession.1 Tim. 6.13. By which we should excite our selves out of love to him,Ib. v. 11.12 to follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, charity, patience and meekness, whatso∣ever it cost us. Let the dangers be what they will, we should still fight the good fight of Faith, to lay hold on eternal life. For, here∣in is our love made perfect, that we have bold∣ness in the day of judgment:1 Joh. 4.17, 18. because as he is, so are we in this world. There is no fear in
love; but perfect love casteth out fear: be∣cause fear hath torment: he that feareth, is not made perfect in love. The Thanksgiving and Prayer afterward. I Humbly offer unto thee, O Lord, together with the whole company of Heaven, the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving; which is eternally due to thy most bounteous goodness. The whole world was made by thee out of nothing. The Heavens, the Earth, the Seas, and all that are therein, con∣fess themselves the work of thy infinite wisdom and power. Out of the dust thou hast framed our comely Bodies: and inspired into them immortal Spi∣rits; on which thou hast ingraven thy own image. Thou didst put thine own Majesty upon us, that all thy crea∣tures here should be obedient to us, and we be obedient only to thee, the great Lord and Governour of all. O how
great was the honour which thou con∣ferredst upon us! And how much more wonderful the grace thou hast given us in Christ Jesus, after our di∣sloyalty and shameful disobedience to thee? Thou hast sent him to redeem us from Hell and Death by his precious Bloud. And given thy Holy Spirit to sanctifie our hearts, and a  our duty: thy Gospel to be ou  thy self to be our Example: thy ¦sters to be our remembrancers: y Sacraments to be the Signs and Seal of thy blessing. I have now tasted o thy great and abundant love. Thou hast feasted me at thy Table: and sa¦tisfied me with thy good will toward me: and filled me with joy and glad¦ness in thy favour, more than if all th riches on Earth had been encreased What shall I render unto thee, and d for thee; who hast done all this for me who am less than the least of all th mercies? My heart burns within m
ll I have offered up my self again un∣to thee: and resolved to spend my ays in praising, loving and serving hee, to the best of my power. O that this holy sense of thee, may never quite anish out of my mind: But I may be lways inclined to think of thee, to de∣clare thy loving kindness, to approve my self to thee, by studying and doing thy will with chearfulness of heart. I have now knit my self to thee, by new onds and engagements, which I de∣sire may be never loosed. O that my ows and promises may stand as fast as hine everlasting Covenant. That no∣thing may make me break my Faith, which I have now and in my Baptism given to thee: but I may always, as I stand bound, most heartily continue to believe in thee, to fear thee,The words of the Church Catechism, which ex∣cellently expresses the duty we owe to God and our Neigh∣bour. to love thee with all my heart, with all my Soul, and with all my strength; to worship thee, and give thee thanks; to put my whole trust in thee, to call upon thee, and to honour thy holy Name and
Word, and to serve thee truly all the days  my life. And assist me by thy Heaven¦ly grace to do my duty also faithfullg towards my Neighbour: to love him  my self, and to do to all men as I would the should do unto me: To love, honour, and suc¦cour my Father and Mother: to honour an obey the King and all that are put in Authori under him. To submit my self to all my G¦vernours, Teachers, Spiritual Pastors an Masters. To order my self lowly and rev¦rently to all my betters. To hurt no body  word or deed. To be true and just in all  dealing. To bear no malice nor hatred in  heart. To keep my hands from picking an stealing, and my tongue from evil speaking, ly¦ing and slandering. To keep my body ine¦perance, soberness and chastity. Not to co nor desire other mens goods; but to learn a labour truly to get mine own living, and to  my duty in that state of life, unto which it sh please God to call me. I desire also the good of all mankind
that they may partake of the know∣ledge of the Lord, and enjoy the fruits of his Death and Resurrection: espe∣cially that all Christian people may walk worthy of the Lord, who hath called them to his Heavenly Kingdom. And particularly all Kings, Princes and Governours may be as careful to observe his Laws, as they are desirous others should observe theirs. That they may remember the honour thou cast done them in exalting them so igh; to the end they may imitate thee,  doing good to all below them. Purge out of thy Church every thing hat dishonours the Religion of our Lord, and endangers Souls. Unite ll the members of it in the profession of the true Faith, and in sincere Chari∣ty: that the poor may be relieved, the sick comforted, the fatherless and wi∣dows visited in their affliction, sinners eclaimed, the obstinate softned, and all that are in unbelief brought into the ock of Jesus Christ.
And grant unto us all that hav Communicated together this day, tha peace which passeth all understanding humility, meekness, obedience, fort¦tude, contentedness, patience, longin desires after Heaven, and willingne to die; that we may rest in an ho Hope, and have a blessed Resurrectio with the just. Amen.
December. The Meditation before the Sacrament. NEed I be told after a whole years ser∣vice, at least, of my blessed Master Jesus, what that duty is I am now going to perform unto him? Am I not preparing my self, according to his command, to make a solemn commemoration before God, Angels and Men, of his unheard of love in dying for us? To make a profession of my sincere love and affection to him? To engage to him my fidelity? To renew the Covenant that is between us? To open my heart to him, and to confirm to him the most absolute possession of my Soul and Body? To wait on him for his continued grace; and that I may feel the ower of his Death and Resurrection? To ow him my willingness even to take up is Cross; and to be his Disciple and fol∣lower to the very death? To testifie the ove I bear unto, and the Communion I desire to hold with all the Christians that re throughout the world? To exalt the ame of the Lord, and to speak his prai∣ses: who would give his Son for us, and
who hath condescended to a treaty of peace with us, and upon such easie terms to become friends with us, yea, reward us, and do great things for us? O how sweet is the remembrance of these blessings! How happy am I that he will not let me forget them! But with a continued kind∣ness invites me again to this delightful em∣ployment. I will go and give him thanks for all his benefits, and for this among the rest; that he hath made me so often parta∣ker of his blessed Body and Bloud, and now gives me a new opportunity to cele∣brate in this manner the memory of his love. And O that my heart were lifted higher than ever, after so long acquain∣tance with him, in admiration of his grace, in faith, in love, in joy, in praise and thanksgiving, in strong and vehement de∣sires, and in cordial resolutions to be his devout and faithful Disciple. O that the hearts of all men else, who shall approach his Table, may be disposed to the like zeal and fervent affection to his service: and so many Souls as there are then present, so many living Sacrifices there may be to God; so many wills resigned into his hands with ardent love. That so those holy Spirits, which the Apostle tells us, were present in their Christian assemblies,
may be invited to come into ours. And beholding nothing but what is reverend, serious, pure, and full of true devotion, they may be excited to rejoyce and praise God together with us, for our sincere af∣fection to his Religion. And they may make report among their Heavenly com∣pany above, that Christian piety is still re∣maining in the world; and that we have made a great increase in growth in it this year, by our frequent remembrance of the Lord Jesus: which may stir them up all to bless the great and glorious name of our God, which is exalted above all bles∣sing and praise. The Lord hath prepared his Throne in the Heavens, and his Kingdom ruleth over all.Psal. 103. Bless the Lord ye Angels of his: Bless him all his hosts. Bless him all ye works of his in all places of his dominion: Bless the Lord, O my Soul. Stir up thy self to bless the name of God our Saviour; who hath not cast us out of his sight, when we threw off our obedience to him: but sent his Son to ga∣ther us again to him, to invite us by pre∣cious promises, to endear himself to us by shedding his heart bloud for us, to open the gate of Paradise again, and restore us to immortality; to make us equal with the
Angels, and rank us among the eldest sons of glory. Let us go, and, if it be possible, excite a greater love in our heart toward him, than ever we felt before. Let us offer up our selves to him with a stronger flame of devotion: which may always burn and rise up higher and higher, till it touch heaven; and lift us up thither where our Saviour is in the high and holy place, God blessed for ever, Amen. The Prayer before. ETernal God: whose omnipotent word brought me and this whole world of creatures into being. Out of the fulness of whose goodness, we are all fed and maintained; and by whose rich and abundant grace it is, that our souls are not in a desperate and forsaken condition: but may approach
with some confidence to thee our Ma∣ker, who in thy Son hast revealed thy self unto us, a most merciful Father. I fall down before thee in an humble re∣verence, to perform that Religious du∣ty which I owe thee as thy creature, and much more as thy redeemed one, through the purchase thou hast made of us by the blood of Jesus. I admire, adore and love all that I know of thee. I extol and praise thy wisdom, thy bounty, thy holiness and truth, which endureth for ever. I acknowledg my self beholden to thee beyond all my words, or conceptions either. I re∣proach my self for my base ingratitude, and all the wrongs I have done thee. I confess the justice of thy proceedings, shouldst thou strip me of all those good things, thou hast bestowed on me. I give thee the glory of thy ineffable and never enough to be valued love in thy Son Christ. I disclaim all opposition to thy will, as base, unjust and unac∣countable.
I vow to thee my intire service and obedience: and approve all thy Commandments as righteous, wise and good. I lay new bonds up∣on my self, to keep and observe them with my whole heart; and rejoyce in thy pretious promises accounting them better than thousands of gold and sil∣ver. My hope, my satisfaction, my comfort is in thy word: which incou∣rages me to wait on thee for the grace of thy holy Spirit; blessing thee for that portion of it, which I have already received. I thank thee for all thy other goodness to me, and trust thee for the continuance of it, as far as thou seest pro∣fitable in thy wise providence; to which I heartily refer my self. I hope thou wilt accept of these poor but sincere ac∣knowledgments, and not condemn me out of my own confessions: but par∣don my errors and miscarriages, con∣firm my holy purposes, pitty my in∣firmities, and strengthen my pious
endeavours. That I may perfectly mortifie all sinful lusts and desires, faithfully discharge my dutie in my several relations, thankfully and sober∣ly use all thy mercies, patiently bear the heaviest afflictions, and improve my soul in wisdom and goodness, by all the helps thou affordest me: by thy holy Gospel, by the good counsels of others, the inspirations of the holy Ghost, thy many remarkable provi∣dences about me, and whatsoever courses thou takest with me, to bring me safe through this world, into an happy eternity. And now that I am about to address my self to the Table of the Lord, O that I might have such a sweet remembrance of his love, as may revive my spirit, encourage my hope, excite me to all my duty, and put an humble confidence in me, to look up unto thee again for thy par∣don; and for the grace of thy holy Spi∣rit, to enable me to please thee better
ever hereafter. Thou who knowest all things, seest that my soul waits for thee, O God, and longs to be more like thee; and is ready to offer up its understanding, will, and all its affecti∣ons unto thee: That I may remain sted∣fast and unmoveable in justice and cha∣rity; meekness and humility; tempe∣rance and purity; contentedness and patience, devotion and piety; with all other fruits of thy good Spirit. Suffer nothing to appear in my soul before thee, but reverend thoughts of thee, most zealous love to thee, passionate desires that Christ Jesus may live in me, and appear in all the actions of an innocent, harmless and useful life. That so the day when I approach unto thee, may be a day of good tidings of great joy; a day of peace and recon∣ciliation, of feasting and refreshment, of comfort and incouragement, to walk before thee with a perfect heart as long as I live. Whatsoever things are
true, whatsoever things are honest,Phil. 4.8, 9, 19. whatsoe∣ver things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoe∣ver things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, help me alwayes to think on these things. And the God of peace be with me; and supply all my need according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus. In whose name and words, I still recommend my self to thy grace, saying, Our Father which art, &c. The Meditation afterward. THou art my portion, O Lord;Psal. 119.57. I have said that I would keep thy word. Why should I repent me of my choice; or start from my resolution? Thy Counsels and commands are the surest guide: thy power the strongest defence: thy good provi∣dence the fullest store-house: thy eternal justice and holiness the best security: thy promises the richest treasure: and good
hopes in thee our highest happiness. It is enough, enough, O Lord, to be beloved of thee, the all-sufficient good; who com∣prehendest all things in thy mind, and canst do all things by thy power, and delightest in raising such monuments of thy wisdom and greatness, as thy almighty love may dispense endless blessings unto. I am well satisfied now that I can say,Psa. 142.5. thou art my refuge, and my portion in the land of the liv∣ing. The Lord is my portion; whom shall I envy? The Lord is my portion; for what shall I be discontented? The Lord is my portion; of whom shall I be afraid? Why art thou cast down,Ps. 42.11. O my soul, why art thou disquieted within me? How can his friends fail to partake of his bounty, who treats even his enemies with so much kind∣ness?62.5. My soul, wait thou only upon God; for my expectation is from him. Trust in the Lord and do good;37.3, 4, 34. and verily thou shalt be fed. Delight thy self also in the Lord; and  he shall give thee the desires of thy heart. Cast thy burden on the Lord, and he shall sustain thee:55.22. he shall never suffer the righte∣ous to be moved. Wait on the Lord and keep his way. For the eyes of the Lord are upon them that love him:Eccl. 34.16, 17. He is their mighty pro∣tection and strong stay, A defence from the heat, and a cover from the Sun at noon; a
preservation from stumbling and a help from falling. He raiseth up the soul, and lightneth the eyes: He giveth life, and health and blessing.Judeth ult. 16. All sacrifice is too little for a sweet savour to him; and all the fat is not suffici∣ent for his burnt-offering: but he that feareth the Lord is great at all times.Ecclus. 34.13. The spirit of those that fear the Lord shall live; for their hope is in him that saveth them. My heart shall rejoyce in him; because I have trusted in his holy name. Let thy mercy, O Lord,Psal. 33.21, 22. be upon me; according as I hope in thee. And I hope that I shall never forget thy word, which I have said that I would keep: the revelation of thy wisdom, the decla∣ration of thy will, and the description of thy most holy and happy life. My God, I have taken thy precepts as my heritage for ever: for they are the rejoycing of my heart.Psal. 119.111, 112. I have inclined my heart to perform thy sta∣tutes alway, even unto the end. This day I have added one vow more of consecra∣tion to thee. I have made over my self intirely to thee, to be thy portion. Whom shall I love, whom shall I serve; to whom shall I resign my will and wayes? but only to thee, the Father of lights, and the Fa∣ther of mercies: who hast not thought thy Son too much to give to me. Never will I
forget this happy day, which hath brought me a taste of the joy and peace and sere∣nity, which spring from the very begin∣ning of a God-like nature. I will alway be devoted to him. Let his will be done on earth, as it is in heaven: for it is the will of my heavenly Father. Let these words remain upon record against me, if I endeavour not to make him my pattern: and not only in that place where I have now been, but in all my behaviour in this world (that great Temple of his) demean my self holily and purely; with that hu∣mility, reverence, meekness and submissi∣on, which becomes his presence. What have I here to do, but to shew forth the glorious perfections of righteousness, mer∣cy and truth, which I behold in him? and to declare the esteem I have of him, and my satisfaction in my portion; by modesty, contentedness, thankfulness, faith, pati∣ence, hope, joyful resignation of all my concernments, with an equal mind, to his wise disposal? This is my will: this is my resolution. And I will declare from year to year, that this I take to be my happiness. And here it may be very fit to resolve often all this Month, to reflect upon our Saviours CONTEMPT OF THE
WORLD, when he had chosen to come and do the will of God. Riches, honour, glory and pleasure, were nothing in his account; in compare with the satisfaction of doing the pleasure of God, though it were by sufferings. He did not regard the esteem of men, nor what they said of him. Though he dyed an ignominious and disgraceful death, as well as lived a poor and despicable life; he was not a∣shamed nor dejected: but rather gloried in both. Because his business was not to please himself: but as it is written,Rom. 15.3. the reproaches of them that reproached thee, fell on me. Let the same mind be in us, that was in him.Ib. v. 2. Let every one of us please his neighbour for his good, to his edification. But overlook the censures and vain opini∣on of this world, with all the honours and preferments of it: so we may but approve our selves to God, and his will be fulfilled by us. For it is a faithful saying;2 Tim. 2.11, 12. if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him: if we suffer, we shall also reign with him.
The Thanksgiving and Prayer afterward. O Most high and holy Lord of Heaven and Earth; the Author of every good and perfect gift. Who art for ever to be humbly acknowledg∣ed, worshipped, loved and obeyed, by me, and by all that know thee. I have often made thee my acknowledg∣ments, for my being, and all the com∣forts of it; for the hopes I have both in this life and hereafter: And now I come to renew them, that I may be more firmly united to thee in hearty love and entire affection. I cast down my self before thee, being even oppres∣sed with the great load of thy mercies and benefits; which will not suffer me to dispose of my heart other-ways, than to thy obedience. As I owe my very being to thee; so all those good things which have made it not to be a burden and uneasie to me. I have en∣joyed
a long measure of health, and cannot tell that ever I wanted my daily bread, [yea, plentiful provision both for my necessity and my pleasure.] The days of pain and sorrow, which I have endured, have been but few, in compare with the many years of ease and joy which thou hast vouchsafed me. I find now all my senses entire and per∣fect, and I have a great many Friends and kind Neighbours: and also a great deal of time to think of all this, and to prepare my self for thy eternal favour. How much am I indebted to thee, for the continued use of my un∣derstanding, reason and memory? that I can take notice of all thy good∣ness; whereby my heart may be exci∣ted to love thee; which is the greatest happiness and pleasure of allYou may ac∣knowledge what you may owe him also for good education, civil breeding, and that he hath perhaps enclined your heart ear∣ly to be Religious, whereby your Conscience hath been kept from many wounds, and both Soul and Body from much dishonour, &c.. This, this, O Lord, is the greatest of thy mercies, that thou hast given me the
knowledge of thy love in Jesus Christ; which cannot but constrain me to the greatest love of thee. And that thy holy Spirit hath shone so often into my mind, and breathed so often on my will and affections: that thou hast par∣doned so many faults; and waited so long for my amendment; and so ear∣nestly importuned my return; and af∣forded me so many helps, and such a long time to perfect my repentance. Thou hast added also now new pledges of thy love, and earnest of that immortal life; wherein I may compleat my prai∣ses and thanksgivings to thee, in the company of the blessed. O how precious are thy thoughts towards me, how great is the summe of them! If I would go about to num∣ber them, they are moe than the sand. I cannot count the least part of them; nor ever see any end of thy goodness: for even whilst I am thinking of it, I receive new favours from thee. Eve∣ry moment is big with abundance of
thy mercies, both to my Soul and my Body; for this life and that which is to come. But I know enough to make me admire and love thy goodness; and to make me ashamed of my forget∣fulness and ingratitude: enough to ob∣lige me eternally to thee: enough to make me fully contented, and to re∣joyce in thee, as my portion. Behold. O Lord, I here again sincerely devote my self to observe thy commands: and keep thy holy word. I have chosen it as the rule and the comfort of my life: and I will ever cleave unto thy testimo∣nies with my whole heart. I would not abuse thy mercies; nor grow care∣less, wanton and secure under the abundance of thy goodness: but look upon them as engagements, and migh∣ty arguments to love, acknowledge and obey thee for ever. Blessed be thy goodness, that I have such thoughts, and am so inclined. Ac∣cept of my good desires, purposes and
vows, which I have made: and ac∣company me alway by thy gracious assistance, that I may accomplish what I have begun, and perfect holiness in thy fear. To thee I recommend all mankind; especially thy Church and chosen People: all the Rulers and Go∣vernours of them; that they may re∣member thou art higher than the high∣est, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: who wilt judge all men with∣out respect of persons. Give pure zeal and knowledge to thy Ministers; the grace of contentedness to the poor of the flock; and of an open heart to the rich; wisdom and discretion to those that are in their younger years; and an holy hope to comfort the aged. And endue them all with an humble meekness, that laying aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, and all evil-speakings,1 Pet. 2.1, 2, 5. as new born Babes they may de∣sire the sincere milk of the Word, that they may grow thereby: and offer up continually spiritu∣al Sacrifices, acceptable to thee by Christ Je∣sus. Amen.
On the Feast of the Nativity, OR Christmas-Day. The Meditation before. WHat amazing News is this! What an astonishing piece of love! That the King of Kings who needed nothing, and is able by his Omnipotent word to com∣mand more Creatures into being (if he wanted any subjects) than we can think of while we live, should send a kind Embas∣sage of peace, to us vile worms, sinful dust and ashes. To us who were unwor∣thy of a gracious look from him, should we have besought his favour; to us that had highly affronted his Sovereign Authority and Sacred Laws, he hath dispatched a glorious Message, as if we were the great∣est persons, and so many little Gods. And had it not been too great an honour for us to think of, if he had sent one of his mean∣est servants in the Heavenly Court to visit
us? Or if he had bidden an illustrious Se∣raphim, to come and comfort, and chear us by his bright appearance, or one of the Cherubims to flye all over the Earth, and make proclamation in their ears, that the King of Heaven would be reconciled to his rebellious subjects; Would it not have fil∣led the whole world with wonder, and made all mankind stand at a gaze, to see themselves so highly favoured? O what a grace then was it, that God should send his Son, his only begotten Son, the Prince and Sovereign Lord of all that Heavenly host, upon this business of reconciliation? See, my Soul, that which astonishes not men on∣ly, but Angels themselves, who procla∣med the birth of this Prince of life, with the loudest shouts of joy, saying, Glory be to God on high,Luke 2.14 and on Earth peace, good will towards men. Towards men do they say? Lord, what are they, that thou shouldest put this honour on them? What are the greatest and noblest men on Earth? What is their excellency and worth, that such addresses should be made unto them? O joyn thy self, my Soul, as well as thou art able, with those bright morning-Stars that sang for joy, when the foundation of the new world was laid, and say; Glory be to the eternal majesty of Heaven and
Earth, who possesses all things, and can suffer nothing; that he would deign to send to us his poor subjects. Glory be to his Almighty love, who so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that who∣soever believeth in him, should not perish,Joh. 3.17. but have everlasting life. For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be sa∣ved. O blessed Jesus, how ardent, how powerful was that love, which brought thee down, from the Heavenly company above, to us here on Earth; yea,Ephes. 4.9; Psal. 139; 15. to the lower-most parts of the Earth? To be cloathed with our rags, to dwell in our mortal flesh, in the likeness of sinful flesh? Mightest thou not at least have been ap∣parelled like the best of men, and been found in the habit and fashion of the no∣blest of us: but thou wouldest also con∣descend to the form of a servant? that the most despicable of all mankind might never suspect they should be despised by the King of glory? O what an humble love was this, to us most wretched sinners? What heart can conceive the infinite force of it? How infinitely is it above all words? We do but declare, that we know little of it, if we are able to talk much about it. It is fit for our wonder and si∣lent
admiration: for adoring thoughts, and devout exstasies of love. Only I will go, and declare, in the assemblies of his people, these wonderful works of the Lord: and publish his goodness, with the voice of thanksgiving and praise. Lord, what new wonder is that, which there I behold! This glorious person, murdered by his subjects. The new born Prince of the world, the Heir of all things, caught,Matth. 21.39. and cast out, and slain by those to whom he was sent to demand their obedi∣ence. O the miraculous wisdom of this love! That he should be born and come among us to die for us! and take our flesh that he might offer it on the Cross, and make peace and reconciliation by being slain, and shedding his bloud! Go, my Soul, and shew forth his death to Angels and Men. For this is the up-shot of his love, that while we were yet sinners, Christ would die for us. By this he hath made an atonement for us; by this he hath obtained an Eternal Redemption; with this offering God is well satisfied; and by this he hath exalted our Nature to the right hand of God, that he may always appear in his presence for us. With what love, and joy, and zeal should we commemorate
this never to be forgotten love! With what hearty affection should we offer our selves to him! How glad should we be of this new opportunity to vow to him our obedience! With what tender love should we embrace all our Brethren, who are flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone, as he is! And how comfortably may we hope that God will be gracious to us, who hath not only sent his Son to make his abode among us, but also to lay down his life for us! Let us go and bless his name, that to us a Son is born, to us a Child is given, even Christ the Lord: that he hath aised up a mighty Salvation for us; and hath redeemed us out of the hands of all our enemies, that we might serve him without fear all the days of our life. And let us re∣ceive these earnests and pledges of his good will, as hopeful assurances; that he will never end his love till he hath con∣veyed us thither, where Jesus is. But how shall we come there, unless it be in those steps whereby he ascended from Earth to Heaven? Go therefore and offer to him an heart of flesh, to be moulded and framed into what figure he pleases. Desire him to form his own image in thee; to subdue thee perfectly to his will, that it may be thy meat and drink to do it, and
to finish the work he hath for thee in the world. Think thou hearest him say, as Abimelech to the men of Schechem, to move them to elect him for their King; Remember that I am your bone and your flesh.Judg. 9.2. Behold, my body which I took for your sake. See here how dear you were to me: and how nearly related I stand, to every Soul of you. Will you not suffer me to rule over you? Such a Lord as is so much concerned for you? Will you not be governed by me, that am your Bro∣ther, as well as your Lord? And then, me-thinks, we should all answer with one accord; other Lords have reigned over us: but now, none but thou, O Christ; none but thou, O Christ. Rule and reign over us for ever; for we are thy Ser∣vants.
The Prayer before. O Eternal God; the Soveraign Lord of all creatures, both in hea∣ven and earth: who art before all things, and on whom they all depend. To whom we owe all honour and homage, all love and dutiful affection, all praise and thanks, service and obedience, throughout our whole life. I acknow∣ledg, O Lord, that I am never more unjust, than when I do not render all this most freely and chearfully unto thee. I cannot deny the debt wherein I stand engaged; though I have too often denyed to pay it. For thou hast raised me out of the dust; and preserved me from returning thither again. Thou hast richly loaden me with thy benefits; endued me with principles of wisdom, righteousness and goodness; made a world of good things to wait upon me and minister to
me; and expectest only reasonable ser∣vice, and an easy obedience from me: which thou hast sent thy Son to demand, and to entreat, and to give me an ex∣ample of. This is the surpassing heighth of thy love, that thou wast pleased not to despise and reject us, when we had despised all thy former favours: but even to assume our Na∣ture into an inconceivable nearness to thy own; and send thy Son Jesus to seek and save us, when we were lost. I adore thine infinite condiscention, O blessed Jesus,Heb. 2.11, 14. who art not ashamed to call us Brethren. And for as much as we are partakers of flesh and blood, hast also thy self likewise taken part of the same: that through death thou mightest destroy him that had the power of death; that is, the devil. Blessed be thy goodness, that in all things thou wast made like unto us; that thou might∣est be a merciful and faithful high-Priest,v. 17. to make reconciliation for our sins. Let all the Angels in heaven still praise him; for
as high as the heaven is above the earth, so great is his mercy above our thoughts. We were not worthy, that thou shouldst so much as look up∣on us, or speak unto us: and then in thine unbounded love, thou wast plea∣sed to dwell in our nature, and to send thy Son in the likeness of sinful flesh,Rom. 8.3. that by a Sacrifice for sin he might condemn sin in the flesh. I see, O Lord, in that Sa∣crifice, how hateful sin was to thee, when thou wast so full of love to us: and am going to thy Table, to renounce utterly every evil way, and devote my self to an holy and god-like life: to acknowledg thy wise good∣ness, who wouldst dwell in our flesh to sanctifie and cleanse it; and give thy Son Jesus to die for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purifie to himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. Accompany me, O God, by that mighty spirit, through which he was conceived, and offered
himself without spot unto thee: that I may have a lively conception of him and his holy Gospel in my mind, and be made conformable to him in every thing, and offered up intirely soul and body, to be ordered and disposed of as pleaseth him. It is but just and reasonable that his will, not mine, should be done. And it is no less my happiness than my duty, to be govern∣ed by him, who is the wisdom of thee our God. I deliver up therefore my understanding, my will, my affections and passions, to be guided, directed and ruled by his supream and immutable counsels. Work in me a stedfast ad∣miration and love of his purity, lowli∣ness, meekness, patience, contented∣ness and charity: that nothing may be so desirable to me, as to have Christ Jesus, in all his divine virtues, formed in me. Hold, O Lord, this image of him alway before mine eyes: that my life may be nothing else but a constant
imitation of him, and both body and soul become the Temple of the holy Ghost; wherein thou mayst be truly honoured, heartily loved, highly prai∣sed and exalted, and purely worship∣ped and served. O that my mind may be ever employed in pious or ho∣nest thoughts; that my will may chuse the better part, which can never be taken away from me; that I may set my affections on heavenly things, and not on things upon the earth; that I may use the world, as one that seeks a better countrey; being chearful and yet composed; diligent in my calling, and yet working out my salvation; doing good to my self with all the comforts of this life, and likewise unto others. Give me the grace, good Lord, never to be weary of well-doing; to be just in all my dealings; faithful in my promises; mindful of my vows; upright in the discharge of my trust; inoffensive in word and deed, and an useful and
peaceable Member of Church and state. Dispose me to be good in all my relati∣ons; obedient to those who are over me; kind to all my equals; compassio∣nate and pittiful to those that are in mi∣sery; meek and lowly towards all men. O that riches may never make me for∣get my self, nor poverty tempt me to forget thee; that health may not make me confident and secure, nor sickness make me dejected and discontented. But I may be patient and constant in all adversities; Religious and thankful in prosperity; and go through fulness and emptiness, honour and disgrace, good report and bad, with the same evenness of mind; till I come to receive praise and commendation as a good servant of Jesus Christ, at the great day of his appearing. In whose most powerful Name I continue to make my suits unto thee; saying as he hath taught me. Our Father, &c.
The Meditation afterward. IS not our heavenly Father very desi∣rous, that we should love him? Would he else have appeared among us? Would he have manifested himself to us? Yea, manifested himself in our flesh? And more than that, purchased us to himself by his own blood? O how dear hath he paid for our love? Love him, love him exceeding∣ly, that he may not lose the great price, wherewith we are bought. But what love do we bear him, if we be not like him? What are we the better that a Saviour is born to us, if he be not formed in us, and dwell not in our heart by faith? Was not this the end of his taking our Nature, that he might purifie it; and make us reverence our selves more, than to defile that which is so near of kin to the Son of God? O most wise goodness, which by becoming like to us, designed to make us like thy self. I see the humility of the blessed Je∣sus, who was born of a poor Virgin. I see his sweetness, in accommodating himself to the vilest of us, and taking on him the form of a servant. I see how little he va∣lued the riches and the dignities and the
pleasures of this world. How contented he was in a mean condition; how obedi∣ent to his parents; how courteous to the meanest clients, who came to receive, not to give. I see how liberal he was of his favours, how unwearied in doing good, how patient in suffering any evil; how he loved righteousness and hated iniquity; how dear the honest heart was to him, and how odious hypocrisie. I see how meek he was when he was affronted; how loth his enemies should perish; how little con∣cern'd either in the calumnies, or applau∣ses of the world; How absolutely resigned to the will of God; and how desirous to do him honour. O how often did he thank his heavenly Father? How many hours did he spend in prayer and private con∣verse with him? How joyfully did he suffer great pains to do great good? And at last laid down his life, full of hope in God to see a glorious resurrection? These are the beauties of Jesus, which I admire. This is the Image of him, which I have vowed to carry always in my heart. This is the glory of humane nature: the honour and dignity to which I would be preferred. I desire to be great in nothing but his humi∣lity: to be rich only in contentedness, patience, and good works: to be glorified
in meekness, and sweet condiscention: to have the pleasure only of pleasing God, and my Brethren to their edification: to rejoyce that Gods will is done, though mine be crossed. And it is no small joy to see the begin∣nings of this beauteous image drawn upon my heart. He that did not despise the Virgins womb, will not despise the hum∣ble oblation I have made of my self to him; nor that little likeness he sees in me of himself. Dost thou not see, my soul, what great things come from mean begin∣nings? How a poor Babe that lay in a manger, came to be the King of glory? Hope in God then, that thou shalt grow to a greater stature; and more exactly resem∣ble thy dearest Saviour. He hath given thee assurance that he will not over-look thee, now that he sits on the Throne of his glory. It is a Throne of grace too, unto which thou mayst address thy self, and find grace to help in time of need. Do but let him see how much thou honourest him; how pre∣tious his memory is unto thee, how thou art in love with his purity; and he that was manifested in our flesh will manifest himself in thee. He will adorn thee with all his graces; and make thee shine as a
light in the world; in humble charity, in meekness of wisdom, in chearful patience, and devout obedience. Blessed be God for this hope. I have no cause to envy the greatest persons: No, not her that carried him in her womb, and then in her arms; if there had been nothing more. For though we are apt to say as the wo∣man among the multitude did, Blessed is the womb that bare thee,Luke 11.27, 28. and the paps that thou hast sucked; yet Jesus saith, yea, ra∣ther blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it. They that hear or be∣lieve his word conceive him in their heart: and they that do it, bring him forth in their life. Blessed be Jesus for the least share I have in this blessedness. I will spend this holy day, in praising him for the hope I have to partake of more of it. What can there be more delightful to those, who know what it is to believe in him and obey him? And in what shall we spend the rest of this time wherein we commemo∣rate his coming into the world? Shall we be so uncivil to our Lord, as to go more wil∣lingly to feast with our neighbours, than to feast again with him? Shall we go to their houses with more chear, than unto his? I will never so dishonour him. God forbid that I should feast my body more than my
Soul. I will rather imitate the ancient Christians, who could find in their heart to meet every day before the morning light, to sing Hymns to our Saviour. I will, at least, be able to say with David; O that all others may bear me company in it, I have gone with the multitude,Psal. 42.4. I went with them to the house of God; with the voice of joy and praise, with a multitude that kept Holy-day. The Thanksgiving and Prayer afterward. O Eternal Majesty of Heaven and Earth, the Father of mercies; by whom all things were made out of nothing, whose Almighty hand sup∣ports them, from falling back into nothing again, and whose good provi∣dence keeps them from being mise∣rable. Thy Wisdom is past finding out; thy Power is irresistable; thy Love and Goodness is unmeasurable, and thy tender mercies over all thy Works. O how great are thy tender
mercies to us, O Lord! How large a portion hast thou given us in thy love! Thou hast not dealt so with any Crea∣ture, as thou hast done with Man: on whom thou didst instamp thine own image, and cloathed him with immor∣tality, and made him Lord over the works of thy hands. And, so great is thy goodness, that, when he had lost himself by departing from his obedi∣ence to thee, thou wouldest not so lose thy sinful Creature: but chose rather to do wonders, that he might not pe∣rish. Thou hast sent thy Son to seek after him and restore him to thy self. Thou hast not abhorred our Nature; but loved us so much as to manifest thy self in our flesh, and honour us with the glorious title of thy Sons, the Bre∣thren of the Son of thy love Christ Je∣sus. I have remembred with all thank∣fulness this day, his humble and loving descent from Heaven, that he might be born and dwell among us: to comfort
us in this sinful and troublesome world with his Divine presence; to assure us of thy good will to us, and invite us friendly to return to thee; to instruct and encourage us in our duty; to put us in hope of endless felicity; and at last to die and give himself a ransom for us; that he might be touched with a sense of our infirmities, being in all points tempted like as we are, without sin. I again adore, O Lord, thy most glorious Majesty. I reverence thy Power and greatness. I wonder at thy wisdom; and am astonished at thy goodness. I have neither words nor thoughts befitting the inestimable benefits thou hast bestowed on us. O that the Holy Spirit which was in our Saviour, would inspire my heart with devout affections towards thee, O God of all grace: that I may love thee more than I can express, more than now my heart can think; and I may joyn chearfully with all the Heavenly
Host above, that are still giving ho∣nour, blessing, glory, power and do∣minion to thee, for ever and ever. For unto us a Child is born;Isa. 9.6, 7. unto us a Son is gi∣ven: the mighty God, the Prince of peace: of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end. In him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily: And we are members of his body,Coloss. 2.9, 10. of his flesh and of his bones.Ephes. 5.30 In him we are compleat, which is the head of all Principality and Power; and hath redeemed us by his bloud,Rev. 5.9. and made us Kings and Priests unto God, to offer unto him Spiritual Sacrifices;1 Pet. 2.5. and we shall reign with him for ever. Amen. I confess, O Lord, that I am less than the least of all thy mercies: And though I have been un∣grateful even for the greatest, yet thou continuest the course of thy goodness; and hast now newly admitted me to the Communion of Christs precious Body and Bloud. Thou pitiest also my weak and childish thoughts, my heavy and dull affections, and all the wan∣drings
of my foolish imagination; and dost not estrange thy self from me, though I am so little moved by thy mi∣raculous love. O thou who hast done such great things for me, bear still mercifully with me: exercise more of thy patience, and show thy self exceed∣ing great in forbearance and long suf∣fering towards me. Thou who hast given thy Son unto me, vouchsafe to send thy Holy Spirit to over-shadow my Soul, and form Christ Jesus with∣in me. That conceiving him in my heart by a lively faith and belief of his Gospel, I may be made partaker of a Divine nature: and express him in his holiness, meekness, humility, patience, charity, contentedness, and simplici∣ty; in perfect innocence, in doing good, and entire satisfaction in thy fa∣therly love. O that the new life to which I am born by the incorruptible seed of thy Word, which liveth and abideth for ever,1 P t. 1.23 and for the nourishment of which thou
hast provided this holy Feast, of which I have now partaked; may encrease unto a perfect age, to the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ: that so at last I may be begotten again from the dead, and be a child of the re∣surrection, to live for ever with the Lord. And for that end dispose my heart, as a new born babe, to desire the sincere milk of thy Word that I may grow thereby. That since thou hast caused thy Holy Scriptures to be written for our learning, I may in such wise hear them, read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest them, that I may obey from the heart that form of Doctrine,Rom. 6.17 whereunto I have been delivered: and by patience and comfort of thy Word, embrace and ever hold fast the blessed hope of everlasting life, which thou hast given us in our Saviour Jesus Christ. Vouchsafe, good Lord, so to direct and govern me, that I may never profane this Body, which thou
hast so sanctified, honoured and exalt∣ed, by intemperance or any impurity: nor this Soul which is so dear to thee, by pride or envy, hatred or malice, wrath or revenge, covetousness or dis∣content. But I may repose a perfect trust and confidence in thee for what I want, seeing thou hast not with-held thy Son, thine only Son, from us; and be thankful for what I enjoy; and live in the love of thee, my God, and of all my Brethren; and possess my body in sanctification and in honour; that I may humbly wait for thy mercy in Christ Jesus to eternal life. Help me this very day, to begin to use all bodily good things with holy fear; with thanksgiving; with pity to the poor and needy; with a sense of spiritual de∣lights and hungerings after righteous∣ness; and with most earnest longings after that feast of joy and gladness which we hope to keep with thee in the Heavens.
O that all the world may hear the glad tidings of a Saviour; that there may be great joy among all people. Let all the people praise thee, O God, let all the people praise thee. Let them lift up their hands unto thee in his name, and bow their knees unto him: and let every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. And O that all they who do confess him, may have their conversati∣on as becomes the Gospel, and be con∣tinually offering up the Sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving, and be com∣municating and doing good. Kings of the Earth and all People;Psal. 148.11, 12, 13. Princes, and all Judges of the Earth. Both young men and maidens, old men and children. Let them praise the Name of the Lord: that God in all things may be glorified through Christ Jesus; to whom be praise and dominion,1 Pt. 4.11. for ever and ever. Amen.
On Newyears-day, if there be a Communion, may be added this short Meditation. LEt us consider, my Soul, before we go to the Holy Table; for what ends we go thither; and with what hearts we ought to go. Is it not to admire the great∣ness of Gods love in giving his Son to us; and the greatness of Christs love in giving himself for us? Is it not to render our highest thanks and praise to the Father and the Son, for this inestimable love, in gi∣ving his bloud a ransom for us; and then to offer up our selves wholly to his love? Is it not to renew our Baptismal Covenant, wherein we promised to forsake all his ene∣mies, and to lead a mortified life in all obe∣dience to his will? To represent to God what his Son hath done for us, and hum∣bly to hope in him, for all the benefits of his passion? To receive encrease of power to overcome the world, and further testi∣monies of his love, and stronger desires af∣ter the consummation of it in Heavenly
bliss? To unite our heart in Brotherly affection to all the faithful servants of Je∣sus; and to rejoyce in the holy Commu∣nion of Christ and his Saints? O blessed Jesus, who can have hearts disposed to do all this without thee? I come to thee therefore, that thou wilt represent thy self most lively to me. If I could have seen thee hanging on the Cross; or if thou wouldest appear to me as thou didst to Saul; if the Heavens were opened, and I could behold thee, as did St. Steven; what strange passions, what holy affecti∣ons would it raise up in my heart! Open thine eyes, my Soul, heartily and strongly believe; and thy joy shall be full. He will be in the midst of us, when we are assembled together in his Name; accord∣ing as he promised. He presents himself before us in these Signs of his Body and Bloud. Behold, how the Word was made flesh: how he was Circumcised, and fulfilled the Law under which he was born; that he might be a pure and unspot∣ted offering to God. See how he was whipt and scourged for thy sake. See how he suffered upon the Cross; how his Body was broken, and his heart-Bloud poured out to reconcile us unto God. And then thou canst not but come with a thankful
heart; and with an humble, reverent, and devout affection present thy self unto him: bitterly bewailing thy offences, chearfully resigning thy self to his will, and joyfully hoping for his mercy. When he saith by his Minister, Take, eat, drink this; what is the meaning, but as if he should say, I am thy Salvation? And when thou stretch∣est out thy hand and dost this; what is it, but to say, My Lord, and my God?Joh. 20.28. And happy are they, who not only call him Lord, but do the things that he saith. Blessed are they, that do his Commandments; that they may have right to the Tree of Life;Rev. 22.14.12.20. and enter into the City of God. Behold, he cometh, and his reward is with him: and he will give to every man according as his work shall be.Rev. 21 7. And he that overcometh (saith he) shall inherit all things: I will be his God, and he shall be my Son. Amen. Even so, come Lord Jesus.
And this short Prayer. O Lord of heaven and earth; who knowest my down-sitting, and my up-rising,Psal. 139.2, 3. &c. and understandest my thoughts a far off. Who compassest my path and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my wayes, ever since I was born. There is not a word in my tongue,Psa. 19.12. but lo, O Lord, thou knowest it altogether. Such knowledg is too wonderful for me: it is high, I cannot attain unto it. Who can understand the errors of his whole life? And with what trembling ought I to approach thee, though I knew nothing by my self? But alas my own heart condemns me; and thou art greater than my heart, and knowest all things. I am ashamed to think, that I lived so many years, before I seriously thought of all my duty to thee. And that since I have known thy will and devoted my self to thy service, I have made such
small improvement in wisdom and virtue. Many years are passed, and innumerable blessings in them have been received; but alas! the God in whose hand my breath is,Dan. 5.23. and whose are all my wayes, how little have I glorified? I have reason to blush that now I have brought an heart before thee, with so little sense of that love, which I have so often re∣membered, and praised and acknow∣ledged, with the largest expressions of devotion to thee. But it is some com∣fort, O Lord, that thy all-searching eye, which pierces to the bottom of my soul, sees a sincere desire there to become better; and a stedfast resolution to en∣deavour to grow in grace, and in the knowledg of our Lord Jesus Christ. It is in my heart to renew my covenant with thee; to ingage my fidelity once more to thee: trusting that I have a good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly.Heb. 13.18. I hope thou wilt graciously accept, and encourage whatsoever thou beholdest
of thy self in me; and when I go to offer my self again most solemnly to thee at thy Altar, make me feel thy di∣vine presence with me: enlightning my mind with a clear sense of thee; raising in me worthy thoughts and af∣fections towards my dear Saviour; in∣gaging my will more firmly to thine; confirming all my pious resolutions, exciting my Faith, love, hope and joy; that this holy Communion may be to the continuance of a holy life in greater care, diligence, zeal and fervency in all well doing. Assist me, I beseech thee, in every part of this duty; that I may remember the sufferings of the Lord Jesus, so as to be crucified with him, and his great love, so as to love him with all my soul, and my neighbour as my self; and the new covenant he hath made in his blood, so as to have his laws written on my heart; and all the the pretious promises he hath thereby sealed to us, so as to place my entire
contentment and satisfaction in them; till I come to possess that perfect hap∣piness which I wait for, through thy mercies in Christ Jesus, Amen. Our Father, &c. A short Meditation after. WHat hast thou now received from our Lord? Are they not the most sacred pledges of his love? And what doth the Lord require of thee? but only love. But how great a thing is love? Love brought him down hither to us: and love will carry us up to God. Love made him like to man: and love is able to make thee like to God. O the power of hea∣venly love! How shall we get it plant∣ed in our heart? How? But by love? The frequent meditation of this admira∣ble love of God in his Son Jesus, will not suffer us not to love him with all our heart and soul and strength. Let us re∣solve then that the remembrance of his love shall lie perpetually in our heart.
As we have begun the year with the thoughts of his love: so let us continue it. What more welcome thought can there be to thee every morning when thou awakest than this, I am the beloved of the King of Glory? With what canst thou open thy soul more chearfully? What will brighten it, and chase away the darkness of melancholly, sorrow, sadness, cares and fears, like to this? If thou hast not lost an hour, and wasted this pretious time which thou hast spent at the Table of the Lord, thou canst not but feel the migh∣ty force of his infinite love. Let us try, my soul, what it will be able to do in a whole years thoughts upon it. Let the morning light bring Jesus ever along with it to thy mind: and enkindle in thee a new devotion to him. And let us take all occasions to celebrate his memory; that so our holy resolutions may be more quick∣ned and strengthned; and when the flame begins to burn dimm, we may blow it up again, and add more fewel to it. If a friend had left thee a token of his love, whereby to keep him in mind, wouldst thou throw it into some blind corner, and never look upon it? But suppose he was a dying friend, nay a friend that dyed for thee, to save thee from death; could he
ever go out of thy mind, or wouldst thou let the thing he left to remember him by, be long out of thine eye? Let us not deal more unkindly with our Saviour. Did he think when he went to heaven, that those whom he hath so obliged, would remember his love so seldom and so coldly? That they need be so much entreated to come and have communion with him? Is it not a grief to him now (if he be capable of any) to see that he hath so few lovers? And that they who profess love to him, testifie it so rarely and in so poor a manner? Let us vow, my soul, again that we will henceforth shew our selves his hearty friends, by keeping his holy Commands: and never for∣get that this is one, Do this in remembrance of me. I will remember thee, O Lord, and in this manner lift up my hands in thy name; till I have finished my dayes and come to see thee as thou art, in all thy Majesty and Glory.
And this Thanksgiving and Prayer may be added afterward. O Lord, I thine unworthy ser∣vant, whom thou art pleased to call thy child, most devoutly humble my self before thee, in new adorations of that love which I can never fully un∣derstand. The highest of our praises, is most heartily to acknowledge, that thou art exalted above all blessing and praise: And our most grateful ac∣knowledgments, to be very sensible of the weakness of our love, when it is ad∣vanced to its greatest and strongest pitch. Thy love is like to thy self, and we cannot search it out to perfection. It is higher than the Heavens,Job 11. what can we do? It is broader than the Sea, what can we know? I have enjoyed many years of mercies; and thou hast been loading me with a multitude of inestimable be∣nefits both for Soul and Body, ever
since I came into this world. Every day brings me fresh tokens of thy good∣ness; and this day, the dearest of all, the tokens of thine everlasting love.Psal. 139. O how precious are thy thoughts towards us, how great is the summe of them! I hope to give thee eternal praises, O Father of mer∣cies, and God of all comfort; who hast made us after thy own image; and in the fulness of time sent thy Son born of a woman, made under the Law, to redeem us from the curse; and hast adopted us to be thy children; promi∣sed to make us heirs with thy only be∣gotten; and for that end to give us a new birth from the Grave, into an im∣mortal Life. Have patience with me, O Lord, till that time, when I shall more fully comprehend, and better ac∣knowledge the greatness of thy love: for which I will endeavour to prepare my self, by an innocent, harmless and unblamable life, as becomes the Gospel of Christ. To him I have now dedi∣cated
my self again in all holy obedi∣ence. I have professed my self his ser∣vant, that admires him and loves him, and glories in being his faithful Dis∣ciple. O that the good thoughts and pious inclinations, which I have now felt in my heart, may remain and abide there for ever: that as I grow in years, so I may grow (as my Saviour did) in grace and favour with thee my God, and with all good men. Endue me with a more solid knowledge of thy will, with a stronger love and affection to it, and with power to do my duty towards thee and towards all men. That I may behave my self in an humble and godly fear before thee; in all justice, mercy and charity to my Neighbours; and possess my Body and Soul in sobriety, chastity and patience. Make me loving to my inferiours, re∣spectful to my betters, friendly to my equals, kind to all mine enemies; thank∣ful for thy mercies, contented with my
own state and condition of life; fearful of my self in prosperity, and confident in thee in adversity; that all temptati∣ons may only present me with some∣thing to overcome, and give me new occasions of victory over the world, and produce for me at last a greater crown of glory. For thou art my hope, O Lord God: thou art my trust from my youth.Psal. 7 5, 6, 8, 9. By thee have I been holden up from the womb: thou art he that took me out of my mothers bowels; my praise shall be continually of thee. Cast me not off in the time of old age,73.24▪ forsake me not when my strength faileth. But let my mouth be filled with thy praise, and with thy hnour all the day. Guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory, through Christ Jesus; to whom with thy self, in the unity of the Holy Ghost, be all honour, thanks∣giving, love and obedience rendred, by me and all Angels and Men, both now and eternally. Amen.
Easter-day. The Meditation before. O Blessed day! which brought glad ti∣dings of great joy. Our Saviours second birth-day, to a more glorious life! The day of the first fruits of those that slept! The day that brought life and im∣mortality to light! and gave us assured hope in God, that it shall be to us according to Jesus his Word. Why do we dream thus, my Soul, about these things? Awake, awake; and stir up in thy self the most piercing belief and sense of them. Thy Saviour is risen, and calls unto thee with a mighty voice, saying,Rev. 1.1. I am he that li∣veth, and was dead; and behold, I am alive for evermore, Amen; and have the keys of Hell and of Death. Need there any more words to perswade thee to go and rejoyce in his love, which made him give himself to die for thee? And in the love of God which accepted of his oblation, and re∣warded his sufferings with a glorious Re∣surrection to an endless Life? And in that power, might and majesty wherewith he is crown'd? So that at the Name of Jesus
all things in Heaven and Earth, and under the Earth do bow and obey? It is too little to say, that I will go and thank him, at this holy Feast, for what he hath done for me, and for what I hope he will still do: I will go and offer my self absolutely to him: I will make a vow of love to him, and charity to all the world: I will tri∣umph in his praise, and glory in the service of the Prince of life: I will dedicate my self to be an everlasting monument both of his Death and of his Resurrection from the dead. I will so remember his death, as to die my self to sin: And so remember his Resurrection, as to rise again to walk be∣fore him in newness of life: And his dying no more; so that sin shall have no more dominion over me,Rom. 6.12, 14. nor reign in my mortal body, that I should obey it in the lusts thereof. His Humility shall be remembred so as to kill my Pride; and his Charity so as to kill my Covetousness. I will remember his pains so, as to mortifie all inordinate desires of pleasure; and his patience so, as to subdue my anger, passion and peevish∣ness. His love to his Enemies, shall make me forgive others, and do good to those who do evil to me. And his absolute obe∣dience, make me take up my Cross, and be obedient to the very death. Dost thou
not begin already to feel the remembrance of his free giving himself for thee, animate thee to a chearfulness, and forwardness in well doing? Doth not his full trust in God, when he laid down his life, that he should receive it again, raise in thee a strong confidence in his Almighty word? Is not the power he hath over Hell and Death, of mighty force to encourage thy hopes, and make thee victorious over all thy enemies? How doth thy heart beat within thy breast? What thoughts and passions doth it travel withal? Doth it not begin to send up admiring thoughts to∣wards Heaven where Jesus is? Doth it not burn with strong desires? Is it not ready to burst forth into the highest ex∣pressions of love and joy? Art thou not enraged against all those sins which mur∣dered the Lord of life? Are they not all condemned to be crucified and slain? Dost thou not resolve to live like one, that believes in Jesus, and professes himself to be his faithful follower? Then think when thou goest to cele∣brate the memory of his Death, that Jesus stands in the midst of you, as he did among his Disciples when he was newly risen from the Grave, saying, Peace be unto you.Joh. 20.19.
Eat, O my Friends; rejoyce and be ex∣ceeding glad: As my Father hath loved me, so I have loved you:Joh. 15.9. continue ye in my love. Behold here, the sensible Signs and Seals of my love. By these I give my self to you, as once I gave my self for you. By these tokens I convey to you, all that I have. I make over to you that inheri∣tance which I have purchased by my Bloud; and that is eternal life in the Hea∣venly places. For I am alive again; and behold I live for evermore. Amen, Lord Jesus;14.19. live, live for ever. Because th livest, I shall live also. Thou knowest how to pity us, because thou art he who was dead. And thou wilt never cease to pity and help us, because thou art he that liveth,m. 6.9. and being raised from the dead dieth no more; death hath no more dominion over thee. Because thou wast dead and tempt∣ed in all things like unto us, thou art sen∣sible of our infirmities, and able to succour us in all the trials of life and death. And because thou livest, thou canst make thy death become powerful and effectual to us: thou canst make good all thy own promises, and put us in possession of the purchased inheritance.1 Pet. 1.3. Blessed be God, which according to his abundant mercy hath begotten us again unto such a lively hope, by
the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. Death is swallowed up in victory. O death where is thy sting? O grave,1 Cor. 15.54, 55. where is thy victory? Thanks be to God who hath not appointed us to wrath,1 Thess. 5.9, 10. but to obtain sal∣vation by our Lord Jesus Christ; who dyed for us, that whether we wake or sleep, we should live with him. Knowing that he which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise up us also by Jesus;2 Cor. 4.14 Jude 24. and shall present us faultless before the presence of his glory with exceed∣ing joy. The Prayer before. O Most mighty Lord of heaven and earth, the Father of Spirits, the God and Father of our Lord Je∣sus Christ: whose name is ever hallow∣ed by an innumerable company of Holy ones, that are always burning with love to thee, and praising thy most beau∣teous perfections; thy incomprehensi∣ble wisdom, goodness, righteousness and truth. The Sun shineth not be∣fore the brightness of thy Majesty. The Angels are unclean, in compare
with the purity of thy holiness. What are we, O Lord, that thou wilt look down from the habitation of thy holi∣ness upon us! what manner of love is this, wherewith thou hast loved us! in sending thy Son down among us, and designing to take us up unto thy self, that we may joyn with that holy fellowship of Angels and Saints, to love and praise thee for ever. We are the off-spring of rebellious parents, that have been transgressors from the be∣ginning. Who have dishonoured our nature, despised or undervalued thy grace in the Lord Jesus, resisted or coldly entertained thy holy Spirit; and loved these little things here below, more than that eternal happiness, which Jesus hath revealed by his resurrection from the dead. We are not worthy of the crumbs that fall from thy Table, which thou hast spread for all creatures, or of the least drop of thy mercies. We are not worthy to lick the dust before
thee; because we deserve not to live and breath any longer in this world. And yet thou lettest us live in hope, that we shall live with thee: and thou givest us leave to breath forth our souls towards thee: and hast thy self spread a new Table for us, and furnished it with the richest of thy blessings: and invitest me most graciously, among the rest, to come now and feast with thee, and eat of the bread of life which came down from heaven, and is able to nourish me to eternal life. I would fain, O Lord, approach into thy holy presence there, and behold the won∣ders of thy love. But I am covered with shame and blushing because of my ingratitude unto thee. I cannot with any confidence open my eyes towards thee, till I have some sense in my heart that thou art willing to cover my sins, and hide thy face from mine iniquities. Which I cannot reasonably hope for, till I find them loathsome, grievous
and hateful to me, more than death it self. I ought to hang down my head in heaviness of spirit, till a sense that my heart is throughly changed and renew∣ed, give me liberty to look up unto thee, saying, Thy will O Lord be done. Possess thy self of my soul; for I abso∣lutely submit my thoughts, desires and passions to be ruled and governed by thee in all things. And what is it else, O my God, that I long for? What doth my soul thirst after? But that I may know thee more,Ephes. 1.19, 20. and the greatness of thy power to us ward, which wrought in Christ, when it raised him from the dead; and set him at thy right hand in heavenly pla∣ces, and that I may be overcome and perfectly subdued by this mighty love; and that I may be transformed into thy image, and live according to the sense I have of thy most adorable perfections▪ O that I may wholly follow the gui∣dance of thy wisdom; and submit to thy soveraign Authority; and be obe∣dient
to all thy righteous and good laws: reverencing and fearing thy ma∣jesty, approving my inward thoughts and desires to thine all-seeing eye, de∣pending on thy al-sufficiency, hoping in thy omnipotent goodness, trusting to thy true and faithful word, delight∣ing and rejoycing continually in thy Fatherly love and care of me, who hast brought me into being, and preserved me from ruin,Eph. 3.6. and made me partaker of thy promise in Christ; the beginning and first born from the dead; in whom it pleased thee, that all fulness should dwell.Col. 1.18, 19. I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledg of Christ Jesus my Lord: that I may be found in him, and have the righteousness which is by Faith:Ph l. 3.8, 9, 10. that I may know the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his death; if by any means I may attain unto the resurrection of the dead. Begin now, good Lord, to raise up my heart above all these perishing things, to those joyes
where thou art exalted. Make me feel that thou art an high Priest after the power of an endless life; still ready and able to assist and succour all those that come to God by thee. O that my eyes might be so fixed on the high and holy place into which thou art entred, that some little glimps of thy glory may breakforth upon me; and I may see the treasures and riches of thy kingdom, and what is the hope of my calling; that so I may be confirmed in my resolutions, grow strong in the Faith, and be more fer∣vent in my desires, more vehement and earnest in my endeavours, unwearied in my pains, impregnable against all temptations, chearful under all difficul∣ties and discouragements;Phil. 3.13, 14. and that for∣getting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, I may press toward the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Into thy hands, both now and ever,Psal. .5. I commit my Spirit: for thou hast
redeemed me, O Lord God of truth. I con∣fide entirely in his Almighty and eter∣nal love, to whom thou hast given all power in heaven and in earth.Matth. 28.18. I wait on thee, who hast not thought thy immortality too much to bestow on us, for whatsoever thou seest good and wholsome for me in this world; re∣ferring my self wholly to thy wisdom, and looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ:Tit. 2.13. in whose pre∣vailing name I am emboldned to make these addresses to thee, and still to offer up my desires in his holy words, say∣ing. Our Father which art, &c.
The Meditation afterward. Psal. 118.24, 22.THis is the day which the Lord hath made, I will rejoyce and be glad in it. The stone which the builders refused, is become the head of the corner. God hath raised up Je∣sus, whom they slew and hanged on a tree. Him hath God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour,Act. 5.30, 31. for to give re∣pentance and remission of sins. It is the Lords doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes. God is the Lord, that hath shewed us light: offer unto him the Sacrifice of righteousness,Psal. 118.23, 27, 28, 29. Psal. 4.5. and say, thou art my God and I will praise thee: thou art my God, I will exalt thee. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy endureth for ever. Could I ever cease to rejoyce if I heard for certain that a dead friend, the dearest in the world, was alive again: and not only alive, but preferred to the highest dignity and honour? O my dulness! that I rejoyce no more in God my Saviour! For that Je∣sus whom I have now seen crucified before mine eyes, is alive from the dead. That Je∣sus who was such a friend that he died and hung on a gibbet for me; is revived again
and sits on the throne of glory. Without all doubt he lives and reigns for me also: and being reconciled by his death,Rom. 5.10 I shall much more be saved by his life. For God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless us, in turning every one of us from his iniquities.Act. 3.20. And we wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead,1 Thess. 1.10. even Jesus which de∣livered us from the wrath to come. He is the first begotten from the dead: and hath the keyes of the grave.Rev. 1.5. He will change this vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things un∣to himself.Phil. 3.21. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him.1 Thess. 4.14. Lord what a blessed hope is this! seeing we look for these things, what manner of persons ought we to be in holy conversation and godliness?2 Pet. 3.11, 4. How di∣ligent should we be, that we may be found of him in peace, without spot and blameless? What can be more disagreeing than a cru∣cified Christ, and a carnal Christian? What more contrary than a Saviour despising the world, and one that professes friendship to him, loving it above God himself? A libe∣al Saviour, and a covetous disciple? A Saviour that indured pain and anguish and orrow, and a servant that will live in no∣thing
but ease and pleasure? A Saviour weeping and bleeding, and a man acquain∣ted with grief; and a world that nothing but laughs and sports and maketh merry? A Saviour that suffered all things, and a world that will suffer nothing; no not the mortifying of unreasonable lusts and desires? A humble and lowly Saviour, and a proud, vain-glorious, self-conceited people that profess him? A meek and patient Saviour, and a passionate, angry and revengeful ge∣neration, that pretend to be his followers? A Saviour that was ever thinking of our good, and men that call themselves his lov¦ers, who never to any purpose remember hi love? A gracious Lord that did us the mos real courtesies and benefits; and servant that only complement with him, and call him Lord, Lord, but do not that which he saith▪ A master that never quarrelled with any o Gods Commands, no, though it were to die and such schollars that count all his Com¦mandments grievous, murmur at all his les¦sons, and say that it is impossible to obe them? O how unlike is a diffident distrust¦ful Christian, to a Saviour that laid dow his very life in hope? How il-favoured do these two sound together, a conquering Christ, and a Christian that is a slave? Jes that hath conquered death, and a Christia
that cannot conquer himself? An head that is in heaven, and a member of his, that only looks at things on earth? God forbid that having professed my self so often to be dead to sin, I should live any longer therein. I was buried with him by baptism into death;Rom. 6.4, 5, 6. that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so I also should walk in newness of life. And now I am a∣gain planted in the likeness of his death, by partaking of his broken body and his blood that was shed: and therefore shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection: knowing this that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that hence∣forth we should not serve sin. God be thanked, that though I was the servant sin,Ib. v. 17, 18. yet now being made free from it, I am become the servant of righteousness. Henceforth, I will serve no o∣ther master.1 Cor. 5.7, 8. For even Christ our passover (by whose blood we are redeemed from ever∣lasting destruction) is sacrificed for us. And therefore I will keep the Feast, not with malice and wickedness, but with sincerity and truth. Building up my self in our most holy Faith, praying in the holy Ghost, I will keep my self in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.
The Thanksgiving and Prayer of afterward. O Most mighty Lord, the Crea∣tor and possessor of Heaven and Earth: who art every where and canst not be excluded from any place, no not from the closest thoughts of any of our hearts. Who art always the same, and canst no more change, than thou canst cease to be what thou art: unmoveably fixed in thy own eternal blessedness. Thou needest not go out of thy self for any thing; and I am sen∣sible that I cannot possibly make thee greater, or more happy than thou art: But it is my bounden duty to admire and extol, to laud and praise, to wor∣ship, love and honour thee: and it is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and praise is comely. All the Host of Heaven delight to sing perpetual Hymns, to the glory of thy infinite Majesty: with whom I beseech thee to give me leave
to joyn my poor and imperfect praises. The whole world was made out of Nothing by thy Power: and proclaims thy greatness, wisdom and goodness in the multitude, variety, beauty, come∣liness and order of all thy works of wonder. The Heavens are the work of thy hands; the Earth stands fast by thy appointment, and every thing keeps the course wherein thou hast set it with admirable constancy. Thou governest all things without any trouble: because at once thou know∣est and canst do what thou pleasest; and thou dost all things with the great∣est reason, justice, mercy and pleasure to thy self. Man was raised by thee out of the dust of Earth; and thou didst inspire him with a wise and un∣derstanding Spirit; and placedst him in a Paradise surrounded with thy bles∣sings, and Lord over the work of thy hands. And when he had degraded himself, and forfeited, by his disobedi∣ence,
his garden of pleasure; thou didst not leave him without a remedy, but openedst the way for him into the Paradise above. Thou didst send thy holy Prophets, and messengers in all ages to thy people; and in the fulness of time, thine own dear Son, the brightness of thy glory: whom thou hast made Heir of all things, and to whom thou hast graciously committed the care of us. Blessed be thy unspeak∣able goodness, who hast made him in all things like unto us, sin only excepted, so that we know and are sure, that he will take care of us, and pity us, and relieve us. I adore thy unparalell'd love in giving him to die, that he might make expiation for our sins; and that he hath overcome death by his rising again; and is set down at thy right hand, because he was obedient to the death. From thence we have recei∣ved the gift of the Holy Ghost (thanks be to thy Grace) to confirm us in the
belief of his Resurrection, and of all his promises, by signs and wonders, and mighty deeds; and to give us power to perform our duty towards thee and towards all men. Thou hast spread this Gospel of Salvation into the fur∣thermost parts of the Earth; and the light of it hath long shone upon this Kingdom where I live. I was born into this light, as well as into the light of the Sun, and had early assurances given me of thy love. In my very in∣fancy I was devoted to thee; and all the engagements I was capable of, laid upon me to be happy, by being a faith∣ful Disciple of Christ Jesus. Thou hast not failed since to breath on me by thy Holy Spirit, and to move me to my duty; that I might be able to make the answer of a good Conscience towards thee,1 Pet. 3 21. and so be saved by his his Resurrection from the dead. Many happy opportunities hast thou put into my hands, to improve my self in Christian wisdom and ver∣tue:
and engaged me to thee in many solemn vows, only to seek the glory, honour, and immortality, which Christ hath brought to light, by pati∣ent continuance in well-doing. I have now received the pledges of it, and commemorated his love in dying for us, and thy love in raising him to life again: that he might perfect our Salvation; and assure us he hath obtained an eter∣nal redemption; and comfort us against the fears of death; and take care of us for ever; and receive the power and glory thou promisedst him, that he may be able to bless us and do us all good. O how hath thy love abound∣ed in Christ Jesus! Besides a world of outward blessings, which thy bounte∣ous hand hath poured on me, and still continues merely out of thy goodness and liberality. How can I praise thee for all thy mercies to all mankind, who cannot comprehend all those which thou hast bestowed on my self alone?
None can understand how much we are beholden to thee; but those that know what thy Son Jesus was, and what the blessing of the Holy Ghost, and what the Resurrection of the dead, and the unsearchable riches of thy Kingdom and Glory are. Accept, blessed Lord, of such acknowledg∣ments as I am able to make thee. Ac∣cept of my whole self, which I yield up unto thee with love unfeigned. Thou whose infinite understanding pierceth into the greatest depths and secrets, knowest that I love thee. Do even what thou pleasest with me; for it is but just and reasonable, that I should not live unto my self henceforth, but unto him that died for me and rose again. I am twice thy Creature: Thou hast given me life a second time by Christ Jesus, through whom thou hast created me to good works, in hope of a blessed Resurrection from the dead. Inspire me good Lord, with such a strong and
lasting sense of thy love, that I may al∣way live in sincere obedience to him, and never forfeit the new title, thou hast given me, to life immortal: But belie∣ving the Resurrection of Jesus from the dead, I may most heartily acknowledg him to be the Lord; and stedfastly believe his Doctrine; obeying his com∣mands, hoping in his promises, and fearing his threatnings; and endea∣vouring thereby to prepare my self, in all purity and holiness of life, for the joys of the World to come. AndThe words of the Church Catechism explaining the Lords Prayer. I desire my Lord God our Heavenly Father, who is the giver of all goodness, to send his grace unto me and to all people, that we may wor∣ship him, serve him, and obey him as we ought to do. And that he will send us all things that be needful both for our Souls and Bodies; and be merci∣ful to us, and forgive us our sins; and that it will please him to save and
defend us in all dangers ghostly and bodily, and that he will keep us from all sin and wickedness, and from our ghostly enemy, and from everlasting death. Which I trust he will do of his mercy and goodness, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen. Now the God of peace,Heb 13.20, 21. that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Bloud of the everlasting Covenant. Make us perfect in every good work to do his will; working in us that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.
This short acknowledgment may be used sometime that Week. Acts 4.24, 25.LOrd, thou art God which hast made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea, and all that in them is: who by the mouth of thy servant David hast said,Psal. 2.7, 8. Thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee. And I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy possession. Thy word is true from the beginning.Psal. 119.160.89.90. For ever, O Lord, thy word is setled in Heaven. Thy faithfulness is unto all generations. For thou hast sent thy holy Child Jesus,Rom. 1.4. and declared him to be the Son of God with power, by the Resurrection from the dead. Though he was Crucified through weakness,2 Cor. 13.4. yet he li∣veth by the power of God. Thou wouldest not let thy holy one see corruption:Acts 2.27, 28. But hast made known to him the ways of life, and made him full of joy with thy countenance. Thou hast
given him power over all flesh,Joh. 17.2. that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him. Adored be thine Eternal love, which appeared in the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that followed after. Adored be thy love,1 Pet. 1.3.11. 2 Tim. 1.10 1 Cor. 15.20. Joh. 11.25. which hath given us a lively hope through the Resurrection of Christ Jesus, who hath brought life and immortality to light: be∣ing the First-fruits of them that slept, and the Resurrection and the Life. I rejoyce in the consolation which thou has sent unto us; and that we in this furthermost part of the Earth are become his inhe∣ritance. I praise thee; I bless thee; I most heartily devote my self to the obedience of Jesus, as is but just and meet. For to this end Christ hath died,Rom. 14.8, 9. and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living. I reverence his Soveraign authority: I submit my self to his Laws: and depend upon his care and good providence. I refer my self to his wise will and pleasure in all things: desiring nothing more, but
that whether I live or die, I may be the Lords. O that thy Spirit which raised up Jesus may dwell in me, guide and govern me:Rom. 8.11. that thou who raisedst up Christ from the dead, mayest also quicken my mortal body, by thy Spirit dwelling in me. O that the rest of the World may become his pos∣session too; and all with one mind and one mouth glorifie thee, the God and Father of Jesus Christ: Who is the faith∣ful witness, and the first-begotten of the dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the Earth:Rev. 1.5, 6 to whom be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.
Ascension-day or Sunday. The Meditation before. AH! how duskish are my thoughts in house of Clay! How dull my affections under this load of flesh! My Sa∣viour is in Heaven, crowned at Gods right hand with glory and honour:Heb. 2.9. Ephes. 4.10 1 Pet. 3.22 He is ascend∣ed up far above all Heavens, Angels, Autho∣rities and Powers being made subject to him. And I can scarce cast a look thither; but am instantly pulled down to this Earth again. Blessed be his goodness who hath left us a lively Image of himself to help our infirmities. To represent his dying and departure from this World; and to be a pledge likewise unto us, that we shall one day ascend up to Heaven, and be for ever with the Lord. O blessed news!1 Thess. 4. ult. the hope of it fills me with joy already, and raises me up a little toward that high and holy place where Jesus dwells. I will go and bless the Father of mercies for his great charity towards us; that he would accept of an offering for sin; and that he would be satisfied without demanding of us the debt: That he would grant new and easie
conditions of Salvation for us through the Bloud of his Son; and seal a gracious Co∣venant in that same precious Bloud. I will go and testifie my love to him, even by my joy that he is gone unto the Father;Joh. 14.28 and hath triumphed over his enemies,Coloss. 2.15. after he had overcome them, and spoiled Princi∣palities and Powers.Ephes. 4.8. He hath led captivity captive,Acts 2.33. and received the promise of the Holy Ghost; and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God;Heb. 12.2. and made the Lord of all. All the Angels of God worship him;Acts 10.36 and in the Heavenly Sanctuary attend upon him; where he is an High-Priest for ever,Heb. 1.6.8.2. holy, un∣defiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the Heavens. 6.10.13. There he makes intercession for us; from henceforth expect∣ing, till his enemies be made his foot-stool. And we have boldness also by the Bloud of Je∣sus,10.19. 6.20. Joh. 14.2, 3. to enter into the holiest: whither he the fore-runner is for us entred; and gone to pre∣pare a place for us: and will come again to receive us unto himself, that where he is, there we may be also. Psal. 24.3, , 5.But who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? And who shall stand in his holy place? He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lift up his Soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. He shall receive blessing
from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his Salvation. I will go then and offer him my heart, that it may be formed to his likeness; Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth. I will go and submit my self to him as the Lord of all; and renew my Covenant of love and friendship with him. I will vow again that I will fight valiantly under his banner, who is the Captain of our Salvation,Heb. 2.10. made perfect through sufferings, against sin, the world, and the Devil. I will be faithful to him unto the death, and no suffering shall deter me from following the Prince of life. For I doubt not but the Sacrifice he made was most acceptable to God; and that he by himself having purged our sins,Heb. 1.3. H b. 2.13. sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high; and will help and succour all his faithful followers;1.14.2.10. and send forth his An∣gels to minister unto them; and bring them to glory,Rev. 2.10. and reward them with a crown of life. O lift up thy self, my Soul, when thou comest to the Table of the Lord. Now, if ever, listen to the Priest of God, when he calls, saying, Lift up your hearts. Now is the season above all others to an∣swer, with the whole Quire of pious Souls, in that joyful voice; We lift them up unto the Lord. Rear thy self aloft, my Soul,
and look beyond these shadows. Fix thine eyes on the splendor of that Majesty, wherewith thy Saviour shines: and think thou hearest him calling unto the whole company of believers, saying, Come, come, my beloved, for whom I died: Come, and dwell with me. It is still my will and desire, that you may be where I am, and that you may behold the glory,Joh. 17.24 which my Father hath given me. Come on therefore: Whither I am gone you know,14.4. and the way you know. Tread upon all the glittering temptations of the Countrey where you are, as dirt and dung, in compare with the Kingdom which I will give you. Make haste unto me, and let nothing hin∣der you: for I expect you, and long, when you are meet for it, to see you. The travel of my Soul will not be satisfied, till you be with me. O my Soul, why do we linger? Why do we look after any thing so much, as his Eternal life? Why should we be discou∣raged or faint in our minds? This Lord of glory came to his Throne, out of as low a condition as we can possibly be in. He was once a servant, the meanest of ser∣vants: He humbled himself to be subject to the basest usage, and to suffer the greatest
despite and publick reproach. Let us be assured then, that he will not despise the poorest wretch, now that he is in his glo∣rious state. And let us not think it strange if we be despised and reproached for righteousness sake. But rejoyce, in as much as we are partakers of the sufferings of Christ;1 Pet. 4.13 that when his glory shall be re∣vealed, we may be glad also with exceeding joy. The Prayer before. O Most blessed God, who dwel∣lest in the highest heavens, and art adored by the highest creatures, who blush before the brightness of thy majesty: but dost not despise us poor worms that dwell upon the earth. Who art happy in thy self, and yet makest sute to us that we would love thee: who commandest us to do good to our selves, and entreatest that duty from us which thou mayst command: who takest it kindly when we give thee
thine own, and rewardest us for that which by thy grace only we can per∣form; and pardonest us also when we fall short in our performance; and giv∣est us repentance that thou mayest par∣don us and receive us into favour; and hast sent no less person than thine own Son to obtain a pardon for us; and ex∣alted him at thy own right hand, that he might be a Prince and a Saviour, to give repentance and forgiveness of sins. Before thee, O Lord most High, I humbly prostrate my self; desiring to be admitted to thy holy Table, that I may adore the riches of thy grace, and beg forgiveness for my unworthy re∣turns to such great love. Give me leave, O Lord, to come and make, at least my acknowledgments to thee, of the duty I owe thee. Yea, I would take thy yoke upon me, with the great∣est thankfulness; and tye those bonds faster, wherein I stand already enga∣ged to thee; and bless thee for such easie
and gracious terms of reconciliation, as thou hast propounded to us; and express my hearty consent unto them; and declare my belief of thy pretious promises; and acknowledg thy good∣ness in making me so certain of their truth, by the resurrection of Christ from the dead, and his ascensi∣on to heaven; that he might sit down at thy right hand to make good all that he hath said. Blessed be the Lord, who hath rewarded his obedience, with such honour, power, dominion, and authority; that we might be incou∣raged to follow him, and depend up∣on him, and have a setled hope of im∣mortality by him. I rejoyce in the glory which thou hast with the Father of all, O Lord Jesus, whose throne is for ever and ever. A Scepter of righteousness is the Scepter of thy kingdom: thou hast loved righteousness, and hated iniquity;Hb. 1.8, 9. therefore God, even thy God, hath anointed thee with the oyl of gladness above thy fellows.
O God, that I could forget all other things, when I present my self before thee, and ascend up, in my thoughts and desires and resolutions, to heaven where Jesus is: that when I come down again to converse with these things here below, I may look upon them as objects of my contempt, or as proofs of my vertue, or as incitements to praise thee, the Creator of all; and as occasi∣ons to manifest how much I love thee, by quitting the dearest thing in this world, if thou requirest it, for thy sake, who hast raised man to such an height or glory and honour above all. O that I may hate every thing, that would not let me love thee, better than it. That I may fear to offend thee, and be very sollicitous to please thee, and studious in all things to approve my self to him, whom thou hast raised from the dead & promoted unto glory: so that he is able to prefer all his faithful servants to that glorious place where he is. Shew me,
O Lord, that he is not held by death, but reigns with thy self for ever, by the power of thy holy Spirit in my heart; raising me above my self, and enabling me to comply with those high and heavenly thoughts, desires and designs which thou hast wrought in my heart. O blessed Jesus, who sit∣test at the right hand of the Father, and hast said, thou hast life in thy self, and all power in heaven and in earth;John. 5.26 Matth. 28.18. that I and all others, who prostrate them∣selves before the throne of thy grace, might find thy power still to remain as great as ever: chasing away the dark∣ness of our minds, warming and thaw∣ing our frozen affections, melting and dissolving our wills into the will of God, inspiring us with might and strength to do that which we cannot but desire; lifting up our hearts to have our con∣versation in heaven, and to live, above the love of riches, pleasures and ho∣nour; a contented, humble, sober,
and thankful life. O that we may ever demonstrate our belief of thy ascensi∣on up on high, by our living and walking in the Spirit, and no longer fulfilling the lusts of the flesh: and by improving all the grace thou sendest down to us, till we be fit to be transla∣ted from hence and come to see what we now believe, and behold thee in the glory of the Father. Amen, Lord Jesus; where thou art, let us be also, rejoycing with thee for ever: and while we stay here, I will alway say most heartily, Our Father, which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven, &c.
The Meditation afterward. O The height of that glory wherein my Saviour is inthroned!1 Pet. 3.22 Heb. 7.26. Eph. 4.8. Eph. 1.21. Who is gone into the heavens: and made higher than the heavens: nay, is ascended up far above all heavens: far above all principality, and power, and might and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come. What a com∣fort is it to dust and ashes, to see their nature shining brighter than the highest stars of glory? To behold their flesh the greatest beauty of the Paradise of God? Where should my conversation be, but in heaven? Where should the members and the heart be, but where their head, and their treasure is? What should I seek, but those things above,Coloss. 3. where Christ is at Gods right hand? O ye little vanities! How contemptible are all your pleasures? How ow are all your dignities and honours? How base and vile the rest of your tempta∣tions, when I look up to heaven, where my Saviour sits in unmatchable glory and majesty? Never speak to me any more; never perswade me to follow worldly lusts: thy thoughts are not now so mean; I am
dead to all those things, and my life is hid with Christ in God. When Christ who is my life shall appear, then shall I appear with him in glory. But, is that eternal life with Jesus the thing thou seekest? Is thy heart indeed set on things above, where he is at Gods right hand? Search and try; dost thou in good earnest travel with high and heavenly de∣signs? Art thou ambitious of nothing so much, as to be like to Jesus; and by the most self denying wayes to obtain his glo∣ry? Dost thou spare no pains to flatten thy too eager desires towards the things on earth; to let out thy vain and aiery con∣ceits; to sharpen thy appetite after real righteousness; to inflame thy love, to heighten thy desire and hope, to strengthen thy faith, to excite thy watchfulness, and ingage thy serious endeavours, that thou mayest possess the things above? Art thou sure taht the wisdom from above is the crown of thy glory?Jam. 2.17. Humility thy ho∣nour? To do good thy riches and treasure? to be Religious thy business; and to re∣joyce in God thy highest pleasure? Doth the peace of God which passeth all understand∣ing keep thy mind and heart?P. 4.7. Art thou above the threats, the contempt, the ha∣tred,
the oppression, the enmities and af∣fronts of this evil world? Above thine own and other mens passions and peevish affecti∣ons? So that thou returnest good for evil, kindness for injuries, and prayers for cur∣ses? Is that sweet thing, that heavenly love to all thy Brethren, the darling of thy bo∣some; which is the very joy of Heaven? Then the Angels give thee joy of an happy resurrection and ascension with Christ Jesus. He hath made thee already to fit with him in heavenly places.Eph. 2.6. The day star is risen in thy heart, foretelling thy approaching glo∣ry. Thou beholdest the morning of eter∣nal joy, the dawning of the day of recom∣pences. And thou mayest rest assured, that God will not leave thee in the grave, nor suffer thee for ever to see corruption: but it shall deliver thee into the arms of thy Lord;1 Cor. 15.53. 2 Cor. 5.4. and corruption shall put on incorrupti∣on, and this mortality be swallowed up of life. Nay, thou mayst now triumph and say, I am an heir; an heir of God,Rom. 8.17. and joynt-heir with Christ: who hath also given me the earnest of the inheritance.Eph. .14. For he hath form∣ed already a model of the heavenly Sanctu∣ary within thy breast: where Christ Jesus himself is enthroned; and the name of God is continually honoured and glorified. And therefore thou mayst humbly conclude in
the words of Jesus,Joh. 12.32. If God be glorified in me, God shall also glorifie me in himself. And O that the Father of glory would be pleased more and more to enlighten the eyes of our understanding,Ephes. 1.17, 18, 19, 20. that we may know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints, and what is the exceeding greatness of his po∣wer to us-ward who believe, according to the working of his mighty power; which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in Heavenly places, &c. Amen. The Thanksgiving and Prayer afterward. O Most Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty; who art to be most humbly adored, worshipped and ad∣mired: but thy perfections no tongue can express, and thou art above the thoughts of the highest and purest of all Creatures. They all give glory to thee in their several kinds, and declare thy power, thy greatness, thy wisdom and goodness, which spreads it self
throughout the world.Psal. 113.3, 4. From the rising of the Sun unto the going down of the same, the Lords name is to be praised. For the Lord is high above all Nations, and his glory above the Heavens. They sound conti∣nually with the praises, which the holy Angels give thee; who know thee bet∣ter than we, that are shut up in houses of clay, and can see but little of thy glory. And yet thou art pleased not only to admit, but to invite us to lift up our hearts unto thee, and unite them with that Heavenly company; in ren∣dring thee our poor praises and thanks, which are infinitely below thee. Ac∣cept, Good Lord, of such as I have to give; and inspire me graciously from above with such a sense of thy good∣ness, that I may offer thee an heart full of love; which may be ever making grateful acknowledgments unto thee. I bless thee, that thou hast made man such a noble Creature; capable to look back to thee, the Author of his being,
and to be happy in loving thee, and bearing a likeness to thee. O how great was thy goodness, that when he forgot thee that formed him, and light∣ly esteemed thy love and favour, thou wouldest not call him out of thy care: but mercifully and speedily madest a promise of a Redeemer to him? I thank thee, O God, that in the fulness of time thou hast sent him, thy only begotten Son into the world; not on∣ly to converse lovingly with us as our Friend and Brother: but also to die for us; and to die the accursed death of the Cross. Who can understand the greatness of thy love, O blessed Jesus, that would hang in such shame and pain; and bleed to death; and lie in the Grave for us wretched sinners? And the greatness of thy love, O Fa∣ther of mercies, who hast raised him again from the dead; and exalted him with thy right hand to the Throne of Glory in the Heavens; and
given him a name above every name:Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. that at the name of Jesus every knee might bow, both of things in Heaven, and things on Earth, and things under the Earth; and that every tongue might confess, that Jesus is the Lord, to thy glory? I confess his Sovereign power and authority, whom the An∣gels worshipped and adored; and I give glory to thee, O Father of all, who hast made him head of the Church,Ephes. 1.22, 23. which is his Body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all. Glory be to thee, O Lord most high, who hast put all things under his feet: and made Angels themselves to be mi∣nistring Spirits,Heb. 1.14. sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of Salvation. Glo∣ry be to thee,Acts 3.26. who hast sent him to bless us in turning every one of from our iniqui∣ties:5.32. and hast made him a Prince and a Sa∣viour to give repentance and remission of sins: and made him able to save them to the ut∣termost, that come unto thee by him,Heb 7.25, 27. seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them. To thy eternal praise and glory be it re∣membred,
that we have such an High-Priest,Heb. 8.1. who is set on the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty in the Heavens: who needeth not daily to offer up Sacrifice; but hath done it once, when he offered up himself. I bless thee, that thou hast now ad∣mitted me to partake of that Sacrifice; which is able to perfect for ever them that are sanctified.Heb. 10.14 And that to the blessings of thy house, thou hast added also those of my own. Thou feedest not my Soul only, but most bountifully providest for my Body too: not only thy Son, but a great number of thy Creatures losing their lives continually to preserve mine. There is all reason that I should serve thee with unweari∣ed diligence, who hast made so many things constantly to serve me. And here I present my self again before thee; to tender thee my hearty ser∣vice, to beseech thy acceptance of the vows and promises I have already made to thee, and to express my hope
in thy mercy, for power from on high to assist and further my pious desires and resolutions. I believe in thee, O God, through Christ Jesus, who hast raised him up from the dead,1 Pet. 1.21 and given him glory, that our faith and hope might be in thee our God. I live in a full perswasion, that thou designest to make me ever∣lastingly happy: and therefore hum∣bly look to receive from thy Divine bounty, the communication of thy Ho∣ly Spirit; to help me to fit and pre∣pare my self for such a glorious state with Christ in the Heavens. That there my thoughts and my heart may be, where my hopes are treasured up; and all things may seem little and mean in compare with the glory to be reveal∣ed; and I may think my self exceeding high and great, in the humility, meek∣ness, goodness, patience and conten∣tedness of the Lord Jesus, and in the holy hope he hath given me of Eternal life. Preserve in my mind a constant
sense of that blessed hope, as incomparably beyond all possessions on Earth: that so I may walk worthy of my High and Heavenly calling; chearfully doing and suffering thy will; and believing that thou who hast done so much for us, as to advance our nature to such glory in the Heavens, will take care of us while we are here on Earth; and conduct us by humble submission to thee, and patient continuance in well∣doing, to that place whither Jesus the fore-runner is entred for us. Psal. 98.4.And let all the Earth make a joyful noise unto the Lord: make a loud noise, and re∣joyce,97.1. and sing praise. For the Lord Jesus reigneth:29.10. He sitteth King for ever. Let them praise his great and holy name: For the Kinds strength loveth judgment,99.3, 4. he doth esta∣blish equity: He executeth judgment and righteousness in the Earth.Psal. 5.11. And let all those that love him, be joyful in him. Rejoyce in the Lord,97.11, 12. ye righteous: and give thanks to
the memorial of his holiness. For light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself,2 Th ss. 2.16, 17. and God even our Father, which hath loved us, and hath given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace. Comfort our hearts, and establish us in every good word and work. Amen.
Whitsunday. The Meditation before. O Holy Spirit of grace! what news is this that thou blessest our ears with∣all? What glad tidings are these, that thou art come to tell us? What means the sound of so many various tongues? the gifts of prophecy, of wisdom, of knowledge, of faith and miracles: with all the rest which thou dividedst severally to every man, as thou wouldest? Doth Jesus yet live? hath he indeed conquered the grave; and is he exalted at the right hand of God; and invested with all power in Heaven and Earth? It is enough: I will go then, and see him when I die. That word is no longer dreadful to me. I am not afraid of the King of terrors: since Jesus lives, and is the Lord and King of all. Witness the Holy Ghost the Comforter, which he hath sent down from the Throne of his glory: to assure us that he not only lives, but reigns in Majesty and Power; and is mind∣ful of us, and of his promises. Those fiery tongues that came with the noise as of a might rushing wind, tell me that he is able
to transport us, when he pleases, in fiery Chariots unto Heaven. I hear them call my thoughts up thither,Heb. 2.9. and bid me see Jesus who was made a little lower than the Angels, for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honour: and scattering his royal gifts among his servants. I am thy servant, O blessed Jesus;Psal. 119.125, 135. make thy face to shine upon me. Let thy mercies come also unto me, O Lord, even thy salvation according to thy word.Ver. 41, 49 Remember the word unto thy servant, upon which thou hast caused me to hope. That, WHERE I AM,Joh. 12.26 THERE SHALL AL∣SO MY SERVANT BE. What words of grace and life are these? It is enough, O thou that dwellest in the Heavens, that I be there where thou art. Thou shalt guide me with thy counsel,Psa 73.24 and afterward receive me to glory. And till I go to see that glory which the Father hath given thee, I will go and see the representations thou hast left us of thy self; and receive the pawns and pledges of thy Eternal love. I will go and remember thy obedience to the death; for which cause thou art highly exalted and made most bles∣sed for ever.21.6. And O that the Holy Spirit of grace, which fell on the Apostles on the day of Pentecost, would fill my heart with
a sense of that love; and swell my Soul with a full apprehension of all the blessings that it contains: that so I may burst forth into thy praises as they did, and speak the wondrous works of God.Acts 2.11. Marvellous are thy works, O Lord,Ps. 139.14 and that my Soul knows right well. I see by the light of the Holy Ghost sent down on them, that Jesus in∣deed was the Son of God; holy and with∣out fault: that all the fulness of the Godhead dwelleth in him bodily:Coloss. 2.9. that he hath made peace by the bloud of his Cross, and reconciled Heaven and Earth:Coloss. 1.20 that he is ascended up far above all Heavens,Ephes. 4.10. Ephes. 2.6. that he might fill all things: and that thou, O Lord, hast rai∣sed us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. I see what a powerful Advocate we have in the Court of Heaven:Joh. 17.2. and that thou hast given him power over all flesh, that he should give Eter∣nal Life to as many as thou hast given him. I see that all thy promises in him are yea, and in him Amen:2 Cor. 1.20, 22. by whom thou hast also seal∣ed us, and given us the earnest of the Spirit. One tongue is too little to speak the praises of the Lord. I will go therefore into the Assemblies of thy people, that they may magnifie the Lord with me,Psal. 34.3. and we may ex∣alt his name together. I will declare the exceeding greatness of his love; and the
superlative bounty of Heaven, in sending him to die for us. Yea, My Soul shall make her boast in the Lord,Psal. 34.2. and glory in his holy Name. Let the wise man, if he please, glory in his wisdom, and the rich man glo∣ry in his riches, and the mighty man in his great strength: But I will glory in this, that I understand and know thee, that thou art the Lord, the God and Father of Jesus Christ,Jer. 9.23, 24. which exercises loving kindness, judgment and righteousness in the Earth: for in these things are thy delight. I will glory in this, that I am the Disciple and Heir of the crucified Jesus: that I know the power of his Resurrection,Phil. 3.10. and the fellowship of his Sufferings: that he hath made a new Co∣venant with us of grace, mercy and peace: that we have received the Spirit of Adoption,Rom. 8.15. whereby we call him Father: and that I am taken into the fellowship of the Saints, and have hope to be numbered with them in glory everlasting. I will send up my heart to Heaven, where he is, in holy love: and engage my self to be ever mindful of his Covenant; especially of that new Com∣mandment, to love one another, even as he hath loved us. By this shall all men know that I am his Disciple, because I love the Brethren.Ephes. 4.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, &c. For there is one Body, and one Spirit, even as we are called in one hope
of our calling; one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in us all. Who gave to every one grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Wherefore he saith, when he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. And he gave some, Apostles: (blessed be his bounteous goodness) and some, Pro∣phets: and some, Evangelists: and some, Pastors and Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ: till we all come in the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the fulness of Christ. From whom the whole body fitly joyned together, and coacted by that which every joynt supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every part, maketh encrease of the body, unto the edify∣ing of it self in love.
The Prayer before. O Lord, who livest for ever and changest not. Whose power made me and all the world: before whom the whole world is as a little grain of a ballance,Wis. 11.22. or a drop of the morning dew that falleth on the Earth. Whose wisdom go∣verns and orders all things both in hea∣ven and earth; whose goodness and bounty provides constantly for their comfortable support; under whose So∣veraign and everlasting dominion we live; and unto whom we owe all ho∣mage, service and fidelity, which ought most readily and heartily to be paid by every one of us. I adore thee in the humblest reverence of my Soul and body. I acknowledge my dependance on thee, and subjection to thee. I desire above all things to live in thy fear, and in thy love and obedience as long, as I have any being. Blessed be thy good∣ness
that I may love thee, and that I am alive to worship and acknowledg thee. Blessed be thy goodness; that thou hast not been provoked to cut me off in my forgetfulness of thee; nor now to open the gates of death for me, and command me to dwell in silence: but the doors of thy house, that I may en∣ter in and praise thy holy Name. To thee belongs all blessing, honour, wor∣ship and service: to me nothing but shame and confusion of face; which ought to cover me when I approach thy presence. I thank thee most humbly for the good news thou hast sent us, that thou art in thy Son Christ,2 Cor. 5.19 reconciling the world to thy self. I rejoyce in thy love, who hast delivered him up for our offences,Rom. 4.25 and raised him from the dead for our justification; that we may know thou hast accepted of his death as a sufficient satisfaction for us, and believe that all his words are
faithful and true, and that we shall be accepted in thy beloved. I thank thee O God, that thou hast exalted him to sit in thy throne of glory; that he may be able to perform his own promises, and enable us to obey his Commands. That thou hast given us such good hope in thee, by patient continuance in well doing, to come to the resurrection of the dead, and to be made partakers of life immortal. Blessed be the Lord for the assurance we have of this: that we see Jesus crowned with glory and ho∣nour, by the descent of the Holy Ghost; which is the earnest of that eternal bliss: that thou hast sent thine Apostles to preach the Gospel to every creature; and that when they went forth thou wroughtest with them,Mark 16. ult. confirming their word with signs following: and that I my self have felt the effects of his royal power in the heavens, by the breathings of thy holy Spirit in my heart, perswading me to love thee and thy Son Jesus; who
hath shown all long-suffering towards me, and waited with great patience up∣on me, that I might return to thee and live. I thank thee, O Lord, and desire to be admitted to thy holy Table, that I may thank thee better; and renew my acknowledgments to thee in the most so∣lemn manner: laying my self at thy feet to tender thee my hearty service; resign∣ing my self to thy will; recommending Soul and body to thy wisdom; submit∣ting to thy government; approving all thy laws, and devoting my self to the constant observance of them. I hope thou wilt mercifully accept and own me in all these acts; and stand by me to guide, assist, and encourage me; and to work in me whatsoever is well plea∣sing in thy sight. That I may be such an one as thou canst love, and delight in, and reward: and I desire nothing else in heaven, or in earth. I do most freely give my self up to the conduct of the Holy Ghost; and stedfastly depend
on thee for its continual presence with me: to possess my mind with such a strong sense of these things which it hath revealed unto us; that they may operate powerfully on my will and af∣fections, and make them conformable unto Christ. O that by walking in love and shewing all meekness to all men; by patience and peaceableness; gentle∣ness and goodness; uprightness and fi∣delity; temperance and moderation; contentedness and joy in every state and condition; and by all other fruits of the spirit I may so resemble my blessed Lord and Master Jesus; that I may no∣thing doubt to bear the image of his glory in heaven, as I bear the image of his holiness here on earth. O that the eyes of my understanding may be opened more and more, to see the wondrous things which thou hast written to us in thy Gospel: that appre∣hending and believing and following
the wisdom given to us by thine Apo∣stles through the inspiration of the holy Ghost; I may have the comfort of knowing that I am still led and moved by it: and living and walking in the Spirit, may go on joyfully to the possession of that immortal inheritance, which it hath sealed to us. Now the God of hope fill us all with joy and peace in believing,Rom. 15.13, 14. Col. 1.28. that we may abound in hope through the power of the Holy Ghost: being full of all goodness and knowledg, and able also to admonish one another; till we come to be presented perfect in Christ Jesus. By whom I am incouraged to make these addresses unto the throne of grace, and to recommend my suits unto thee in his holy words; saying, as he hath bidden us. Our Father which art, &c.
The Meditation afterward. THou hast now seen the completion of all the mystery of our redemption; how that Jesus who learned obedience by the things which he suffered,H b. 5.8, 9. being made perfect; became the author of eternal Salvation unto all them that obey him. Canst thou doubt of it when thou remembrest the princely gifts, which he hath already bestowed on his Church? Did not the spirit poured out, as on this day, bear witness that all those who obediently believed on Jesus, were the children of God?Rom. 8.16, 17, 18. And if children, then heirs, heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ. How couldst thou refrain, my soul, from rejoycing in these thoughts, shouldst thou be in the midst of their tribulations? For I reckon, that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us. Be not so dull then now, that he giveth thee also a number of other good things so richly to enjoy. But stir up thy self, and be exceed∣ing glad in the comfort of that light which shines from heaven upon us; shewing us those things which in other ages were not made known to the sons of men,. 2.5. as they are
now revealed unto his holy Apostles and Pro∣phets by the Spirit. And is it possible to know Jesus, and not to learn obedience of him? What was it that he designed from first to last but to form to himself an obedient, holy people zealous of good works? Dost thou not see how early he went himself about his Fathers business?Luke 2.49.51. How du∣tiful and obedient he was to his earthly pa∣rents? How humbly he condiscended to be baptized by a meaner person than himself, because he would fulfil all righteousness?Mat. 3.15. And what did he do immediately after he was baptized,Mark 1.12. but enter into a combate with the Devil, and vanquish those very temptations which foiled our first parents? O how gloriously did he then triumph o∣ver pride, ambition,Matth. 4.1, 2, &c. eager appetite of meat and drink, and all perswasions to presump∣tion, or distrust of God! Consider, my soul, what was the first thing he preached after this, but that men should repent and be∣lieve the Gospel?Mat. 4.17. Mar. 1 15. And his Sermon that pre∣sently followed on the Mountain, what les∣sons doth it teach, but poverty of spirit, mourning, meekness, mercifulness, purity, peaceableness,Matth. 5.3, 4, &c. and such like heavenly ver∣tues; without which, he tells us in the con∣clusion of his discourse,7 26, 27. we may as discreetly
build an house upon the sand as hope to go to heaven? And was not his whole life, a continual comment upon this text? Whi∣ther tended all his promises, his exceeding great and pretious promises;2 Pet. 1.4. but that by these we might be made partakers of a divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust? O God! that we should be no more moved by such promises to purifie our selvs! what miracle will work upon those hearts, whom these will not prevail withal to be obedient? And yet his miracles I see also had the same design, to win men to a better life. I hear him admo∣nishing the impotent man whom he had cu∣red,Joh. 5.14. Behold, (mark what I say) thou art made whole: Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee. So had his death also; for he gave himself for our sins,Gal. 1.4. that he might de∣liver us from this present evil world, accord∣ing to the will of God and our Father: & that he might sanctifie and cleanse his Church with the washing of water by the word; that he might present it to himself glorious,Eph. 5.26, 27. not hav∣ing spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish. For this cause likewise he rose again, as well as died, that we should not henceforth live unto our selves but unto him;2 Cor. 5.15. Act. 3.26. and that he might bless us in turning us from our iniquities. For
which end he ascended into heaven, and was exalted with Gods right hand, to be a Prince and a Saviour,Acts 5.31. for to give repentance to Isra∣el, and forgiveness of sins. This is the in∣tent of his eternal Priesthood, that we should be incouraged to draw near to God with a true heart, in full assurance of faith,Heb. 10.21, 22. having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water. And for this purpose he sent the Holy Ghost, to make the Gentiles obedient,Rom. 15 18, 19. by word and deed, through mighty signs and wonders, by the power of the Spirit of God. With this commission he sent his Apostles, that they should go to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God,Acts 26.18 that they might receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in Christ. And this they preached with the greatest fervency and testified in the Lord, that they who believed in him, should not henceforth walk as other Gentiles did in the vanity of their minds,Eph. 4.17.5.6. &c. for they pronounced the wrath of God would come upon the children of disobedience: but to them,Rom. 2.7 who by patient continuance in well-doing, sought for glory, and honour, and im∣mortality; eternal life. Of this the Holy Ghost was the Earnest; the Advocate of
Christ Jesus here, as He is ours with the Father; the Witness of his resurrection and glory, the Proof and Demonstration of his Religion; the Comforter of all those that live according to it. It bids them hope that he who hath so advanced humane na∣ture (as was most apparent on this day) in wisdom, power and charity; can and will change us into his glorious image, and make us meet for the inheritance of the Saints in Light. It bids us ask what we will in his name,Joh. 16.23 Rom. 8.32 and it shall be given us: for he that hath given us his Son, and sent his holy Spirit; how shall he not then give us all things? What shall we ask, O my soul? I only bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,Eph. 3.14, 15, &c. of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named, that he would grant me according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthned with might, by his spirit in the inner man; that Christ may dwell in my heart by faith; that I being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and to know the love of Christ which passeth knowledg, that I may be filled with all the fulness of God. Amen.
The Thanksgiving and Prayer afterward. O Lord, the fullest and most boun∣tiful good: who art rich in mer∣cy to all that call upon thee; never weary of our importunities; nor wea∣ry of importuning us to dispose our selves to receive thy blessings.Ecclu. 2. ult. Thy po∣wer is the beginning of righteousness; and is guided by the greatest wisdom, and the greatest love. As is thy Majesty,Wisd. 12.16. so is thy mercy: and because thou art the Lord of all, it maketh thee to be gracious unto all. Thou lovest all things that are,11.24, 25, 26. and abhorrest nothing which thou hast made; for never wouldest thou have made any thing, if thou hadst hated it. And how could any thing have endured, if it had not been thy will? or been preserved, if not called by thee? But thou sparest all: for they are thine, O Lord, thou lover of Souls. It is of thy mere good∣ness that I am not consumed,Lam. 3.22. and because thy compassions fail not. That I have so much
liberty as to recount thy mercies, which keep me in life, and let it not be as wretched and miserable, base and vile, sickly and uneasie, troublesome and te∣dious, as it might have been according to my deservings; is for ever to be re∣membred with most humble thankful∣ness. I cannot forget, unless I cast away all care and consideration of my self, from how many dangers thou hast delivered me, in what extremities thou hast succoured and relieved me, and what friends, lovers and kind ac∣quaintances thou hast bestowed on me. But the greatest of thy mercies are those, which thou hast expressed to us in the Lord Jesus; without which all the rest might have made our life in the next world, to have proved more mi∣serable and intolerable to us. Thou hast sent him in the tenderest and most endearing manner in our own flesh: with the most moving and compassio∣nate entreaties; and the strongest and
most obliging arguments, to surrender our selves to thy obedience, to whom of right we belong. And he hath laid down his life (so great was his love) the just for the unjust,1 Pet. 3.18. that he might bring us to thee our God. And thou hast reward∣ed his obedience to the death, with a glorious Resurrection; and set him at thine own right hand; and given him the promise of the Holy Ghost,Acts 2.33. which he hath shed abundantly on his Apostles to guide them into all truth:Joh. 16.13 that they might go and Teach all Nations, and Baptize them into his Religion:Matth. 28.19, 20. and teach them to ob∣serve all things that he hath commanded. I remember, with most grateful ac∣knowledgments, the manifold gifts which thou bestowedst on thy Church to confirm the faith of Christ, and pro∣pagate it in the world; till it came to these Regions where I live. Blessed be thy goodness, that I was born of Christian Parents; and without my knowledge, very early, by their care,
dedicated unto thee. Blessed be thy goodness, that ever since I have been thy care; and that thou hast brought me up to the knowledge of thy holy Gospel: wherein I read this story of thy marvellous love; and am instruct∣ed in my duty towards thee and to∣wards men; and encouraged by ex∣ceeding great and precious promises; being put in hope of immortal life, the pledges of which thou hast ordered and appointed thy Ministers to provide for me, and give unto me. I have now by thy goodness received them; and tasted that the Lord is gracious, full of compassion, and of great pity: not de∣siring the death of a sinner, but that he should return and live. This raises thy mercy to the greatest height that thou hast done all this, for those who are so dull and insensible; cold and careless; inconstant and uncertain; apt too soon to forget these benefits and great obli∣gations, which thou layest on them.
But thou hast done all this, and conti∣nuest thy kindness to make us better. Which is the thing, O Lord, that I most heartily desire and labour after: and shall ever account it the greatest blessing when I am overcome by thy merciful kindness; and am willing to part with my self and all my own de∣sires, to gain thee and thy love; by being led and ruled in all things ac∣cording to thy will. To that I un∣feignedly again submit my self; and humbly vow all the powers of Soul and Body to thy obedience. I own thy blessed Gospel, for the rule and dire∣ction of my life; and thy Son Christ Jesus, for my pattern and example; and thy good Spirit for my guide and governour: in whose holy comforts I rejoyce, more than in any thing in this world. For ever magnified be thy love, that thou hast exalted one migh∣ty to save: and hast sent him not only with a pardon, but with the power of
the Holy Ghost, to renew, sanctifie and advance our Nature, by changing it into the likeness of thine own. I hope in thee, O Lord, for the conti∣nued influences thereof, to quicken my Faith, and render it more and more ef∣fectual in all the actions of an holy life. That I may have high and adoring thoughts of thee, and humble thoughts of my self: overlook the little things here below, and labour for those above: do good with what I have, and lay up treasures in Heaven: be contented with my portion, and sober and discreet in the use of it: live peace∣ably with all men, but not be partaker in their sins: and that it may alway be part of my employment in this World thus to worship thee, and reflect upon thy goodness; and the rest may be to live according to my prayers and ac∣knowledgments. Amen, and Amen. O that all Nations whom thou hast made
would come and worship before thee,Psal. 86.9, 10. in Spirit and in Truth.Joh. 4.23. O that they would glorifie thy Name; for thou art great and dost wondrous things; thou art God alone. But let all Christians especially,1 Cor. 12.13. who by one Spirit are all baptized into one Body, and have been all made to drink into one Spirit, glorifie the Name of their Lord;Ephes. 4.3. by keeping the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, and agree∣ing together in Godly love. And do thou, O Lord, the God of Peace, direct their hearts into the more excellent way: that though tongues, and prophecies, and miracles are ceased, yet that humble, kind, meek and long-suffer∣ing Charity may remain and abound more and more, which will bring us all to live in endless love and peace, and joy together in the Heavens. The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ,2 Cor. 13. ult. and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost, be with me, and with all my Friends, and all thy Servants every where. Amen.
THus, by the help of God, I have brought this Treatise to a Con∣clusion: which I hope will not be un∣welcome to those that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity.Ephes. 6. ult. And I most humbly beseech the Divine Majesty graciously to accept my weak endeavours therein to serve this Church, and stir up every Member of it with hearty love, to offer up themselves to him in its Publick Ser∣vice. Which so gravely and patheti∣cally expresses the sense of pious hearts at the Holy Communion; that these Private Prayers which I have compo∣sed to wait upon it, can only serve to excite those who will make use of them, to joyn with more fervour in the Com∣mon Devotions: and to continue those holy dispositions which they declare to be in their hearts if they sincerely unite them with these words,In the Prayer af∣ter the Commu∣nion. And here we offer and present unto thee, O Lord, our Selves, our Souls and Bodies, to be a
reasonable, holy, and lively Sacrifice unto thee. Which that we may ever be; we cannot, in a few words, better im∣plore the Divine assistance, than in those of that incomparable Prayer at the end of our Communion-Service. PRevent us, O Lord, in all our doings, with thy most gracious favour; and fur∣ther us with thy continual help, that in all our works begun, continued, and ended in thee, we may glorifie thy holy Name, and finally by thy mercy obtain Everlasting Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. THE END. ERRATA. PAge 53. line 19. read, went away: p. 179. l. 1. r. heart: l. 2. r. mouth: p. 320. l. 27. 1. have received: p. 357 l. 12. r. Lord Jesus: p. 362. l. ult. r. a member: p. 383. l. 10. r. and growth: p. 396. l. 13. r. earnests.
