S2683 11907432 50754
FATAL LOVE: OR, THE Forc`d Inconstancy, A TRAGEDY. Acted at the THEATRE ROYAL. Written by Elkanah Settle, Servant to His MAJESTY. Maxima pars vatum— Decipimur specie Recti.—Hor. LONDON, Printed for William Cademan, at the Sign of the Pope's-Head, in the Lower-Walk of the New-Exchange, in the Strand, 1680.
To his Honoured Friend, Sir Robert Owen. CErtainly, of all Mankind, nothing is so vain as the Scriblers of this Age; for no sooner are they blest with any extraordinary Favour, but they must tell the whole World of it. The Honour of that Friend∣ship You have been Generously pleased to give me, and the Delight of a Conversation so Compleatly Ingenious, affords me no little Occasion for the same Natural Vanity. This is that makes us Publish our Plays, as formerly the Romans Built the Porticoes to their Houses; they always fixt their Lares o're their Threshold.—But at the same time that I boast of the Honour I have received, I ought to blush at the Present I make You, when I treat you with a Play so worthless, and so Unfortunate. Nay, to sum up all its Misfortunes, it does not only owe so little to the Composers Hand; but breath'd too in a Season, when Poetry even with its softest and most Curious Aires, to the Ears of this untunable Age, sounds but harsh and unpleasant: nay, and what's yet worst of all, perform'd by the feeble Fragment of a Company.—'Tis true, the Theatre Royal was once all Harmony; where the Heroick Mu∣ses sung so sweetly, and with Voices so perfectly Musical, as few or no Ears could escape Enchantment. But when this hapless Play came forth, its sweetest Pipes were stopt; and like a shatter'd Organ, it had only left what could do little more than squeak and jar. But, Oh, that their Oracle should be quite silent! Ah, that their Gold∣en Head would speak agen, and bring once more the scatter'd Quire around him! Then Tragedy might re-assume its Majesty, and Passion plead with such aa Emphasis, till the charm'd Spectatour should almost wish to be that Real suffering Hero he admires, and share his very Fate, to move but half his Pity. For my part, wee
I a Poet, nay, a Fletcher, or a Shakespear, I would quit my whole Title to Immortality, so that one Actor might never Die. This I may modestly say of him, (nor is it my own particular Opinion, but the Sense of all Mankind) that the best Tragedies on the English Stage have receiv'd that Lustre from Mr. Hart's Performance, that he has lfft such an Impression behind him, that no less than the Interval of an Age can make them appear agen with half their Ma∣jesty, from any second Hand. And when he leaves the Stage, the Reign of Tragedy Expires; for then it must dwindle from a Mo∣narchy to a Common-wealth. And were it in my Nature to be Envious or Malicious against any Man that writes, it should be a∣gainst their Good Fortune, who writ in the Indian Emperors first Days: And having named that admirable Play, methinks it has made its Appearance since, so far short of its Primitive Excellence, that I fancy it has been sometimes almost as unmercifully used, as their tortured Montezuma by the Barbarous Spaniards. But, Alas, the very best of Plays now find but a cold Reception, in com∣parison of the kinder Entertainment they met, at the King's first Returne. For Players and Plays came then upon the Stage like Co∣lumbus into America, they brought New Faces, and almost a New Language into our World; and what betwixt Novelty and Surprize they won Spectators Hearts so easily (whilst a little Wit in Plays went so far) that like Him they could Traffick even with Beads and Baubles: But Time & Conversation has made the Critical Au∣diences like the Wiser Indians; and he that would please 'em now, must purchase their Applause with Solid and Elaborate Sense, and bring more than Glass to barter for their Gold.—But this Discourse looks so like extenuating my Faults, that 'tis high time to give it or'e: Yet if by any Arguments I can purchase your charitable Opinion I have gaind a Judge to my side; and indeed I have no mean Creder∣tials to confirm me in that Assurance: For, besides the Charm of our ordinary Conversation, you have more particularly favour'd
me with the Perusal of a Poem of your own; without Flattery, not outdone by a Coopers Hill: And what adds to the Merit of it▪ you writ it so Young, that a Judgment so Ripe, at an Age so early▪ is not a little Miraculous. But, Sir, you have all the Reason in the World to be both Poetical and Ingenious, having both Nature and Fortune your Friends; and certainly, there's nothing goes so far to∣wards the compleating a Man of Wit, as Prosperity and Patrimo∣nies. For to say truth, Wit is never truly well scituate, but where a good Estate lies round it. This made the Antient Poets fancy that their very Muses could never be Happy, nor cheerfully Harmonious, till they gave 'em a Pernassus for their Inheritance, whilst their Mounts & Fountains, Groves & Grottoes were all their own. With these Advantages your Fancy soars; nay, it has one Happiness above all this, it needs not look abroad for a Subject: For whilst you de∣rive your Descent in a long unbroken Line, from the Old Active Brit∣tish Princes, within the Circuit of your Ancestries Fame, like him that hunts and hawks in his own Ground, you have an ample Field for Po∣etry even within your Self; and borrow-from your Birth a Theme, of which your own Native untaught Bards, could but rudely sing. But your Hereditary Glory has no occasion to look so far back into the Records of Time: Even the last Age is so full of your Fa∣thers, and your whole Families Active, and no less suffering Loyalty; Loyalty that e'n embalms their Dust, and makes their Memories fra∣grant: That if ever an English Monarch should have a Cause to dispute, a Prerogative to maintain, or an Injury to revenge, (but Heaven forbid, that the Glorious Son of the Unhappy Charles, should ever have his Father's Necessity to use 'em) I could wish him no bolder, nor no Faithfuller Champions, than the Heir of your Families Honour, Courage, and Allegiance. But, Sir, my Business is not to be your Herald nor Historian; but to tell you how much I am▪ SIR, Your most Obedient and most Humble Servant, Elkanah Settle.
PROLOGUE Written by a Friend. AThens and Rome, from whence this Trade was brought, Who best knew how to Value what they Taught, With that true Zeal their Poets did Adore, That scarce their Conquerours themselves had more. And the same Wreath, that did in Peace adorn The Poets Brow, Was by the Victour in his Triumphs worn. Wit then was Sacred, and less Awe was paid To Caesar Living, than to Virgil Dead. But the Degenerate World has chang'd the Scene: Wit ne'r must see those Golden Dayes agen. The Reverend Stage has lost its Native Use, And is become a Bridewel to a Muse: For here She must from testy Critick bear More Lashes, than poor Punck from Beadle there. Censure's your Game, and when you've rowz'd a Play, How loud the numerous Pack of Coxcombs Bay. The grateful Musick ecchoes through the Town; And, open-mouth'd, you run the Poet down. So snarlingly to your Delights you move, That you see Plays e'n just as Cats make Love. Here Three dull Hours i' th' Afternoon you pass, With those crampt Looks, and with that Damn'd Grimace, In so much Pain, so much against your Will, As if your Morning-Bolus grumbled still. The Ladies too, who should Relieve the Stage, Will Damn an Author, as they chide a Page. Severe to Man in all Respects they prove: Are neither satisfied with Wit, nor Love. But think their Drudges in both Labours dull, Unless, like Misers Coffer's, alwayes full. But be ill-natur'd all; Hiss, Rail, Exclaim; Nay, let each Fop against his Conscience Damn: Alas! This will not do. Your Noise and Rage, Does rather Cherish, than Destroy the Stage. Scriblers, in Spight, will still Write on: For know, Poets, like Mushrooms, by your Thunder grow.
EPILOGUE Spoken by Lysandra, in the Habit of a Nun. GAllants, I come to take my last Adieu; Bidding Farewel both to the World, and You▪ A Nunnery!—Oh, tis a Popish Place! Never poor Virgin, sure, had my sad Case. Has not our Author used me very ill? He makes me die a Maid against my Will. And yet the Godly Fool should be forgiv'n: Ala He meant it for the Way to Heav'n. Yet from your Presense, and your Love debar'd, Gallants, indeed, it is a little hard. When first on Cloister-Ground my Feet I set, Never poor Girl was put in such a Sweat. All on a suddain, from his Cell there ran A Hideous, Terrible, Rough-Bearded Man: Cry'd, my Dear Daughter; and then clasp't me fast, Like Hang-man, with a Halter round his Wast. But walking farther on this Sacred Ground, The Shifted Scene more Pleasant grew; I found An Aged, Reverend Matron compast round, With a fair Train of Nymphs: To her, they all Paid Homage, and their Mother-Abbess call. Their Mother! Blessing on your Heart, said I; I never saw so fair a Progeny. But, Are these pretty Ladies all your own? To which she answer'd, in an Angry Tone; Let me no more these Idle Bug-words hear: Fye, foolish Girl, we are all Virgins here! Virgins! Oh, Heav'n! what will become of me? Must I then Live, that dismal Day to see? Be such another stale, old Maid, as she? Well! Had the Virgins of Both Theaters, Begun their early Penance at my Years; What numerous Intrigues had then been Crost? Lord, what a World of keeping Fops we'd lost?
Actors Names. ARtaban, A Prince, first Husband to O∣lizia; supposed Drown'd. Pyrgus, Steward to Artaban. Philander, A Gentleman; by Birth, a Sici∣lian; formerly Contracted to Panthea. Gobrias, Friend and Confident to Artaban. Olizia, A Princess, formerly Wife to Ar∣taban; but now Newly and Privately Married to Philander. Lysandra, Her true Name Panthea; bought from Pyrates, as a Captive, by Pyrgus. Corinna, Confident to Olizia. Seconds, Villains, Messengers, and Atten∣dants, &c. The SCENE, A Nobleman's Palace in the Isle of Cyprus. ERRATA. PAg. 1. line 20. for Sealed, read Seated. p. 3. l. 32. f. lost, r. left. p. 13. l. 17. r. Leprous Arms. p. 17. l. 33. del. that. p. 21. l. 29. r. Secundi. p. 30. l. last, r. bring. p. 39. l. 34. f. Fortunes r. Tortures. p. 40. l. 33. . growing Storm.
Fatal Love: OR, The Forc`d▪ Inconstancy. ACT THE FIRST. Pyrgus and Lysandra. Lys. OH! Stop the Rage of your unjust Desires; And think, what Sparks of Hell attend your Lawless Fires! Pyr. Are you so Coy? Then I must change the Scene, And call my Favours to your lost Remembrance. For, where Good Deeds are ill Rewarded, there 'Tis Justice, not Vain-Glory, to Recite 'em. Did I for this, stretch out my Bounteous Hand, To free you from the Slavery of Pyrates? Nay, bought you under-hand too; when, perhaps, They meant, you should have stalk't the Market-Place, In State and Pomp, with your Price writ on your Fore-Head? Did I (I say) free you from all this Infamy; Here sealed, and protected you? Lys. 'Tis true; You powrd your larger Sums, to free me from One Slavery, but to impose a Greater.
For, if your Words interpret your Black Thoughts, I am your Captive still: And feel the Weight and Misery of Bonds, In that which you style Liberty. Pyr. Then, Chast Diana, take your own Desire, And to your Native dear Digrace return. Your Fortunes, without me, are at their Ebbing; And you may Beg with Vertue: 'Tis within My Power, to make you Rich. The Prince, my Master, Left his Dear Princess on her Nuptial-Day; And, in a Freak of Jealousie, went to Sea: Where, (rest his Soul!) as my Two Years Intelligence Informs me, he has made the Fish a Banquet. His sprightly Lady, for the Disappointment Of a lost Bridegroom, on her Nuptial-Night, Like a sad Pensive Turtle, stole away One Evening; and was never heard of since: No doubt, she has met her Husband's Destiny▪ I dare almost, with Confidence, pronounce My self the Lord of thus Magnificent Pallace; And all this Mass of dazling Wealth, my own: A fairer Pile, all Cyprus does not yield. Be thou then mine: Here thou shalt Reign a Goddess; A Goddess, brighter than our Cyprian-Deity. Why all these unkind Looks? Fye! smile, Lysandra. Nothing but Love should on this Shore be found, Since Loves fair Goddess blest the Hallow'd-Ground. Lys. Heav'ns! What a Villain's this? Cease this bold Language; For, I am Unalterable: Nay, my Guilt's Impardonable even to hold Discourse With such Impiety. Pyr. Then know, vain Girl, The Good from which you flye, I'le force you to. Are you full-gorged, and wanton? I'le lure you, with a Vengeance! Come, be plyant; Or else, behold your Fate. Draws a Dagger. Lys. I would I were so Happy! Kill me, do Enter a Servant, Running. Pyr. Curse on this Interruption! What's your Business? Serv. The Princess is return'd.
Pyr. Hell and Confusion! How that Name distracts me? Lys. This News brings me some Glimpse of Happiness. Enter Corinna. Pyr. Welcom, dear Traveller: Say, kind Corinna; Is our great Princess, the Divine Olizia, Safely return'd? And art thou kindly come, To bring the Blessed News? Cor. Yes, Sir, I am. Pyr. This dazling Bliss, breaks like the Morn upon me: And thou'rt the Star, that ushers-in the Sun. Lys. I'le take this happy Hour, to fly this Monster. Exit. Pyr. Her secret Flight, and her two years Concealment, Made us suspect, that some malicious Planet Had plunged her in her Husbands Fate; and cropt Her blooming Vertues, with her Tyrant's Crimes. We, her poor frighted Slaves, believed her Dead. Cor. No, Sir, she lives; and, as the just Reward Of Vertue, favour'd with the Smiles of Heav'n. Pyr. This Sound has all the Musick of the Sphears: The Groans of Mandrakes! Curse on th' Hellish Note. Aside Cor. Nor is this all the Blessing that I bring ye: She that so long sigh'd for her Injur'd Name, Mourning the Cruelty of her first Lord's Inhumane Jealousy, has bravely changed Her wither'd Willow, for a fresher Myrtle: And chose a worthyer Partner of her Joys. Pyr. Marryed again! Cor. Yes: And this very Night, Must Celebrate her Nuptials. Pyr. I am all Wonder! But, when I seriously reflect; How comes it, That she, who lost her Pallace, with that sense Of her wrong'd Innocence, and blasted Fame, Should quit her Pious Task, and give the World New Cause to blemish her, for this rash Marriage? Cor. I'le tell you, Sir: Not to recount the Penance She suffer'd, for her Jealous Tyrant's Sins;
Nor the too long, sad, miserable Years, We spent in a poor despicable Cottage▪ About Three Months ago, this Gentleman Landing upon our Shoar, (for near the Sea, She kept her Humble Court) as Fate would have him, Made choice of the same Melancholly Walk, To finish an unhappy Life. There meeting The near Resemblance of their Miseries, Toucht her so sensibly, that from Conversing, She grew to Like him; and from that▪ to Love him. The Sadness in his Eyes, was her own Mirror. If Love e're chose Equality, 'twas then. For, on the Sea, the Common-Scene of Fate, She had a Husband, He a Mistriss, lost. And in uniting Two such drooping Hearts, Their gloomy Cupid matcht his pointed Darts. In short, They marryed in a Cell; and come To Consummate their Nuptials in a Pallace. She's here. Enter Olizia, Attended. Pyr. Curse on that Face of Majesty; all my Dreams Aside. Of Greatness, now are shrunk into a Shadow. Madam, This blest Return has brought your poor Despairing Vassals, no indifferent Joys. Oliz. I thank thee, honest Pyrgus: But begon. I have brought Home a Noble Guest. He calls himself, Philander. Shew your Duty, In your Respect: Go, and Attend him hither▪ You'l find him writing a Dispatch to th' Court Of Scicily; t'acquaint his Noble Parents, What Fortune brings him hither. Pyr. I obey you Exit. Oliz. After my Sighs and Tears, and all my Sufferings For my first Cruel Prince, to be thus blest With a much dearer▪ Treasure, the Affection Of my Philander! Heav'ns I thank ye! Thus; Thus ought blest Venus, to be born o'th' Sea.
Tempests, and Darkness, Billows, Shipwracks, (Things By which my first ungrateful Husband perisht) Were but as Foyles, to set out my Delights; Placed just before my Joys, as Monsters are Before the Gates of Pallaces. Enter Lysandra. But take heed, lest my Transports speak too loud. What fair Intruder's this? Lys. Madam, forgive A persecuted, wretched Maid, who throws Her self for Refuge, at your sacred Feet. Oliz. Can any thing, with such a Form, be wretched? But say, sweet Innocence, What are those Ills, Which you can Fear, and I Redress? Lys. I doubt, My Story will disturb your happier Thoughts. Oliz. No, pretty Supplyant: Boldly, and freely speak; I take delight, To listen to the Accents of th' Afflicted. Say then, What unkind Stars Could frown on so much Sweetness? Lys. Th' unkind Stars, That frown on Love. Since then your Princely Ear Vouchsafes to hear me; know, my Name's Lysandra; My Country, Sicily; my Parents Noble, And Wealthy too. I was born Free; tho not To be so: For not yielding to their Wise, Grave Councel, to be Sacrificed in th'Arms Of a Rich, Nauseous Miser, for the sake Of th'only dearest Lord of all my Vows; I left my Parents, follow'd him to Sea: And, trusting to the wavering Tide o'th'Sea And Fortune, (being embark't in different Vessels, T'avoyd Suspicion and Pursuit) our more Unhappy Ship was made a Prize to Pyrates, And wretched I, their Merchandize. From whom I was Redeem'd by Pyrgus.
Oliz. My Steward! Lys. Yes; but to a greater Bondage: To Prostitute my self t'his foul Desires. For had your blest Return not Rescued me, My ravish't Honor had been made his Prey: Nor has the Horror of it left me yet. Oliz. Enough, fair Sufferer; thou'rt for ever Rescued From Him, and Slavery. Lys. Madam, I owe you More than the Ransome of my Life; so much The Safety of my Honour is above it. Oliz. Once more enjoy your Freedom: If you deem it Freedom to live with me, I shall desire No other Evidence, than your own Complaint, To prove him Guilty; and I'le punish him. In the mean-time, my House shall be your Refuge. Retire; whil'st I consult your Good in Private. Exit Lysand. Enter Philander, Introduced by Pyrgus, and other At∣tendants. Welcom, my dearest Lord; I cannot shew you Any new Favours: After I have given My Self, the small Addition of my Fortunes, Are but a Tribute. Phil. This surprizing Goodness▪ O're-pow'rs my Soul with Wonder and Delight! This high and splendid Pile, a Roof more fit For the Reception of an Eastern Monarch. And the kind Influence of this smiling Star, That lights the Gilded Battlements: Such Love, Wealth, Beauty, are too great for Mortal Blessings. Oliz. Oh, do not wonder at this little Offering! Were my Wealth greater, were the World my own, My Heart and Treasures ought to go together. Phil. This Bliss is much too mighty for my Humble Fortunes: And I can never merit half this Glory. Oliz. Come, Sir, walk-in; the Genius of this Pallace Waits with Impatience, to Salute its Lord.
Phil. I follow you▪ dear Madam: But implore Your Leave, for one short Minutes stay; to lose My dead Panthea's Memory. And since She sleeping lyes in a cold Bed of Waves, That she may never float within my Thoughts, But be drown'd there too, give me leave to Bury her In one last Tear: And when I have paid that short Just Funeral-Rite—— Oliz. Oh my unkind Philander! Does that usurping Shadow haunt you still? Phil. My dearest Princess, thou art so Divine, No mean Perfections should obtain thy Smiles. Alas! I'de only drive the weak Remains Of her Faint Image from my Breast, to make it Worthy t'entertain thy Brighter Excellence. And when I have purged my Drossie Part away, Then I will come all Kindness; lose my self In all the Extasies of mighty Love's Unbounded Pleasures, uncontroul'd Desires; And make Love's Altars shine with pure Immortal Fires. Exit. Oliz. Was ever Fate like mine? Cor. No, surely Madam. To have a Princess of your Birth and Beauty, Descend in Glory, like a Goddess, on him: And have so much Divinity repay'd With such a cold Ingratitude, is hard. Oliz. Alas, Ingratitude's all the Return My Kindness meets. My first ungrateful Lord, Out of a wild and groundless Jealousie, Deserted me upon my Nuptial-Day: And I, like a fond Woman, and true Wife, Mourn'd for his Absence, invoked the Gods For his Return to Love, and Me. And when, Abandoning my Pomp, and all my Greatness, My sad dejected Mind chose a poor Cell, To fit my Humble State: Where, when I had heard, An angry Tpest had revenged my Wrongs, And punisht his Unkindness with his Fate, I met this dearer Idol of my Eyes.
And my first Husband's setting▪Light gone out, Philander's clearer Brightness fill'd my Soul. But, to compleat my Misery, my own Inviting Eyes betray'd an easy Conquest. Cor. And, Madam, Could your Kindness be your Crime? No; for that signal Grace, he ought to think, His Life's too mean an Offering. Oliz. But he Thinks the Oblation of a Smile too much After my little Beauty had subdued That Superstitious fond Idolatry, Which two long Years, h'had paid to a Dead Mistriss; After the Sacred Hymeneal Bond Had joyn'd our seeming mutual Loves; then straight Her Image made a second Resurrection: Struck with a sudden Horror, a pale Trembling Seiz'd him all o're To such an Ebb of Coldness, His Heart relapsed; that even her very Name Had greater Influence, than my slighted Beauty. Goddess of Love, compose his Troubled Mind. Whil'st all my Kindness does neglected lye, Shadows, and Ghosts, have greater Charms than I. Exeunt. Enter Philander. Phil. Immortal Pow'rs, You that enjoyn Mankind Such Strictness, teach him to observe it too. If Constancy best please your Deities, Why did you suffer me to violate Vows, that were scarce less Sacred, than your selves? Why did you suffer me, to gaze on Fair Olizia? But—— If looser Fires burn brighter in your Sight, VVhy do I then extinguish 'em? VVhy don't ye Permit me, to embrace this Lady? Dally In her soft Arms, and revel in her Treasures; And quite forget the Name of my Panthea?
Enter to him a Messenger. Mess. Sir, Let me beg your Pardon, if my Business Make me unwelcom: But t'excuse my Boldness, My Warrant's sealed by a Commanding Hand. Gives Phil. a Letter. Phil. From whom? Mess. Panthea. Phil. Panthea! Mess. So she calls her self. Phil. 'Tis▪ False. Mess. Read, and be undeceived. Phil. Panthea! It is impossible. Had I not been more than a half Spectator Of her untimely Death, thou might'st deceive me. But yet these Characters are sure the Traces Of my Pantheas Pen. Your Pardon—leave me. Exit Mess. Philander Reads. JOy to your Nuptials, and your prosperity in the Princess Olizia. Now I thank the milder Tempests, since my Misfortunes have thus made way to your deserved Greatness. I only request this in Recompence for my Two Years Sufferings, that as I was Redeem'd from Pyrates by Olizias Steward, and now am her Captive, you would procure me free Passage into my Country; where I will So∣lemnize your Marriage with perpetual Virginity, and live a Stran∣ger in my Fathers Family, as I now make my self a double One, whil'st I stile my Name Lysandra to the World; but remain to you, and my unhappy self, Panthea. Panthea living! Is it not a Sound Would rowze a sleeping Lover from his Grave? But, Oh she lives to see Philander Perjur'd! Lives to upbraid me of the basest Treason, The blackest Infidel could e're commit! Did I upon my Knees, at her dear Feet,
Give up my Heart, and my vow'd Soul resigne? And call to witness that Bright Lamp of Heav'n, T'attest my Vows: Vows of that Sacred Force, that ought to be No less Unchangeable, no less Immortal, Than that Bright Sun, which I invoked to hear'm: Vows of that Force, that Death should ne're dissolve. How dare such Treachery as mine see Light? Shrowd me, some God, in Everlasting Night. Exit. The SCENE, a Bridal-Chamber. Olizia appears Seated within the Scenes, and Corina standing by her. Enter Philander, introduced by Pyrgus. Phil. Where do you lead me? Why this State for me? Pyr. 'Tis such as does become your Bridal-Chamber. Exit. Phil. My Bridal-Chamber! Is this a Place for me? Can I perform the Rites of a young Bridegroom, Melt in the Embraces of a yielding Beauty, Whil'st the Remembrance of my Broken Vows, And the cold Thought of my despised Panthea Turns all my freezing Blood to Veins of Ice? And yet, How can I make a base Return T'Olizias Love, her kind and generous Love? She, who t'a Stranger, both my Birth and Fortunes Unknown, gave me her Heart, her Self, and makes me Lord Of Treasures, that would tempt a Gynick from his Cell. And, Shall I pay Ingratitude for Love? And when she meets me with her dazling Brightness, To yield the Pleasures of a Nuptial-Bed; Shall I disdainfully tell her, She invites me To a poor Treat, that is not worth Acceptance? An Insolence can do no less than Damn me. Did I for this betray her to a Marriage? Guide me, ye Gods, in this unhappy Labryrinth. Oliz. Dearest Philander! Rising up; & Advancing to him.
——Ha! How does my Lord? Methinks, you are not well; your Looks are alter'd; A sullen Paleness hangs upon your Cheek, As if your kind Olizia did not please you. Phil. Fairest Olizia! true, I am not well. The Thought of my lost Love.—— Oliz. Unkind Philander! Is this the Musick of our Bridal-Night? Phil. Oh, that I durst but tell her, that she Lives! But that would be a too Tyrannick Cruelty. Aside. Oliz. Are these your Vows? Is this the Love you promist? But my Philander, I can still forgive you: And you'll deserve your Pardon; will you not? What cannot be recall'd, should be forgotten. Can Sighs or Tears, or all your Cruelty To me, restore her Life? Phil. Indeed, I do not merit half this Sweetness: But I will study to repay your Kindness. Panthea, now I do remember Thee, And curse the Fate, that could have Pow'r to part us: But must thy Resurrection make me Cruel, Ungrateful to such Glorious Excellence? Aside. Must I, like an Apostate, break my Faith, Rend up the Nuptial-Seals of my sworn Heart, And make my Soul all one perfidious Blot. Oliz. to Corin. Observe that gloomy Brow; I fear in all That clouded Heav'n, there's no kind Star for me. Phil. Had some propitious God, with the least Beam of Heav'n, In a kind Dream, but visited my Soul Before this Marriage-Knot was tyed, and told me, Panthea lived, I would have left the Altar, With-drawn my guilty Hand, and with disdain Aside. Shrunk from th'embrace of the World, greatest Empress, To have been just to thee: But now my Heart Is sealed and gone, and thou revivest too late. Nor is my Crime my Treason, but my Fate. Madam, forgive a fearful trembling Lover, Whose awful Feet approach his Heav'n so slowly. True Piety fears where it does adore.
In these kind Arms, and on this rising Breast, Kissing—and Embracing. The Touch of this dear Hand, and this soft▪ Bosom, Would tempt an Angel; and can Flesh and Blood Resist th'impetuous Joy? My dearest Life, Light of my World, and Treasure of my Soul, Am I the cruel, false, unkind Philander? Oliz. No, my best Life, thou art not; now thou'rt kind. The Raptures of this one▪dear happy Minute, Would sweeten a whole Life. Farewel my Pains: Nothing but Joy can come within this Circle. Corinna, bid Lysandra bring the Banquet She has prepared. Phil. Lysandra! Aside. Oliz. The mighty Cleopatra, In all her Riots, all her haughty Love, Could never Treat her Lord, with half my Pride, Nor half my Kindness. Phil. Stay, Corinna, stay. Must my Panthea then be a Spectator, And introduce me to her Rivals Arms? Aside. Can I out-live that Thought? Oliz. What means my Lord? Phil. Must she stand by, and with accusing Eyes, See my false Hand the Bridal-Nectar hold, See my false Lips salute the Lifted-Gold? Whil'st my warm Cheeks with flushing Pleasures glow, And warmer Veins with pamper'd Fierceness flow Aside. Then see her Traytor in his Nuptial-Bed, On Perfumed Down, and spreading Odours laid, Whil'st her sad Heart, with her brim-swelling Eyes, Cryes, False Philander!—and then breaks, and dyes. Oliz. Will you relapse agen, and are you going To be the cruel and unkind Philander? Did you but fhew me Heav'n, to take it from me? Phil. Defend me▪ ye Bright Guards of Heav'n: Methinks, I see Panthea all in Tears, and pale▪ As Death, opening her perjur'd Murderers Curtains. So Chastly Caesar look't, so Brutus trembled.
Oliz. Why this Despair, dear Sir? Those Sufferings Will dye, when you are kind: Indeed, they will. My gentle Looks shall soften all your Fury. I'le love you into Peace, as the kind Sun Dispels the Clouds, till the rough Tempest dyes. Phil. No, Angel-form, thou art too Bright for me: Thou art all Innocence, a pure Idea, Too Good to mix with foul and drossie Mortals: I am all Monster, Savage, alI that's ill. My Heart's all canker'd, my corrupted Veins Are only fill'd with circulating Poysons. In my Blaek Soul, Ten thousand Furies dwell, Whole Mines of Sulphur, and whole Lakes of Hell. Oliz. Oh drive these Visionary Horrors hence! Dear Sir, do not indulge this unkind Frenzy. Phil. No, Madam; from these precious Sweets I'le flye; Take hence this Fiend, take hence these Leprous Stems; My blasting Eyes, and my invenom'd Breath. Thou art too Excellent, too Divinely Fair, To live within my Pestilential Air. Exit. Oliz. Were ever Nuptials, angry Pow'rs, like mine? The rest Of my more prosperous Sex, compared with me, Are Goddesses, in glittering Chariots ride, And make their Lovers Vassals to their Pride: But I (poor I) Court mine, and am deny'd. Exeunt▪ Finis Actus Primi.
ACT THE SECOND. Enter Artaban Disguised, Attended by his Confident Gobrias. Art. OH; Gobrias! How I loath those hated Walls? Under that Roof, that splendid Pile, is lodged The greatest Fiend, that ever was ordein'd: Heav'ns Instrument of Vengeance, that e're took Commission from the Gods, and Pay from Hell. Olizia! Damn'd Impostor! Gobr. 'Tis very strange, my Lord, that two years Travail. With all the Pleasures of the ransack't VVorld, Cannot remove that Woman from your Mind. Art. Ah, Gobrias! when I first beheld that Beauty By the false Opticks of my wounded Eyes, I saw such infinite, united VVonders, I thought the Magazin of the Blind God, His Darts, his Quivers, all his Arms were there. At last, I marryed her; and thought my self Possessor of a Jewel, much more worth Than all the Treasures of the East. But Oh! My Diamond proved but Glass, false brittle Glass. Oh, she had lost her Honor! She that look'd All Health without, within was all Contagion. Gob. My Lord, might I advise you, you should scorn her: Leave her, and her detested Crimes to Fate. Search Nature's store, and find some worthier Choice, T'adorn your Nuptial-Bed. Get a Divorce, And marry once agen: Some brighter Beauty Would soon dispel her faint and sullyed Image. Art. No, Gobrias; for her sake, I loath the Sex. They are all treacherous Joys. Even when they melt In our Embraces, we but bath in Poysons. Gob. Alas, Sir! those are but the monstrous Forms, Which the false Light of your wild Thoughts presents you.
Come, Sir, let some more charming Face convert you. You cannot guess, the Charms attend on Marriage: Where Love and Virtue make the Bridal-Musick. Art. Could I embrace thy Councel, I were happy. But know, I loved; and dyed for that fair Devil; And my wrong'd Love is turn'd t'invetrate Hate; VVhil'st from that Soursce, Eternal Vengeance flows. Gob. If then you are resolved to be your own, And her Tormentor, VVhy in this Disguise? Art. O yes! The Mine is not yet strong enough, to blow up. This Trayt'ress, by returning thus unknown, And in Disguise, perhaps I may surprize her, Dallying i'th' Arms of a strong-sinew'd Favourite; Or revelling amongst a Herd of Satyres; Whil'st some fair Cupid, with his wanton Ayres, Stretches her slack'ning Veins, and tunes her Blood Up to a Pitch so high, fit for th'Embrace Of his own Mothers fierce, hot, War-like God. Oh, had I Rage enough, to tear her Heart out, And make the Blood of this false Scorpion cure me. Enter, walking at Distance, Corinna. Cor. Oh, thou unhappy Princess, that such Love, And so much Beauty, should deserve no more. This dull Philander, blind to his own Glory, Flyes from those very Arms—— Art. Corinna here! Her Cozen, and her Confident! Madam—— Cor. A Stranger here at this dark Hour! Offers to go. Art. Corinna stay; 'tis Artaban that calls thee. Cor. Prince Artaban! Ye Gods, is he alive! Poor Princess, now thou art compleatly wretched. Aside. What Ruins does this rising-Planet threaten? Are all the Stories of your Watry-Grave False as the Oceans Smiles, in which Fame told us— Art. Yes, they are all false, false as the Oaths of Women. Cor. How Sir?
Art. False as that Trayt'ress, that I left behind me. Dangers I met, and Shipwrack I have suffer'd; And after two years Travail, am return'd, To tell you that I Live But, Cozen, say: How fares our lusty Widow? Cor. Cruel Prince! Art. I mean our young brisk Wife, the Fair Olizia. Cor. Undone by her, unkind ungrateful Lord! Art. Poor Lady! Cor. How could you be so barbarously Jealous? Did she deserve it from you? Art. No, not she. 'Tis true, I had the Satisfaction on My Nuptial Day, to know the great Lord Lysias Had tasted her dear easy Sweets before me. But why should I be Jealous? Alas! kind Man, He had only eased me of my first Nights Trouble, And laid a good Foundation for a Bridegroom. Cor. Fye, Sir!—But what black Monster told you this. Art. Only the dearest Friend I have on Earth? Cor. His Name? Art. Araxes; that brave Gallant Man: He that would run thro all the angry Elements, And meet even Death in any shape, to serve me. This kind Araxes, being return'd from Travail, And hearing that the King design'd to give me Olizia, flew with all the VVings of Friendship, To quench the threatning Fire; but came too late: The fatal Knot was tyed. Then in my Ears, He breath'd a Story of that dreadful Accent: Told me, I had took that Viper to my Bosom.— Cor. Hold your Cariere—Pray, how came this Araxes So wise, so knowing? VVhence had he this wondrous Intelligence of all her private Sins? Art. From her own Bawd, Lord Lysias Confident. He could have told me all their stoln Amours, And Assignations for three Years together, Had he suspected when he left this Kingdom, Her VVitchcrafts would have led my Soul astray.
Cor. And all this you believed. Now hear your Folly: Suppose that Treacherous Lord design'd t'abuse you, What fitter Instrument than this Araxes? Who makes so sure a Traytor, as a Friend? Art. The brave Araxes scorn'd it. Cor. Why? His Fortunes Were not so large, but that the great Lord Lysias Had Treasures, Favors, Honors to bestow, Such as might dazle a much surer Friend. Were you not sensible, that Lord had Courted her For many Years; and when he saw her Beauty Design'd your Prize, no doubt his slighted Passion Converted to Revenge, and to strike home, And blast your whole Lifes Peace, he chose your Confident, Your own best Friend, t'administer the Poyson. Art. I thank you for your galless, soft Morality: But I have, at present, no such Gentle Thoughts About me, to be preach'd into a Convert. Cor. Had I been you, I would have search'd the World, T'have found that Impious Lord; and when I had fixt His perjur'd Soul low as that Hell that had Inspired it, I'de have brought his Canker'd Heart And laid it at her Feet; and then received Her spotless Honor in my longing Bosom: Prized her above my Life, loved her next Heaven; Not left her so inhumanly as you did. Art. Yes, Madam, had we liv'd i'th' Golden-Age, When Milk and Herbs were th' only Riotous food, Then Women were not pampered into Lust, Then Mans more temperate blood had less gall in't; And then your Morals, might be practicable. Cor. Was ever such a Cruel Temper heard! But, she has rewarded that your Barbarity, And fixt that Mirtle Wreath, which your unkindness Had forfeited, on a deserving Brow. Art. How, Cozen? Cor. She has taken the advantage Of that false Fame, that told us you were dead. Art. Married agen!
Cor. Indeed, 'twas much unlucky; But 'tis no more than you deserved. Art. How, Married! Confusion on her hot, rank, burning Blood! Death! Married! Now did I not tell thee, Gobrias? What precious Saints are Women? Cursed Women! Married agen! Damn her! Cor. What have I done! Aside. Consider, 'twas your Fault: Do not blame her. You left her basely, left her all in Tears: And as a just Reward for your Unkindness, We had been long confirm'd, that you were lost, And Dead. Art. And she like a sad Widow, drank My Funeral-Wine on her new Wedding night. Confound the Syren! Cor. Oh, forbear this Fury! Consider, 'twas a Sin of Ignorance. Nor is her Error any lawless Love: Her Love, at worst, has only Marryed; and You know, that Marriages are writ in Heaven. Art. Yes, they're writ there; & so are Wars, Plagues, Famines; So all the Engines of the Sky, th'Events Of Thunders, Comets, Earthquakes, Deluges, Design'd from the Foundation of the World, To ruin Mankind, are all writ in Heav'n. Cor. Oh my rash foolish Tongue! Art. Marryed! Accursed Woman! By this Hand, The Sex is all Perdition, wild as Storms, And Ravenous as the Grave; Their Breath is Wild-Fire, Their Eyes are Meteors, and their Arms are Quick-Sands: And whil'st those lead the wandring Fool astray, 'Tis these devour him. Is there a Destroyer, Like Impudent, Inconstant, Perjur'd, Infamous, Infernal VVoman. VVoman damn'd the VVorld, Her Treason drown'd it, and her Lust will burn it! When Nature shall all blaze, and the Poles crack, Hell gape, and all its Sulphurous Mines burst out, Tis only Woman that must light the Fire-brands.
Cor. Oh horror! what a Tempest have I rais'd? Dear Sir, no more; cease this mad Rage. Art. I've done—— Oh thou hot-Blooded, and insatiate VVitch! By Heav'ns, I question if a VVomans Lust E're dyes; but only when her putrid Carkass, As rotten as her Soul, is housed in Earth, The Brutal-Monster makes a Resurrection, And turns a Succubus, to play her Game out. Cor. Barbarian! Why this Storm against poor Women? Art. I'll tell you the Design of their Creation: When the Apostate-Angels ward with Heav'n, And all their Pride and Impudence was grown Too fierce for Chains to bind, or Hell to tame; Heav'n in meer Policy, Invented Woman-kind to match the Devil. Marryed again! Perdition seize her Soul! How she distracts me! Cor. Why this Furious Raving! Art. I Rave! You wrong me; by this Light, not I A Phlegmatick Philosopher in's Tub, VVould preach as much as this is.—But, dear Cozen, For once I will be calm, and reason with you. After I went away, How long was she In choosing this New Mate, to fill my Place? Cor. VVhen you had deserted her, she offered all Her Prayers for your Return; courted the Sea, To bring you back agen: was that true Mourner— Art. Was that true Witch, that rais'd the wind that sunk me? Cor. Inhumane!— Offers to go. Art. I have done: Go on, dear Cozen. Cor. And for that impious Lord, that had abused her, A hundred times upon her Knees, I've heard her Call Heav'n, t'attest her Innocence. Art. No doubt on't. That's th'only use that Women make of Heav'n, To be Fore-sworn by't. Cor. Barbarous Man, farewel! This Blasphemy's too horrid. Offers to go.
Art. Stay, Corrinna: I'le be all Gentleness; not speak one word, That shall offend you. Cor. Learn then t'have a sense Of her wrong'd Vertue, and your groundless Rage. When you'd forsaken her, her Greatness seem'd (Without her dearest Lord to share it with her) A Burden, not an Ornament of Life: Then leaving all her Treasures, all her State Abjured, like a poor Pilgrim, she deserted Her hated Pallace: And in that Retirement, When she had long heard your Death, and truly paid you For two long Years, a pious Widows Sighs. At last, this Gentleman—— Art. Revived her Spirits. And, Did she hold Two Years, full two whole Years, Before she Marryed him? In that long time, How many Grooms and Pages had she tired? Cor. Go, bruitish Infidel, thou deservest thy Fate. But what have I pull'd down? Methinks, I see In his wild Looks Revenge, like Trains of Ruine, Against the poor Olizias Life prepar'd: Let me who caused her Danger, be her Guard. Exit. Art. Oh, Gobrias! What has my Frenzy done? This subtle Devil will out-wit me: Alarm Th'Adulterors, and put 'em on their Guard. But fly, take the Advantage of the Night: O're-take her, Seize her, Bind her, Gag her; any thing, So you but keep that noisy Engine silent. Exit Gobrias, run∣ning after Corinna. Enter Pyrgus. Who have we here? some kind Night-walking Pander? Pyrgus! Pyr. Prince Artaban! Art. Thou art surprized, To see thy Lord alive. Pyr. I'm all Amazement! My wondring Senses——
Art. Come, suppress thy Wonder! Thou hast stranger Prodigies t'admire at Home. Pyrgus, I left thee Honest, Brave, and Faithful. Pyr. And, Sir, I'm no ill Steward of that Honesty You left with me; I have improved, not lessen'd it. Art. I thank thee, Pyrgus. I have a Business for thee, Which if thou darest perform— Pyr. Which if I dare not, Curse both my Cowardize, and my Ingratitude: Speak your Commands, and use my Life to serve you: I ow't you, as the Author of my Fortunes. Art. Kind Pyrgus: Know then, I've deceived the World, And by the help of a Disguise, return'd Safe, and unknow to any but thy self, My faithful Gobrias, and the false Corinna: But I have spoyl'd her Rhetorick, for some Few Minutes. Having stopt her Ravens-Croak, I must obtain thy Art and Int'rest, To introduce me safe, and privately, Into your Ladies Bed-Chamber. Pyr. I'le do't. Art. Do, and I'le make thee happy; do, and make me Thy Vassal. To behold 'em Kissing, Courting, Embracing; Oh, How that dear Scene transports me? Now Sorceress, I'le countermine your Charms; And whil'st she fryes in her warm Satyres Arms, I'le make her Veins with a new Poyson swell, And put her in a Sweat more hot than Hell. Exeunt. Finis Actus Secundus.
ACT THE THIRD. Philander and Olizia in a Bed-Chamber. Oliz. HAve I not yet deserved your Heart, unkind Philander? I have a mighty Sum to reckon with you. Phil. And 'tis a Debt I am too poor to pay. Let me but count it up; then blush, and Dye. The Trojan Youth, whose dazled Eyes survey'd Three tempting Courting Goddesses at once, Did not behold thy Worth. The fair Olizia, Has in her all their Deities: Their Charms, Beauty, Wit, Glory, are united here. Oliz. Oh Sir, lay by this airy, flattering Style! Yet you speak kindly, and there is some Bliss In a kind word, to her that has no more. Phil. Mirror of Goodness! Thou art all Divine: And he that should embrace such infinite Charms, Ought to be Lord of all th'united Graces, That Lover e're possest. Greatness should wait Upon his Birth, and Honor on his Sword: And to Crown all, his undivided Soul Should be entirely thine: whil'st no less Lights Should shine before thy Sun. But I, poor I, Unworthy, far unworthy, want all these. And for thy Wrongs, and my Ingratitude, When my just Grief has bow'd me to the Dust, And the kind Grave has purged my Dross away; Thy Love I only can in Heav'n repay. Oliz. Can't you be Just, unless you Dye? Nor must You love me, 'till we meet among the Stars? 'Tis very hard: Yet 'tis some Joy to think, I shall find Love in Heav'n; For I've but little here.
Phil. Oh, matchles Sweetness!—And thou cruel Heart, Since my Pantheas Pow'r has harden'd thee To that Inflexible and stubborn Marble, Aside. Too stiff to kneel to this Celestial Creature; Own, own the Cause of thy Impiety: Cheat her no more; but say, Panthea Lives. Dear Madam, I've a sad Truth to tell you. Oliz. And is it sad, dear Sir? Out with it then. For since th'unkind Philander will not love me, All that is Sad, all that is Miserable, Should center here. Phil. More weight to my Confusion! Yet I must speak.—— Oliz. What would you say? Phil. Dear Madam,— Suppose that— Oliz. What? That you have got some other Dear Ghost, besides Pantheas?—Alas, You need no more; her Pow'r alone's too Great. And whil'st For her cold Shade, you from my Arms retire, Her Ashes have more Lustre, than my Fire. Phil. Now you present my Guilt in all its Horrors. But Madam, whil'st I gaze on this bright Glory, And stand like a Damn'd Soul, that's placed within The Sight of Paradise, and must not enter, Impute it to a strange commanding Cause: Imagine, that the lost Panthea lives. Oliz. Panthea lives! Then Gods shut in your Day; Light, and the World, and all your Joyes farewel. There wanted but this Stroke: This dreadful Word Has all the wounds Despair and Death can give. Swoons away. Phil. What have I done! The killing Sound has closed Her fainting Eyes: her Rosy Sweet's shut up, Like a be-nighted Flow'r. She's gone! She's gone! My dearest, sweetest, kindest Life return: Return, and keep thy mourning Slave alive. Revive, look up, open those orient Lights, And take my Sighs, my Soul into thy Eyes.
Oliz. Why do you wake me? Now Panthea lives, You should be kind, and give me Leave to dye. Let my Heart break; do, let it break: Since she Fills all your Soul, there is no Room for me. Swoons agen. Phil. She's gone agen! Return, dear Saint, return. Look up, and live: It is not I alone, That call thee back; the Gods themselves invite thee. Oliz. Why do you raise me from Death's gentle Sleep, And force a poor lost wretched thing to live? You ne're were truly Cruel, till this Hour. Oh, let me dye! I dye to make you Happy. Then your Panthea may possess you all. Go to her Sir, and tell her when I'm Dead, And laid aside forgotten in the Dust, Shee needs not fear a Rival. Then she may safely please her Loved Philander, Meet your kind Looks, and fill those dear, dear Arms: And like a Star all Glorious, all Divine, Rise in that Heav'n, where I must never shine. Phil. Talk not of Death; Live to inrich the Universe: Live to bless me. Alas! I only said She Lived, to try your Courage. Oliz. Was that all? Phil. Ah that my Pity should make me a Traytor! But, Is it Treason to preserve a Life So Precious? No, she cannot, must not dye, If Love can save her. Oliz. But Sir, Are you sure Panthea does not Live? Phil. Name her no more. All that is Excellent, all that's Divine, Lives in thy Arms: Fixt in that glorious Sphear, Let me look down on poor and abject Mortals. Oliz. My kind dear Lord; What a bright Change is here! Did you then only fright my Soul away, To call it back again with such blest Musick? Phil. Dear Divinity! Shall I like an unsatisfyed dull Fool, Be willful blind to such Tryumphant Bliss?
Or like young Alexander's mad Ambition, Idly and wildly rave for other VVorlds, VVhen I have all, all Natures VVealth in Thee? No my best Life. Embracing her. Enter Artaban and Pyrgus. Pyr. Stand there: Your Slaves are ready. Exit. Art. Patience, ye Gods! Hold, hold my boyling Blood. Oh! 'twere a rare and excellent Revenge, To joyn their Hearts on my Swords Point, as close As their Engendring Lips. Oliz. VVhat Man art thou? Art. One that comes hither to behold a Sight, VVould damn a Saint, and blast a Basilisk: To see two brooding Vipers mix their Poysons, And a lascivious, lewd, Adult'ress burn VVith Lust far more tempestuous, Flames far hotter, Than that great Day, when the Young Charioteer Misled the Sun, and set the World on Fire. Look here, Have you forgot this Face? Undisguises Oliz. Confusion! Oh, dreadful! Is Artaban Alive? Phil. Ha! is he Risen from a Grave? Oliz. Who waits there? Art. Stir not a Foot; and stop your idle Clamors, Lest my winged Fury launch your bloated Soul Into those Lakes of Everlasting Brimstone, And antedate your just, your just Damnation. Oliz. To see you Live, is no small wonder! But As you deserted me a True Barbarian, I have no hopes you are return'd a Convert. It is not VVinds or Seas, or Change of Air, Can tame a Savage, or can calm a Tyger. Go on then, Sir; VVhat Death is't I must dye? Art. Dye! By this Light, a Question worth disputing And it would puzle an Ingenious Artist, T'invent a way to kill thee; For by Fire Or VVater, 'tis impossible to do't.
Betwixt thy Falshood, and thy flowing Lust, Thou art too Rank to Burn, too Light to Drown: Nay, should I bury the Incarnate Monster, Like the slain Gyants, under Piles of Mountains, Thy Lust (like Etnas Flames) would burst 'em thro. Phil. If thou art he, who in a blinded Fury Could leave this dear inestimable Treasure, And basely durst suspect her spotless Honor, Whose unexampled Virtue is alone, Enough t'atone for all her Sexes Frailty: Take heed how you provoke the Gods, by hurting This brightest, nearest Image of themselves. Art. Young angry Sir, spend not your Breath in vain; Keep it to curse the Hour thou saw'st that Face: I have a Scourge for thee, and this brisk VVanton, Fierce as the Vengeance of a God, And swifter than a Pestilence. Come in there My Imps of Fury, enter. Enter Six Villains, who seize Philander and Olizia. Oliz. Cruel Monster, what are these? Art. The Light'ning to my Thunder. Phil. Cursed Fate! Surpriz'd, unarm'd, and made so tame a Sacrifice! Art. Prepare to Execute what I commanded you. Phil. Inhuman Savage, What's thy black Design? Art. T'oblige Mankind, and purge th'Infected Air: For whil'st that Monster breaths, she can't breed less than Plagues. Phil. Oh bloody Tyrant, aim your Rage at me! Send me to Ruin, kill me, burn me, drown me: Do any thing, so you but save her Life! Think when you murder that Celestial Form, You wound all Mankind at the dismal Blow: Not only all the Mourning Globe, the Gods Themselves will suffer, when such Virtue bleeds. Art. Oh Amorous Raptures! Oliz. Do not touch one Hair Of that dear Gallant, God-like Man: On mine, My Head alone, pour all your Impious Vengeance. Live, my kind dearest Lord.
Art. Rare Impudence! Exquisite Friend: Yes, I'le obey thee; And thy kind dearest Lord shall see thee dye. But ere thou goest, call all thy Friends below; (For thou'rt too wicked, to have any yonder) Command your black Infernal Vassals; bid 'em Prepare to entertain the greatest Guest, That ever lodged within their burning Walls. Bid Lucifer resigne his Throne, and say, I've sent him The only Head fit to be Crown'd in Hell. Oh, that I could but make thee an Age in Dying! And, Oh that thine were like Prometheus Heart, And I th'Immortal Vulture to torment it! Oliz. How I disdain thy Rage! Do, shew thy Sting. Kill me as Barbarously, as thou art base. But when I dye, I'le send my last kind Looks, Sighs, Pray'rs, and Life, into Philander's Eyes. Nay, tho you scatter all my sprinkled Ashes Around the World, each Atom of my Dust Shall find a Soul, and flye into his Bosom. Phil. Oh mighty Love! Oliz. If I can't live to love him, I'le soar above, and shine from Heav'n upon him. And Tyrant, If thy Rage won't let me mount To th'Sky an entire Star, tear me to pieces, And rend my mangled Limbs into a Comet: Then know, when from my Glorious Constellation I shall look down into that dark Abbyss, Where thou makest Fuel for Eternal Fire, I'le scorn thee then, as I defye thee now. Art. Hold Heart! Away, and house her in a Dungeon. Phil. Touch her no more, than you would tread on Lightning. Art. Spare her no more, than you would save a Crocadile. Phil. Have you no Pity? Art. Dogs! Have you no Ears? Away with her. Phil. Hold Hell-Hounds! Art. Go, or you're Dead! Phil. Stay, or you're Damn'd!
Art. Begone. Phil. Dear Angels!— Art. Dear Damnation!— Phil. Guard her— Art. —Sink her. Exeunt Philander and Panthea, forced out by the Villains. Now my young Bride, I'le drein your Amorous Veins. One Minnte, and the Charming Scene begins. Enter to him Lysandra. Lys. Oh Sir! as you would gain Immortal Honor▪ On Earth, and Everlasting Joyes in Heav'n; As you would have your Glorious Actions fill The Book of Fame, and like Ascending Incense, Perfume the Skies, and Treat the Gods, recall Your Banish't Peace, and save their Precious Lives Art. Ha! VVhat art thou, fair Fiend? One of her Imps? Is she so great a VVitch, so rare an Artist, To raise such Beauteous Devils, to defend her? Lys. No, Sir, I'm one of that weak frighted Sex, VVho could not hear your furious Threatning Out-rage, Without a bleeding Heart, and melting Eyes. Art. Where have I Lived obscurely, That I was never dazled till this Minute. Lys. Oh Sir! if ever Pity touch't your Breast, Save a young Stranger, and a wretched Lady. Art. Heav'ns! were she any thing but that Monster Woman▪ How I could Love her? Aside. Lys. This black Doom recall: Punish your self, not her. If she has done ill, She owes it all to you. Had you perform'd The Rites of a Kind Lord, I'm sure she would Have made a Miracle of Love and Duty. You should have moulded all her tender Thoughts, And form'd her Soul in any Shape, to please you. You might have lived an Age in envied Bliss▪ And if you've lost all this, it is because▪ In an unmanly Rage, you forfeited
The Right of your Creation, when you left Her feeble Sex unguarded all alone. Art Go on, gay talking Thing. I thought before, The only Musick in the World had been The cracking Heart-Strings, and the dying Groans Of my Adult'rous Sorceress. But now, My Rage can stop in all its full Cariere, VVhil'st this soft tempting Syren Charms my Ear. Lys. Will he then hear me? Oh, my blooming Hopes! Dear Sir, indulge, improve these Sparks of Pity. Mercy's the Glory of a Deity: And it is God-like, to forgive. Subdue Your wild Desires; and that Heroick Deed Is Nobler than the Conquest of a Kingdom. But if you stain your Hands with Guiltless Blood, Think then what dismal Horrours wait on Murder: Wolves, Raven, Scriech-Owles, then will be your Guests. And her Pale Ghost will haunt your starting Sleeps, Press your sad Thoughts with Lead, more heavy than The Ponderous Marble, that entombs her Ashes. Art. Begone, take those enchanting Eyes away: There's a bewitching Influence within Those sparkling Circles, that un-man's my Soul. Lys. Nay, if these Eyes have Pow'r to make you Good, They shall pursue you wheresoer'e you go: With their soft, humble, pleading, courting Tears, I'le weep 'em blind, to quench your raging Fires. Art. Where am I going? Stay, my fleeting Glory. I had design'd that great, that brave Revenge, That should have rais'd my vast Immortal Fame High as a Monumental-Pyramide, And hid its tow'ring Head among the Clouds: But this Young Sprite would shake my great Foundations. Take thy Face hence. Lys. Oh Sir!— Art. I'le hear no more. Vanish false Fire, bright Meteor disappear; It is not safe for me to tarry here.
My mighty Mind would keep its sacred way; And she strows Flow'rs, to lead my Soul astray. Exit, and Lysandra following him. Finis Actus Tertii. ACT THE FOURTH. Philander and Olizia appear in a Dungeon, Attended and Guarded by the former Villains. Oliz. THis, this Philander, is my Funeral-Scene. Phil. And these the Fiends, to act the Hellish Deed: They only wait for their Commanding Devil. Oliz. But when you see me Die, will you be kind, And pitty my hard Fate? When you behold My panting Breast laid open, and that Heart Where my dear Lord once raign'd, all torn and mangled, Will you look Pale, and with a trembling Sigh, Let a kind Pearl fall trickling srom your Eye? Say, Will you do all this for poor Olizia? Phil. Not do all this for thee! When the dire Monster Dares wreak his Barbarous Vengeance in thy Veins, Thy sacred Veins; and the unthinking Gods Dare see it done; Shall not I mourn for thee? Doubt not that Pious Tribute of my Eyes. Shall not my Dew fall at thy Setting-Sun? Not weep to see thee Bleed! I'le make my Eyes Start from their Sphears, to view that killing Object. And when thy Sweetness Draws near to Heav'n, my fainting bleeding Heart Shall just keep Life enough to break with thine. Oliz. Then you'll be kind indeed. Now, Murderers welcom: Bringing all your Torturing Racks. Thy gentle Pity
Will vanquish all the Pains of Execution. Who would not dye, to be deplored by Thee? To have thy Sighs, thy Tears, thy Love, Like ministring-Angels, mount me to the Skyes? Phil. Since, my best Saint, it is by Fate ordain'd, That thou must dye for me; and for my sake, Thy faithful fearless Love dares boldly set With so much beauteous chearful Light about it, Hear my last Vow. Kneels. Ye Gods, if in this little Short Glass of Life, I breath one Sigh to ought But fair Olizia; If my flaming Heart Blow the least Spark to any other Breast, Shut your Bright Gates against me. Banish me From the blest Realms of her Immortal Day; Expell'd for ever from her Heav'n, and Yours. Panthea now, shall haunt my Thoughts no more: Thee, and Thee only, I'le in Death adore. Oliz. My kindest Lord, now with full Tides of Joy I can meet Death, since Death has made you mine. My Soul's all Rapture, all Delight! Grim Death, Whose Ghastly Visage frights the trembling VVorld, And comes with hollow Eyes, and ratling Bones, To me's all Gay; and with a Charming Smile, Doe's with sweet VVreaths, and flow'ry Garlands come. My Bridal-Pleasures blossom on my Tomb. Phil. Now you transport my ravish't Sense too high▪ The worth of Ages, and thy Sexes Glory, Is all sum'd up in Thee: And, Must you dye? Must this Celestial Light fall like a Meteor? And this blooming Spring fade like a wither'd Autumn? Must this fair Book of Life, writ by the Hand of Heav'n, The Legend of a God, be all defaced? And must I see it done? Oh, dearest Madame! I never was a Coward, till this minute. Oliz. How Sir? Phil. I cannot, must not, dare not fee you dye. Better th'whole Sex beside, were all extinguish't; Their worthless Beauties shuffled in the Dust,
And thou the only God-like VVoman, left T'uphold the VVorld.—Oh Gentlemen! if Beauty And Innocence can ever move Compassion, Look on that Form; say, Shall that Bosom bleed? Perform a Deed worthy a Chronicle: Turn all your Swords against her Tyrants Heart. But if Reward can only make you Good, Propose a Ransom that may buy her Life; I'le pay it at the Price of all my Fortunes, Treasures, and Honors; all I have on Earth: And if that ben't enough to pay the Sum, I'le be your Slave; sell me to make it up. Oh, save her! Nay, if you'd be Saints, Stars, Angels, Save her, and you'll deserve to be 'em all. Enter Lysandra. Lys. That Glorious Task must be assign'd to me: 'Tis I that bring her Life and Liberty. Phil. Oh guard me, guard me, some Immortal Pow'r! Aside. Those Eyes could never blast me till this Hour. Lys. Gentlemen, let this Signet satisfy you, Shews a Ring to the Villains. That I have wrought the angry Prioce to Mercy, And have obtain'd your Prisoners Lives & Pardons. With-draw; they're now my Charge. Exeunt Villians. Oliz. Saved by Lysandra! Lys. By a long Seige of Tears l've calm'd his Fury, And crusht the Snake that twin'd about his Heart-strings. Oliz How can the study of that Life you've given me, Requite my kind Protectress, generous Maid? Lys. Ballance your Deeds with mine, and but remember How you preserved my threaten'd Honor from A Ravisher, and you've done more for me. Oliz. Now my dear Lord, raise your dejected Head. I shall not Bleed; all the rough Storm is fled. Why do you start, shake, and look pale? Is her Kind News unwelcom? Can my rescued Life Displease you? Sure it can't. But if it does, Alas, Sir! let not that your Trouble give: I will dye still, if you'd not have me live.
Phil. No, Madam, Live; and Live to be Adored. Let the Converted Sex learn Love from thee: Not place their gaudy Amorous Delights, In loose Desires, gay Dayes, and wanton Nights. Let 'em Perform thy Hymeneal Rites, Stand the great Shock of Wracks, and Death unmoved, Walk upon burning Irons, Tread on Graves, And keep their Bridals on a Funeral-Pile▪ When they dare do all this for Love, they'll be Fit Votaries, great Saint, to Kneel to Thee. Lys. And would not I, your lost despised Panthea, Have suffer'd all these Pains for you? Oliz. Panthea! Art thou the Fatal, Fair, Belov'd Panthea? And, Do's she Live? Have you deceived me thus? Was all your Mighty Love, your Sighs and sears, The Charming Rhetorick of your Tender Eyes, A meer Delusion to undo the poor Olizia? Oh, my Fall! I, that just now, Wrapt in my blest Imagination, stood Upon the Highest Pinacle of Heav'n, Am, in one Minute, lower than the Grave. Phil. I do confess, I told you, She was Dead; Said any thing, to raise your drooping Spirits: But that was all my Treason. Tho I knew Panthea liv'd, and liv'd to call me Perjur'd, In all the Passion I exprest for you, By all that's Good, my Sighs and Love was True. Oliz. And, Would you Cheat me still! Phil. By all the Powers—— Oliz. Speak not one word in your Defence. No, Sir, you cou'd not, did not, cannot Love me. And, Does she Live? You've doom'd a Wretched Soul to endless Torments; And 'tis beyond the Pow'r of Fate, to save me. Phil. Ah, Madam, if there's Faith on Earth, and Truth Among the Gods, I swear—— Oliz. Oh, Sir, no more. And, Cruel Rival, was it not enough,
You'd seiz'd his Heart, and ravish't all my Right; But in the Pleasantest, and Sweetest Dream, When his dissembling Tears had made me think, His Love was True; and the Fair Apparition Presented to my Thoughts the gilded Walks, And painted Scenes of Paradise, making Me scorn the Drossie World; just when I came To Dye, and be born upon Angels Wings, You most Inhumanely have saved my Life, And waked me from my Visionary Treasures, To find my self a Beggar. Lys. Do not think, I had such base and mean Designs: No, Madam,— Oliz. Canst thou Dissemble too? No, 'tis too plain. But do not vainly think, I'le poorly live, To bow my Neck to thy Triumphant Chariot. Let me but take one Look from those dear Eyes; And now false World, Farewel. Offers to go. Phil. Oh stay, dear Angel, stay! Oliz. No, my unkind, false Lord, Farewel for ever. Phil. Stay but one Minute: Stay, mistaken Sweetness. Do not forsake your Loyal Prostrate Slave. To fly me thus, would be to leave me Damn'd: To doubt my Love, you Stab me. By my Life, My Oaths are True. The Gods can witness for me: They see, They know my Heart, my Truth, my Soul. Oliz. Oh, false Philander, stop that Fatal Eloquence! Such were the very Sounds, that first undid me. Thou Love? No, cruel Man, speak it no more. I will not hear the Name: It is a Sound, That I will never, never hear again. Go Perjur'd, Revel in her dearer Arms: And whil'st your Love does your new Pleasures take, My dying Groans your Bridal-Musick make. Exit. Phil. Stay, Cruel Fair; Remorseless Tyrant, stay! Lys. When I Preserved your Life, I did not come to bring you half these Torments. Phil. Why then, Did thy untimely Kindness bring me Life?
Lys. Is Life a Plague then, 'cause 'tis brought by me? Ah, Cruel! Have these Eyes so much of Terrour, That you had rather Dye, than meet their hated Sight? Am I so much forgotten? Phil. Ah! No more. Shame, and Confusion overwhelms my Soul. Thus low, a Blushing, Perjur'd Criminal falls; And, Injur'd Fair, to thee for Mercy calls. Such Shame, such Horrours from my Guilt arise▪ I dare not look on those offended Eyes. Lys. Hold Heart! Phil. But False and Perjur'd, as I am, My Heart did not too basely play the Traytour: I was not False▪ before I thought thee Dead. But now, Fair Sweetness, thou Reviv'st too late. Love, and Olizias Charms demand me all: I've made those Vows, which I must ne'r Recall. Lys. Is't not enough, I Live to see you Perjur'd; But you must take the Pride to own it too? Go, Faithless Man: But, Faithless as you are, Glory and Crowns lye at your Feet, whil'st I Go seek some Melancholy Cell, and Dye. Exit. Phil. Strike home, dear Thunder! End, end my Lingring Pains: Am I not Dead yet? What Lover ever felt my Wounds, and Liv'd? Was ever Man surrounded with my Glory? Th'intire Possessor of the Hearts of Two Majestick Beauties, so Divinely Fair? And yet, I'm doom'd to Famish in Despair. So the poor Naked Slave digs in the Mine, And sees the Glitt'ring Ore around him shine: Yet does with hopeless Eyes, that Wealth behold; Wretched, and Starved, amidst a Mine of Gold. Exit.
SCENE Changes. Enter Artaban. Art. What's Nature, and the Pow'r that Governs it! Man is the Puppet of the Gods, and Moves Backwards or Forwards, as they please to Dance him. Now could I Laugh, to find my Self a Fool; And yet be Mad, to think I can't be otherwise▪ Where's all my Blust'ring, Roaring Storm, against Olizia?—Hush't, and Calm'd; and all, because A Foolish Girl had Power to stroak me Gentle. My great Foundation's ▪laid in Sand: One Minute, Fierce as encount'ring Lyons; and the next, I'm Tamer than the meekest Beast they Prey on. Enter Lysandra. But here she comes. Lys. After I had Redeem'd The Lives of Innocents, I could not take This mighty Blessing from your Hands, and not Return to pay my Thanks upon my Knees. Art. Oh, Rise! What other Lives have you to Save? What to Destroy? What New Commands to Execute? What Tow'rs to Scale? What Rocks to Plow up? What Mountains to Level? For I Love you so, I could do all this in a Breath, to serve you. Be free, dear Charming Witch, command thy Obedient Devil. Lys. Love me! Art. Oh, wond'rously! Try me like Hercules; I could Act all his Labours o're again. And when I had done, throw off my Lyon's Skin: Then take his Distaff, and sit down and Spin. Lys. What cruel Words are these? Art. If this be Cruel, I'le try a kinder way of Love, to please you. Seizes her. Lys.
Lys. Ah, Sir! What do you mean? Art. To use you Lovingly; To Revel in the Charms of this soft Breast, And surfeit on Delights, on which a God might Feast. Lys. Oh, Sir! If ever Virtue, Mercy, Pity Dwelt in your Noble Breast,— Art. If ever Passion, And warm Desire dwelt in my Boyling Veins, I Love thee▪ Ruffles her. Lys. Is this Love! Art. No; tho this be not, I'le shew thee what it is, before we part. Lys. Do not mistake: Can it be Love, to offer all that Violence, For which you would both Hate your self and me? Art. By Heav'ns, 'tis like enough. I loved Olizia That Morning that I Marryed her, above The spangled Skyes, and all the Joys within 'em: Yet before Night, I loath'd her worse than Hell. Yet, now I think on't, I ne'r tasted of her Charms: But I'le be Kind and Riot in Thy Arms. In these soft Chains for ever bind me thine. They know the Treasure best, who search the Mine. Lys. Oh, Sir! if you pursue these wicked Ends, What Triumph will a Virgins Ruin be? To make a poor lost Creature shun the Light; And call on Rocks and Mountains, t'hide her Shame? Art. Talk not of Shame; but think of Love, dear Love; The Business, and the Pride of your Creation. Yield, yield or I must force your stubborn Pride. Lys. Oh hold, Sir! I had a Virtuous Father; Who taught me still, that where was such a word, As Conjur'd Devils up, Eclips't the Sun, Made Earthquakes, Blazing-Stars, and Blew Hell-Fire. Art. Why do you Treat me thus, like Cruel Judges▪ Who speak them Fairest, who they mean, shall Dye? Without thy dear Embraces, I'm but Dead. Lys. Ah, Sir! Consider what you ask me; which when
You've once obtain'd, you'll hate, and loath me for't; Call your self Fool, for loving such a one As had not such a poor Degree of Virtue, To keep her Virgin Chastity unblemish't. Pity your self; destroy not in one Act, So many Deeds of VVorth, past, and to come. Then pity me: Let not my guilty Soul Make my own Shadow fearful, fill my Dreams With Frights, and Startings, all my Life with Horrours; Ashamed in Company, alone Unquiet; Weary of Life, and yet afraid to Dye. Art. No more! no more! VVhat Sense can Virtue speak? Th'hast Sacrificed my wicked Thoughts; and thence The Spirit of Sacred Ones shall rise Extracted, And Cleansed from all their Dross. Divinest Maid, I never Loved thee half so well as now. Lend me thy Hand. Kisses. Unutterable Sweetness! Nectar and Heav'n! Oh, my Transported Soul! Gods! Could my Burning Lust (that Brand of Hell!) Attempt to set this VVorld of Sweets on Fire, And not Alarm all your Bright Starry Host, Her Heavenly Guard, to Strike the Monster dead? Lys. Name it no more. Your Noble Penitence Has gain'd your Pardon, both from Heav'n and Me. Art. I thank ye Gods. Oh, Love, I am thy Convert! Fair injur'd Innocence, I'm no more Thy Impious Idolater: Thou'rt now My Goddess, and my Vows are all Divine. By Hymen's Holy Rites, I'le make thee Mine. Lys. Oh, my hard Fate! Ah, Sir, What do you mean? Art. To make Attonement for the Blackest Guilt The Furies e're Inspired. Thy Beauty dwells Under too Low a Roof, and I must Raise it. That Fore head wants a Princely Coronet. Lustre and Honours should thy Vassals be: Heav'n owes thee Greatness, and must pay't by Me. Why do you shrink?
Lys. Ah, Sir! do not pursue This mean Design, too poor and low for you, A Deed so abject, so beneath your Greatness, Mankind will blush to hear, and You to own. Art. Mistaken Sweetness, Don't I love thee? And, Can I do less for that, which I Adore? A Lover, were he Master of the World, For such Bright Eyes, could do no less than lay The Universal Scepter at thy Feet. Nay, were I the Great Monarch of the Skies, Would I not place my Thunder in thy Hand? Make Nature, and her Laws, own thy Command? Mount thee aloft on my proud Eagles Wings, Whil'st all my lesser Gods, like Captive Kings, And Fawning Courtiers, fill'd thy shining Train? Thou o're thy Jove so Absolute should'st Reign; To Kiss thy Feet, my Heav'ns should Homage pay, And crowding Stars make a new Milky-Way. Lys. Forbear, this Language I with Horrour hear. Alas! I've made a strict and solemn Vow,—— Art. To what? To whom? Oh, speak!— Lys. To Death. There is A Noble Youth—— Art. Oh, Hel! Lys. —(I can't Dissemble.) ——For whose dear sake, I've vow'd to Mourn and Dye. Make me not Perjur'd, take your Prodigal Kindness in: For Love, and I, must never meet agen. Art. What murdering Sounds are these? And, Must this happy, Blest—Cursed Rival, have more Pow'r than I? Lys. Oh, Pardon me, when I am bound to say, And dye, to prove it True. Not all that the Sun sees, must alter me; Not Empires buy my Love, nor Fortunes force it. Art. What Furies rais'd this Fiend, t'usurp my Right? Rival and Devils, I defie your Spight. She must be mine, is mine, all mine. My blood boiles high, and I must seize my Prey. Seizes her.
What Tempting Magick leads my Soul astray? Fly, fly, fair Cruelty!—Stay, dear Marble, stay! Ex. Lysan. Enter Pyrgus. Oh, the high Billows of my stormy Soul! Pyr. Sir, Let me calm that Tempest. Art. What canst thou do? Pyr. I can deplore her Fate, and pity Yours. Hither I come, to tell my Erring Prince, He has misplac'd his Heart, upon an Object, Where he must never hope for a Return. Art. Had I not Snakes and Hags enough within me, But thy bold Insolence dares play the Schrieth-Owle? Pyr. Oh, give my Zeal a gentler Name! I'm come To wake you from your drowzy Lethargy. Alas! Her Soul is gone, past all Retrieve▪ She Loves Philander, for Philander Dies. Art. Philander! say▪ What's that? Pyr. And her seal'd Heart's Impenetrable to all Pow'r, but his. Your Greatness, Sir, has the whole World to Range in; And may command a more deserving Beauty. Court not a deaf and sensless Idol: Fix Your Thoughts more High. From this vain Seige retire: Cure your wild Love, and quench this threatning Fire. Art. Philander!—Was I not damn'd enough before? But thou-must come to Preach me into Hell? Pyr. Yes, would I could. Aside. Art. Philander! The very Villain has debauch't my VVife, Ravish't my Peace, and loaded me with Shame; Now, after all, must steal my Mistriss too: And yet, this very Man, l've Saved and Pardon'd. Oh, VVhither was my blinded Folly driven! Mercy, VVhat art thou? Get thee back to Heav'n. What has the Race of Man to do with Thee? Leave Human Minds to Nobler Passions free. Hence-forward Death and Ruin, Reign alone; Make Hell your Vassal, and the World your Throne. Exeunt.
ACT THE FIFTH. SCENE, A GROVE. Enter Pyrgus solus. Pyr. IN what a Labyrinth am I lost? The Prince, My Master, turn'd my Rival? Hell and Furies! And, Have I Bought & Purchas'd, Nurs'd & Cherish'd That Beauteous Slave, to see her made my Princess? If he subdues her, (as I'me sure, he will) Beauty's an easie Fort, where Greatness storms. And though she weeps for false Philander's Loss; Those Drops in mourning Virgins Eyes, are but That Dew, which Courting Glory soon exhales: If he subdues her, Then my Fate's inevitable. She knows, I am a Villain, have pursued her with all the Rage of Lust; nay, even to Ravish her. And when she lies within my Prince's Bosom, Shall all my undetected Villanies Forgotten, sleep and dye? No, I am lost: Spurn'd from his Presence, and thrust out to Scorn, Beggary and Misery are my last Reward. What shall I do? Enter Artaban and Gobrias —Yonder the Tyrant comes. Wit and Despair, your utmost Skill perform; And steer me Safe through all this Threat'ning Storm. Exit. Art. Cold as the North: By all that's Good, Impenetrable As Rocks of Adamant. Oh, How she baffles me! Disdains my Passion, Slights my proffer'd Glory! Unmoved by all my Sighs, Pray'rs, Agonies. Gob. Indeed, my Lord, this Scorn is wonderful. Art. Scorn! By this Light, she'd scorn the Courting Thund'rer, Stand the Temptation of a Golden Show'r; And Jove himself, in all his Shapes, unalter'd.
Gob. 'Tis very strange, the great Prince Artaban, With all his Prosperous Fortunes, cannot thaw her. Art. The Fatal Cause of all her Scorn's too plain. This Fair Infatuated Fool, Doats on the False Philander. 'Tis Philander, Whose threat'ning Pow'r stands like a flaming Sword, To stop my Entrance into Paradise: But I will cut my Passage through his Heart. The Ravisher of all my Hopes shall Bleed. Say, Gobrias, Will he meet us? Gob. Yes, my Lord. Art. This Hour? Gob. Immediately. Art. Himself and Second? Gob. Yes, Sir. Art. 'Tis well: The Guardian-Dragon dies, And then, th'Enchanted Beauty is my own. Enter Philander and Decius. Phil. Hither I come, my Lord, invited to A Solemn▪ Feast of Blood. Art. Yes, and you're welcom. And, Sir, to make you like your Entertainment, Know 'tis a Sacred, Glorious Festival. Next the First Mover, 'Tis Love and Honour Turn the Globe: 'Tis they, That Rule Mankind, and Guide the Strokes of Fate. And, Sir, those Mighty Names have both been wrong'd by you: And 'tis your Blood must make an Expiation. Call to your Conscious Soul, that 'tis Philander Blocks up my Passage to Lysandra's Heart, And makes it Inaccessibe. Phil. My Lord, If it be that, that calls me to the Field, Why should we Fight for what I calmly Yield? She's yours, all yours; and to secure that Title, Know, Jealous Lord, I bear her kindest Love▪ With no less Pain, than you her greatest Hate.
Art. If there's no Magick in Lysandra's Name, To Rowze thy sluggish Soul, call to Remembrance Olizia's Wrongs, her Wrongs, and my Dishonour. For tho I've shook that Trifle from my Heart, As little as she moves my Soul; yet still Her Fame thou'st Tainted, and my Honour suffers: And nothing but your▪ Death, can clear the Stain. Phil. Olizia's Wrongs! And, Canst thou name that word? Thou, whose degenerate, base, groundless Rage, Could doubt her Virtues, blast her Sacred Fame? Ye Gods! A Saint more Pure, a Soul more Spotless, Did ne'r Adorn your World, or Grace your Heav'n. But, Do I talk? That Name has rowz'd my Vengeance. Art. And fair Lysandra mine. Have at thy Heart: For whil'st Thou Liv'st, I'm worse than Damn'd. That cruel Fair, Whil'st thou draw'st Breath, will ne'r, will ne'r be Mine. Phil. Now, angry Sir, we meet on Equal Terms: For whil'st thou Liv'st, I'm Damn'd as well as Thou. Could my Olizia love me to that Height, That 'tis not Rocks or Mountains, Seas or Desarts, Should hold her from my Arms; yet, whil'st thou Liv'st, By Honour's Cruel Laws, she never must be Mine. Then let our Swords cut through our Knotty Fates: And to Encourage us for the Brave Deed, Know, 'tis a Cause as great as Alexander's. Beauty's our Universe; which, to subdue, Our Glory's summ'd in this one Chance alone: Who cuts the Gordian, makes the World his own. They Fight, and Philander's Second falls. Art. Now, for the World, How think you? Phil. I come not here to Think, but Act. Gob. Howe're, bold Sir, Does not this Odds look Ominous? Phil. Prophetick Sir, if you would talk of Omens, Pray make your Swords your Oracles. Art. Thou'rt Bràve: And tho VVith this Advantage I shall Blush to Kill thee, I must not give thee Life.
Phil. Nor must I take it. Come on. Art. VVell, Sir, the Turning VVeight is mine; And the next Hoist, I mount thee up to Heav▪n. They Fight, and Artaban's Second falls. Phil. Hold your Scales right; for now the Weights are even. Art. VVhat Turn of Fate is here? VVell, Sir, I see, Fortune, in taking of my Odds away, Designs me Honour in thy Nobler Fall. There's something tells my Soul, Thy Date is short. Phil. Shorten your Speech, and make it so▪ They Fight, and Philander Disarms Artaban. Art. Curst be my Arm. Phil. And doubly Curst be mine. Must I then save his Life, to blast my own? The VVorld's too Narrow for us both. Here take your Sword again; I give it freely: But on Condition, that you'll us't again. Forget that e▪re 'twas mine; and Nobly aim it, VVith all your Heat, once more against this Heart. Art. Hold, Sir! Thou art the Man, whose Death I'de buy, Even at the Price of my Eternity. Nay, I would give my Life and Heav'n, to Kill thee. But forced by Honours dread Commanding Pow'r, I must not lift a Hand against his Life. Phil. Now I'm undone: Now, we're both truly Wretched. 'Tis to thy Life my tortur'd Soul must owe More Pains, more Hells than wretched Man e're bore▪ Art. Nor must my Soul less Torments feel than thine. But since we ne'r can meet as Foes again, Farewel thou Pestilential Comet; Thou everlasting Bar to all my Hopes. Phil. How dismally this Fatal Meeting ends? We were kind Enemies, but mortal Friends. Exit. Enter Messenger. Mess. Great Sir, Thus low I fall, t'implore your Pardon. Art. Pardon! For what? How fares your Charge, the Fair Lysandra? Is she Safe?
Mess. Oh, my dread Lord! Curst be that Tongue, that tells you she is lost. I, like her sleeping Jaylor, thought her safe: But by my false Security, I'm undone. She through her Window, Sir, has made Escape; And, I suppose, 'twas by Olizia's Aid. For in the Princess Chariot she was hurried, And Lodg'd within a Cloister. Art. Fled t'a Cloister! Lightning and Earthquakes! Ruin and Despair! Immured in those Impenetrable Walls, For ever Ravish't from the VVorld, and Me. Mess. And this, my Lord, is all she left behind her; Gives him a Letter. To tell you, That the Fatal Name of Love, Is that harsh Sound she now shall hear no more. Art. Not hear the Name! Not hear it! Yes, fair Murd'ress, I'le thunder't in thy Ears, 'till I am Dead. Nay, when thy Scorn has laid my Bones in Dust, I'le burst my Marble Load, rattle the Chains Of my Infernal Jaile, to tell thee, Tyrant, That I was Damn'd by Thee! Yes, thou shalt hear My murmuring Groans, thy murder'd Lover's Groans. VVhil'st all that Flowing Gold, those Beauteous Tresses, On thy Proud Fore-head, fixt with Horrour, stand, Erected like the strutting Porcupine: And the Bright Fires, in those bewitching Eyes, VVane, and burn Pale, at my approaching Ghost. Mess. Not all the Groans and Agonies of Love, I fear, will move her now. Nought but the Language Of Death and Heav'n, will now be understood. Those Cloister'd Saints are Deaf to Flesh and Blood. Art. A Cloister! Curse on that Religious Cheat! And, Must that shining Beauty lie Entomb'd, Buried alive, and this to make a Saint? Dull Priests, you Lie! To Saint that Beauteous Sex, Teach 'em to Love, be Kind, Embrace, and Crown Some happy Lovers Bed: Then live to see Their warm Desires blest with a Numerous Race;
Born to inrich the World, and to increase the Stals. Do this, and this and then they will be saints indeed: This is the only way of Heav'ns Ordaining, To Consecrate that Angel Creature, Woman. This Blessing, Gods did with your World begin; How e're the other Pious Curse crept in. Exeunt. Enter Philander. Phil. Slaves at an Oar have greater Ease than I: Harden'd to Labours, they their Pains defie. Despair in Love, 's the only true great Misery. We with fresh Agonies our Souls torment; Remember the bright Tracks, where th'adored Beauty went. And with fresh Pains, our endless Plagues deplore, To think our Setting-Sun will Rise no more. Enter Pyrgus. Pyr. Oh, Sir! live such a Story, as will scorch Your boiling Veins into so hot a Fever, Shall make your Heart-strings burst, and set a float The burning Lake within 'em. Phil. Oh, be quick! Expound these mystick Horrours. Pyr. Ah, Sir! the Prince, my Master,— Phil. What of him? Pyr. You know, he loves Lysandra; and but now His Amorous Suit renew'd: He beg'd, sight, languish't; But all in vain. His swelling Tears, his gasping Pangs, And dying▪Groans, had all no Power to move her. In short, Her haughty, merciless Disdain, So stung his tortur'd Soul; till at the last, Courting and Threatning, and as oft Repuls'd, Her Scorn on Scorn, rais'd Rage on Rage; till all His Reason, Sense, Religion, Conscience, Love, Drown'd in the groaning Storm, he snatch't his Dagger, And, at one Stroke, divorc'd her trembling Soul. Phil. Horrour and Plagues! Gods, Does your Thunder sleep?
Pyr. This is not all. No sooner was that Beauteous Martyr fal'n, But the dire monstrous Deed, a Deed enough To force a Blush into an Ethiop's Face, Touch't him so little, that grown flush't with Murder, His Eyes erect tow'rds Heav'n, (but his black Thoughts Were shap'd in Hell) these dismal Sounds he utter'd: Philander! Shalt thou have Peace, whil'st I have none? No, Ravisher; Thou'rt Damn'd, as well as I. Then to the Fair Olizias Chamber rush't. Phil. Olizia! Guard her, Gods! Pyr. And in a most Inhumane Butchery, drag'd her from her Bed. And the same Steel, bath'd in her floating Gore, He left her grovelling on the reeking Floor. Phil▪ Olizia Dead! and I Alive to hear it! Fly, whil'st thou'rt safe; thou'st utter'd such a Deed, Whose Repetition is enough to Damn thee. Exit Pyrgus. Oh, Horrid, Bloody, Savage, Beast of Prey! Think not to hide thy cursed, impious Head: No, Tyger; through all the World I'le hunt thee Dead. Nay, tho thy Devils make thee walk Invisible, Through all thy Infernal Guards, I'le find thee out. 'Tis not the Center of the Earth shall hide Thee, from my Rage. Like a new Hercules, I'le Dive to Hell, but I will reach this Traytour. Enter Artaban. Yonder he comes! Tryumphant Impudence! Art. Ah, Sir! The Fair Panthea is for ever lost. Phil. Ravens and Scriech-Owls! The Insulting Monster Owns th'Exacrable Deed. Aside. Art. And now, Philander, Beset with all the Horrours of Despair, Hither I come— Phil. Yes, Infidel, to Dye! Draws. Art. What do I see!
Phil. Now, ye Great Pow'rs, you're Kind. Thou Limb of Vengeance, and thou Brand of Hell, Take thy Reward. Art. Confusion! Hold, yet hold. Why all this Fury? Phil. Why this staggering Guilt! Base Hell-Hound, Have thy Crimes made thee a Coward? Art. Coward, and Crimes! Death! Why all this to me! Phil. To Thee▪ To Thee! Ask thy black Soul, and let Thy startled Conscience tremble at this Arm Art. Why all this Fury? Sir, Explain this Riddle. Phil. Oh, harden'd Hypocrite! Art. Sir, Do but hear me. Phil. Yes, thy last Groans. Art. Yet hold, let me but speak. Phil. When thou art Damn'd, Talk on. Fights, and Kills Artaban. Art. As I am Dying, let me know, rash Murderer, Why thou hast Kill'd the very Man that Lov'd thee? Phil. Lov'd me! Can thy black Soul, thus doubly stain'd With Fair Olizia, and Panthea's Blood, Breath such a Word as Love? Art. Oh, strange Impiety! I lift a Hand against Panthea's Life! What Poisonous Traitour has abus'd your Ears? Phil. What do I hear? Art. As you would give Me Peace within the Grave▪ and Bliss in Heav'n, Name me the Monster, that my Death may Blast him. Phil. Has that false Devil, Pyrgus— Art. Did he tell you so! What more than Hellish Rage, provok'd him to This Blasphemy? By my last Hopes, Olizia, and the Fair Panthea lives. Phil. Oh, abhor'd Slave! Oh, most detested Villainy! Has my mistaken, curst, infernal Fury, Pull'd down such Ruins?—— Art. Ah, Forbear this Grief! My Life's not worth a Tear. The Cruel, Fair Panthea
Could ne'r be Mine: And, What is Life without Her. Thou weep'st to see me Bleed: Dry up thy Tears, And let me Kiss that dear, kind Hand, that Kill'd me. Since that Bright Form do's in a Cloister lie, What has her hopeless Slave to do, but Die? But, Sir, Tho my Hard-fated Love could ne'r be Blest, Be Thine more Prosperous; in my Death, I make Thy Passage free to thy Olizias Arms: I give Her Thee. 'Tis the last Legacy Of thy expiring Friend. Phil. Oh, wond'rous setting Virtue! Art. But, Could the Fair Lysandra never Love me? Could all my Sighs not light one Spark of Pity? Beauty, thou Pageant of the Frantick World, And Love (false Love) with all thy Cheats, Farewel. When I am Dead, take me (ye Gods) and place me Upon some Hollow Sounding Arch of Heav'n: There lend me but a Voice as loud as Thunder, And I'le Convert the doating World below me. Dies▪ Phil. What have I done? What Guilt, what Shame, what Horrors Surround my staggering Soul? Ye Gods, he gave me Olizia! This Bright Miracle of Honour, With his last Breath, could bless his Murderer. Thou most unhappy, injured Prince, farewel. Who would believe, this bloody, barbarous Deed, That Savages would blush at, was th'Effect Of Love? Great Loe, the brightest Spark of Heav'n, Could blow into this Thunder! O, ye Gods! What is your World? What's Life? What's Human Fate? When if your Dooms our Ruines have Decreed, The noblest Cause can Act the blackest Deed. Enter Pyrgus. Pyr. What do I see? 'Tis as my Soul could wish. Dead by this Light! H'has done the Feat so sweetly. Phil. Ha, Devil! Art thou here? Ye Gods, I ask no more! Pyr. Why that odd Face? Prethee, rough Sir, look calmly. Phil. Monster, hear me! For, tho my aking Hand, and boyling Veins, Hold back my Rage from thy accursed Heart, With greater Pain than e're thy Mother bore thee; Yet I would talk with thee, before thou'rt Damn'd!
Pyr. Well, angry Sir, and, What is't you would say? Phil. Thou black Incendiary, What strange Fury Provoked thee to this Execrable Malice? Pyr. Dull Sir, I'le tell you. Know, I loved Panthea: And that infatuated Lord, my Rival, Rose, like a Planet, to destroy my Hopes. I knew, at last, Time, and his Courting Glories, Would melt a Passage to her frozen Heart. And when she had Married him, my Villainies Would be detected; and, at least, my Ruin, If not my Throat, would make her an Atonement. But know, my Soul's too Proud, to Live with Infamy: To see my Slave my Princess, and to lose That gay, proud, haughty Thing, I had Bought, and Paid for. Thus, 'twixt Despair, and my defeated Lust, I made thy sensless, foolish Love, my Property, To cut my Safety through his Heart. Phil. Damnation! Was there ever Dungeon, Jaile, Or Gibbet, that could Match this harden'd Infidel▪ But I do Talk, and let the Villain live! Offers at him. Pyr. Hold, Sir! Draws a Pistol. —Make not your self too large a Promise. Stand off! I scorn the worst your Rage dares do. Phil. What means this Baseness, Coward? Pyr. Only, Sir, If you're for such a Bloody Game as Death, I am a Rook, and play not on the Square. Phil. Slave! Do'st thou think to Frigh me? At thy Soul. Pyr. Are you so Brisk?— Shoots, and misses him. Curse on my erring Hand! Draws. Yet hold! Hear me one word. Phil. Speak then, make hast: Be quick, and short; for know, this Breath's your last. Pyr. Tho that dull wand'ring Fire has mist thy Life, I've still the Odds: Know, this invenomed Steel, With the least Touch, gives Death. Retire, rash Man; There's Poison in this Sword. Phil. And greater in thy Veins. Go, tell thy Canker'd, Venomous Bloated Soul, Thee, and thy Arts of Hell, I'le thus Confound. Kills him. Pyr. Thou'st Kill'd me, and I fain would Curse thee for't! But, Oh, my Breath grows Faint, my Eyes turn Giddy;
And, in a Mist, I'm lost! Dyes. Phil. The Villain has drawn Blood. His Arm bloody. Enter Olizia, and Women. Oliz. Oh, my Philander! I have those Contradictions in my Fate, Those Bars betwixt my Joys, that nothing but A Cloister, and a Grave, can Reconcile. But, e're I take my Everlasting Leave Both of the World, and Thee, I can't but come, To breath my Last Farewel Phil. Life of my Life! My Dearest, Sweetest Heav'n, thou art too kind. Oliz. Oh, my Philander! Could I but believe, Flatter my breaking Heart, Philander Loved me; Then I in Peace could Die. Phil. Divinest Madam▪ If all my Oaths in Life could not Convince thee, As I am Dying, hear this one last Vow; By all my Hopes above, I'm only Thine. Oliz. Dying! What words are these? Phil. Look there, t'explain 'em. That Impious, Black, Infernal Traitour, Pyrgus, With a long Mask of Complicated Perjuries, Told me, His Savage Lord had Murthered Thee▪ And by my violent, mistaken Rage, In thy Revenge, that God-like Martyr fell. That generous Prince, who with his Dying Breath, Gave me Olizia, Perish't by this Hand. Oliz. Was ever such a dismal Scene of Horrour? Phil. And yet that dismal Scene, Was the Effect of Love, impetuous Love. What Flesh and Blood, fill'd with a Soul like Mine, Could hear thy Death, and not run Mad as I did? But my hard Fate, the Gods have doubly punish't. By my just Hand, that cursed Villain dyed; And I am Murder'd by his Poison'd Sword. Oliz. Why was I Born, ye Gods, to see this Day? Is there no Help, no Art, no Succouring Angels, To save his Life? Phil. VVere't in the Pow'r of Fate, The precious Balm of thy kind Tears would do't▪ But 'tis too late. Oliz. VVas this the dismal VVeapon,
That has undone the World? Oh, fatal Steell! Thou hast been cruel, but I'le make thee kind. Falls on the Sword. Phil. What have you done? Oliz. Nothing, but only paid The Debts of dying Love. Tho cruel Fate Divorced me from thy Arms, and Cancell'd all Our Marriage-Joys; yet in the Grave▪ in that Cold Bridal-Bed, I shall not be deny'd, To lie a sleeping Virgin by thy Side. Phil. Can then my Kind and generous Princess, Leave all her Greatness, all her blooming Youth; Let those dear Eyes, those sparkling Twins of Love, And all that mighty Mass of Infinite Beauty, Lie undistinguish'd in the Common Heap Of mouldring Dust, ghastly as Death▪ and wither'd As the naked▪ scraggy Roots▪ of unborn Flow'rs; And all for her unhappy, worthless Slave? Oliz. Alas, Sir! What have I to do with Eyes, Life, Youth, and Beauty? Are they not all Yours, Created Yours, a Part of my dear Lord? And, Should they dare Survive, when he is gone? No, 'tis but Just, they in your Urn should lie: When the Tree falls, the scatter'd Blossoms die. Phil. Now, thou'rt too kind. Oliz. Could I do less, to shew I loved Philander? The meanest of my Sex can Live and Love; Each common Spark inspires that Noble Heat. To Die for Love, is only truly Great. Nor is this all the Glory of my Death; Ye Gods, I bring my Innocence to Heav'n. Free from Loves grosser and impurer Charms, I die a Virgin in a Husband's Arms! Dyes. Phil. She's dead! She's dead! Meet her, ye Gods! Oh, meet her! Throw open all the shining Gates of Heav'n, And Sally out thick as the Beams of Day, To her Immortal Praise new tune your Sphears: At her dear Feet your brightest Diadems lay. Ye Gods, 'tis Beauties Coronation-Day! But, Oh! in all her Heavenly Pomp she wants Her Loyal Slave! I come, bright Saint, I come, To fill the State of thy Celestial Train. Thus may I Kneel, and Thou for ever Reign! Dyes FINIS
