S4356 12278860 58589
Britain's Glory, AND ENGLAND'S BRAVERY. Wherein is shewed The Degrees of Honour from the Prince to the Peasant; with the Honour of the Nobles, and Previleges of the Commons; the proper Places and Precedency of all Persons from the Throne to the Bondman; more particu∣larly in Coronations, Processions, Feasts, Fu∣nerals and other great Assembly: As also Honour of Arms, Power of Heralds, Significa∣tion of Charges in Coat-Armour; with an Armorial Dictionary, explaining the Terms of Heraldry. And an account of all the Or∣ders of Knighthood in Christendom, and of the Weights and Measures of England. To Which is added A Continuation of the Historian's Guide, from November, 1687. where the Third and Last Impression ends, to June, 1689. Being the Collections and Observa∣tions of Benjamine Smithurst. LONDON, Printed for William Crook, at the Green-Dra∣gon without Temple-Bar, near Devereux-Court, 1689.
A TABLE TO Britain's Glory, &c. CHAP. I. OF the Distinction of Titles, page 1 The Name of Gentleman in general. Of the King. Nobles. Commons. CHAP. II. Of the King's Most Excellent Majesty. 4 Coronation. Anointing.
Sceptre. Globe. Ring. Bracelet. Sword. Robes. Diadem, and the Stones. Crown: Offering days. Collar days. CHAP. III. Of the Prince. pag. 9 Of the King's Child en. CHAP. IV. Of Dukes, 10 CHAP. V. Of Marquesses, 13 CHAP. VI. Of Earls, 14 CHAP. VII. Of Viscounts, 15 CHAP. VIII. Of Barons Spiritual and Temporal, 16 CHAP. IX. Of Noblewomen, 20
Queen-Sovereign. Queen-Consort. Queen-Dowager. Princesses. Dames. Gentlewomen. Alien women. CHAP. X. Of Injuries to Noblemen, 23 CHAP. XI. Knight of the Garter, 24 The Names of the Knights, 1685. The Names of the Knights, 1689. CHAP. XII. Knights Bannerets, 29 CHAP. XIII. Knights Baronets, 31 CHAP. XIV. Knights of the Bath, 33 CHAP. XV. Knights Bachelours, 37 Degrading of Knights. CHAP. XVI. Knights of the Round Table, 41
Other Orders of Knighthood, viz. Knights of St. Andrew, or the Thistle in Scot∣land, 42 Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem, 44 Hospitallers, ib. Templers, 45 St. Lazarus in Jerusalem, 46 St. Bass, or St. Bassil, 47 St. Katharine at Mount Sinai, ib. The Martyrs of Palestine, ib. Oak in Navarre, 48 Lilly of Navarre, ib. Band in Spain, 49 Dove in Castile, ib. Fish Scale in Castile. ib. Lilly in Aragon, 50 Mountjoy, ib. Acon, or Acress, ib. St. James in Galici, 51 St. Saviours in Aragon, ib. St. Julian, or of Alcantara, 52 Callatrava in Castile, ib. Tuxillo, or Trugillo, ib. Our Lady and St. George, ib. St. Mary de Merced in Aragon, 53 Rosary in Toledo, ib. Golden Fleece, 54 D'Avis, ib. St. Michael's Wing, 55 St. James, 55
Knights of Christ, 56 Jesus Christ in France, ib. Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel, 57 St. Michael, ib. Holy Ghost, 58 The Gennet, 59 Crown Royal. ib. Lady of the Star. 60 Thistle of Bourbonne, ib. The Porcupine, 61 Cressants of Anjou, ib. Ermin in Bretaigne, ib. St. Mary the Glorious of Italy, 62 Holy Ghost at Rome, ib. Angelick of St. George, 63 St. Peter at Rome, ib. St. George at Rome, 64 Pius at Rome, ib. Loretto at Rome, ib. Glorious Virgin Mary at Rome, ib. Jesus, now at Rome, 65 De la Calza in Venice, ib. St. Mark in Venice, 66 St. George at Genoa, ib. Pretious Bloud of our Saviour Jesus Christ at Mantua, 67 St. Stephen of Florence, ib. Knot in Naples, 68 Argonaute of Naples, ib. Ermin in Naples, ib. Annunciation in Savoy, 69
Knights of St. Maurice, 70 St. Maurice, and St. Lazarus, 71 Bear in Switzerland, ib. Tutonick Order of Prusia. 72 Gereon in Germany, 73 St. George in Austria, ib. St. Michael the Archangel, ib. St. Anthony in Haynault, 74 Tusin Order in Bohemia, ib. St. Hubert in Gulick, 75 St. James in Holland, ib. St. Brice, ib. The Seraphim, 76 Aramanta, ib. Elephant in Denmark, ib. Of Christ, or Sword in Livonia, 77 White Eagle in Poland, ib. Dragon in Hungary, ib. Sword in Cyprus, 78 St. Anthony in Aethiopia, ib. Burgundian Cross in Tunis, 79 Broom-Flower in France, ib. Ship in France, 80 CHAP. XVII. Esquires, ib. CHAP. XVIII. Gentlemen, 82 By Ecclesiastical Preferment, 86 By Military Profession, ib. In the Civil State, 87
CHAP. XIX. Yeomen, 90 CHAP. XX. Artificers and Labourers, 92 CHAP. XXI. Precedency, 93 CHAP. XXII. Procession at a Coronation. 98 CHAP. XXIII. Proceeding on the Coronation day, 102 CHAP. XXIV. King's going to Parliament in State, 105 CHAP. XXV. Coronation-Feasts, 107 CHAP. XXVI. Royal Feast at other times, the K. present, 111 CHAP. XXVII. Funerals. 112 CHAP. XXVIII. Proceeding of the Funeral of a Gentleman, E∣squire, Knight, or Baronet, 114 CHAP. XXIX. Precedency of a Nobleman's Funeral, from a Duke to a Baronet. 115
CHAP. XXX. Heralds, and their Duty, 116 CHAP. XXXI. Heraldry, 121 CHAP. XXII. Ordinaries, 126 Charges Common, 132 CHAP. XXXIII. Abatements. 152 CHAP. XXXIV. Points in an Escoucheon, 156 Terms of Art explained, 157 Weights and Measures, 169
Brittain's Glory, WHEREIN Is shewed the Degrees of Honour, from the Prince to the Peasant; the Honour of the Nobles, and the Pri∣vileges of the Commons, &c. CHAP. I. Of the Distinction of Titles. THe Name Gentleman is of such account, that it is given as a pro∣per Title to all persons, from the King to the lowest Degree of those that bear Coat-Armour; and also to many, who though they can claim no Right to the Bearing of Coat Armour, yet claim a Right to the Title of Gentleman, by virtue of the Place or Office which they hold: But, as in the Body Natural the Mem∣bers
are disposed to several Offices for the preservation of the whole; so in the Body Politick, a Distinction of persons is accoun∣ted necessary for the preservation of the whole; and such is the Policy of this Realm (especially,) that for the better Government thereof, they have made a threefold Divisi∣on of persons, viz. Sovereign, Nobles, and Commons. 1. The King is our Sovereign Monarch, under which name a Sovereign Queen is comprehended. 2. Under the Name of Nobles are com∣prehended the Prince, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons, called Lords Spiritual and Temporal. 3. By the Commons are understood the Knights of the Garter, (if no otherwise dignified,) Knights Bannerets, Baronets, Knights of the Bath, Knights Bachelours, Esquires, and Gentlemen, together with Yeomen, Artificers, and Labourers. And though our Law doth not call any man Noble under the Degree of a Baron, yet many there be which make a Distincti∣on between Nobiles Majores, which is from the Prince to the Baron, and Nobiles Mino∣res, which includes all from under a Baron to the Gentleman, and leaves the rest to be called Commons. When we say the Nobles of the Land, the
King is not comprehended by the Common Law, he being the Fountain of all Nobility; but is by the Civil Law. The Nobility are known by the name of the Peers of the Realm, or Barons of Eng∣land; for anciently the Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and Viscounts, did sit together in the King's great Counsel of Parliament, as Ba∣rons, by which is understood the whole Bo∣dy of the Nobility; and though there be different Robes worn at their Creation, yet in Parliament the greatest of the Nobility wear the same Robes with Barons, only the Dukes, Marquesses, &c. wear more or less Furrs upon their Shoulders, with some diffe∣rence in the Furr, that is set as Fringes, or Edgings on their Robes, and take place ac∣cording to their Dignity; of which more particularly anon. Besides, it is observable, that in Cases cri∣minal, all Degrees of Nobility are tryed by Barons, as well as those of their own Digni∣ty, or Degree, as their Peers, and Barons are tryed by Nobles of a higher Degree: as well, as those of their own, as in all such Cases is well known. It may be here noted, That no English man receiving any Title of Honour from a foreign Prince, can use the same in England, But (if he have no other Title from the King) must in all judicial proceedings be
named by his name of Baptism, and Sir∣name; excepting only the Honour of Knight-hood which is to be born in all pla∣ces: And this is the same in Scotland, or Ire∣land, as well as in other Lands. CHAP. II. Of the King's Most Excellent Majesty. THe Title used by the Kings of England (as those of France, and Spain, and some few others) is Dei Gratiâ, which is to be un∣derstood simply as having his Authority from none but God; he is styled, Deffender of the Faith, which was antiently used by the Kings of England; but Anno. 1521. confirmed to them by a Bull from Pope Leo the 10th in King Henry the 8th's time, and by Act of Par∣liament made Supreme Head of the Church of England, and he, as all other Kings, writes in the plural Number. The Ceremonies at our King's Coronation are more than are used in many other Coun∣treys; as the Annointing with Oil, (which is said by some to be of a thousand years standing) and hath a Priest's Garment, called a Dalmatica, or Colobium, put on, him to shew he is both King and Priest: He hath an
Emperial Crown set upon his Head at his Coronation by the Archbishop of Canterbu∣ry, which is a peculiar Prerogative belonging to that See. The King hath also many o∣ther emblematical Ensigns and Ceremonies at his Coronation, which hath these follow∣ing proper Significations: 1. At his Coronation, first he hath the Priest's Garment, or Dalmatica, put upon him, to shew his Power in the Church. 2. He is annointed with Oil to shew his Person is Sacred; on the Head to shew Glory, on the Breast to signifie Sanctity, on the Arms to emblemize Power, His Ensigns of Regality are these: 1. In his Right-hand is a Sceptre, to shew Justice. 2. In his Left-hand a Globe with a Cross on it, called a Mound, used ever since Ed∣ward the Confessour, signifying, that the Faith of Christ is to be owned throughout his Empire. 3. A Ring is put on his Finger, whereby he is wedded to his People, and denotes Faithfulness. 4. He hath a Bracelet put on his Hand, the Emblem of good Works. 5. A Sword is born before him, to signi∣fie Vengeance.
6. He hath purple Robes, to attract Re∣verence. 7. On his Head he weareth a Diadem Triumphant, to blazon his Glory; in which Diadem some take notice of twelve precious Stones, and shew their Significations as fol∣loweth: 1. Say they, the first is a Tophaz, whose Rays seem to partake of the Colours of most sorts of precious Stones; by which the King is warned to exercise all Vertues. 2. A Smaragd, or Emrauld, of a pure green, and shews that Justice is an ornament for a King. 3. A Sardick, whose Colour is like red Clay, (it is in the top of the Crown,) where∣by the King is put in mind, that though he be the highest, yet he is but Clay. 4. A Crysolite, which shineth like Gold, sending forth (as it were) flames; this ex∣horteth the King to shew Wisdom and Prudence in his Actions. 5. A Chalcedon, which is strong and hard by Nature, and sheweth that the King should be of Fortitude, and courage of Mind. 6. An Hyacinth, which shews like Water when the Sun shineth upon it; it teacheth Temperance, &c. 7. A Jasper, of a dark Grass-green, and
teacheth the King to provide more for his Peoples Sustenance than his own. 8. A Chrysoprasus, whose Colour is like Gold, somewhat mixed with green, thereby advising the King to Wisdom, and to aspire to heavenly things. 9. A Berill, of a pale Green, shewing that a Prince ought to have heavenly Contempla∣tion, and to abhor Epicurism. 10. A Sapphir, of a light Blew; it in∣structeth the King to Continency, and Cha∣stity. 11. There is an Amethyst, of a purple or Violet Colour, advising the King to a faith∣full Discharge of his Royal Function, and so give a good Example to his People. 12. The Last is a Sardonyx, which is black at bottom, red in the midst, and white above, and sheweth a King ought to be Cha∣ritable, Humble, and Sincere. The Imperial Crown hath not been long in use with us; for formerly the King wore a Coronet composed of Spires, or points, untill Henry the 3d. who first wore the Imperial Diadem. There are twelve Days which are called the twelve Houshold or Offering Days, on which the Nobles attending at Court, and Knights of the Garter, wear their Robes, and the Besant is given to the Lord Steward; the Days are as followeth:
On these four Days the King offers Gold, which is given by one of the White-staff Officers, viz. 1 Christmas Day, 2 Easter Day, 3 Whitsunday, 4 All Saints Day. These two Days the King offers Gold, Myrrh, and Frankincense. 1 New Years Day, 2 Epiphany. On the Six Days following the King of∣fers only Gold: 1 The Purification, 2 The Anunciation, 3 The Ascention-Day, 4 Trinity Sunday, 5 Midsummer-Day, 6 Michaelmas-Day. The King's Collar Days without offering are the Sundays and Hollydays in the twelve Days of Christmas, all the Apostles and Evan∣gelists Days, the Coronation Day, the King's Birth Day, the 5th of November, St. George's Day, Monday and Tuesday in Easter Week, Monday and Tuesday in Whitsun Week.
CHAP. III. Of the Prince. THe King's Eldest Son and Heir Apparent from the Day of his Birth is entituled Prince of Wales; and since the happy Union of the Kingdoms, his Title hath been Magnae Britanniae Princeps; but he is usually called by the former Title of Prince of Wales: He is, as the King's eldest Son, by his Birth Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, and as El∣dest Son to the King of Scotland he is Earl of Rothsay and Senchall of Scotland from his Birth; but he is created Prince of Wales. At his Creation he is presented before the King in Princely Robes, who putteth a Co∣ronet of Gold upon his Head, a Ring on his middle Finger, a Verge of Gold into one Hand, and his Letters Patents, after they are read, into the other Hand: His Mantle which he wears in Parliament is doubled with five Doublings upon his Shoulder, and his Cap of State is indented at Bottom: His Coronet formerly was composed of Crosses and and Flower-de-luces mixed; but since the happy Restauration it was solemn∣ly ordered, that the Son and Heir Apparent to the Crown of England, should bear his
Coronet of Crosses, and Flower-de-luces, with one Arch, a Ball and Cross thereon, as the King's. By Order of Common Law the King might levy a reasonable Aid of his Subjects for the Knighting his Eldest Son at the Age of fif∣teen years, and to marry his Daughter at seven years, which Aid was twenty Shillings for every Knight's Fee, and as much for e∣very twenty pounds per Annum in Soccage; but this is now laid aside. CHAP IV. Of Dukes. THe Title and Degree of Duke hath been of more ancient standing in the Empire, and some other Nations, than in England; for the first English Duke was Edward the Black Prince, who was created Duke of Cornwall, Anno. 1337. by which Creation the eldest Son of the King is Duke of Cornwall from his Birth, or his Father's coming to the Crown. A Duke takes his Name à Ducendo, from Leading, being at first a Leader of the Royal Army; but now it is a Title gi∣ven by Kings to Persons of high Bloud, and excellent Merit; and at this day the Sove∣reign
Princes of some Countries are called Dukes, as of Moscovoy, Savoy, Florence, Sax∣ony, &c. At their Creation they have two Ensigns of Honour (and so have most other Noble men) to signifie their Duty. First, their Heads are adorned with a Chapeau, or Head Attire of Scarlet Colour, doubled or lined with Ermin: And, Secondly a Sword, which is girt about him, which shews his rea∣diness to serve and defend his Prince; his Mantle over his shoulders is guarded with four guards or Folds of Ermin; his Coro∣net is of Gold, set round with Leaves; the Cap is of Crimson (but not indented as the Prince's is, unless he be of the Bloud Royal,) and his Verge is of Gold: Dukes of the Bloud Royal have their Coronet's composed of Crosses, and Flower de-luces, and are repu∣ted as Arch-Dukes. A Duke tantum (or no more but Duke) takes place before Marquess, and Earl; but if a Duke be Marquess, and Earl, or either of them, then he shall take place before such Duke tantum. Note; Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls, at their Creation are girt with a Sword, (or else it is put over their Shoulders) which Viscounts, and Barons, have not. A Duke out of the King's or Prince's presence, may have a Cloth of State han∣ging down within half a yard of the Ground; his Duchess may have the same, and her
Train born up by a Baroness. No Earl, without Permission, ought to wash with a Duke. Dukes Eldest Sons, by the Courtesie of England, are from their Birth styled Mar∣quesses, (and the younger Sons Lords,) and and take place of Viscounts, but not so pri∣vileg'd by the Laws of the Land. A Duke hath the Title of Grace; being written un∣to, he is styled Most High, Most Noble, and Potent Prince; also Right Noble. Dukes of the Bloud are styled, Most High, Most Mighty, and Illustrious Princes. The Ceremonies at his Creation are these: He hath his Sur-coat and Hood, and is led between two of the Noblest Persons present, not being above him; a little be∣fore him on the Right-hand goeth an Earl with the Cap of State, and Coronet on it; on the other side an Earl with the Verge: Just before him one of the greatest Estate (as Marquess, &c.) bearing his Sword, and before him an Earl bearing his Mantle, and Robe of State; all which Nobles must be in their Robes. His Title is proclaimed twice, and Largus thrice: His Honour is Heredi∣tary, (as is all the Nobles, unless otherwise Provided in their Patent, which is rare.) Lastly, a Duke may constitute six Chap∣lains.
CHAP. V. Of a Marquess. A Marquess (by the Saxons called Mar∣ken Reeve, i. e. a Governor or Ruler of the Marches) hath the next place of Honour to a Duke. This Title came in first by Richard the 2d. who created Robert Vere Marquess of Dublin, whereas before, they that governed the Marches were entituled Earl of March, (which Marches were those Grounds between England, and Wales, and are now reduced into the Counties and Shires of Monmouth, Brecknock, Radnor, Den∣bigh, and Mountgomery.) At his Creation he is honoured with a Coronet of Gold, com∣posed of a Strawberry Leaf, and a Point pearled of equal hight round; his Mantle hath three folds, or doublings, and a half; his Eldest Son is by Courtesie called Earl, or Lord of his Father's Title, his younger only Lord John, Thomas, or the like. His Ti∣tle is Most Noble, Most Honourable, and Potent Prince: If the King, Prince, or a Duke be absent, he may have a Cloath of State to reach within a yard of the Ground; his Marchioness may have her Train born up by a Knight's Lady in her own house, but not
in the presence of a Duchess; his eldest Son shall wear as many powderings as an Earl, but must give place to an Earl, and his Wife to a Countess, but may sit above all Marquess Daughters, the Eldest whereof is born Countess, and the rest Ladies. At his Creation he must have his Surcoat and Hood: He is led by Marquesses, his Sword, Cap, &c. are born by Earls. CHAP VI. Of an Earl. THE Dignity of an Earl, is either local, or personal; local, as from some place, as Oxford, &c. or personal, as Earl Marshal, Earl Rivers, &c. Hugh Lupus was the first Hereditary Earl, Anno 1067. made so by William the First, who created him Earl of Chester, and gave him Jura Regalia within the said County. An Earl is created by Letters Patents, and adorned with a Cap of Honour, and a Coronet of Gold, composed of Leaves, and Points pearled; the Leaves lower than the Points: He hath his Hood, Surcoat, and Mantle of State, with three Guards of Furr, being Ermin, upon his Shoulders, (though some
say it ought to be white;) he is girt with a Sword also. When the King writes to a Duke, Marquess, or Earl, he styles them Cosins, though of no Kin. Formerly they had the Title of Prince, but now it is, Most Potent and Noble Lord, Right Honourable, Truly Noble, &c. Out of his Superiour's presence he may have a Cloth of State fringed, but without Pen∣dents; his Wife may have her Train born by an Esquire's Wife, but not in the presence of a Marchioness. CHAP. VII. Of a Viscount. THe next Degree of Honour is a Vis∣count, formerly a name of Office un∣der an Earl, who being the immediate Offi∣cer of the King in the County, and his personal Attendence at Court often required, he had his Deputy to look after the Affairs of the County; which Office is now called Vice-comes, or Sheriff; but in the 18th of Henry VI. it became a Degree of Ho∣nour, conferred upon John Beaumont by Let∣ters Patents, as all since are: He hath his Surcoat and Mantle, which hath two Guards
and an half of white Fur: His Coronet is set round with Pearls, or Balls, close to the Ring, without number, but close together: He hath the Title of Right Honourable, Truly Noble, Potent Lord, &c. He may have a Traverse in his House, ex∣cept in his Superiour's presence; his Wife may have her Train born up by a Woman out of her Superiours presence, in their pre∣sence by a Man. CHAP. VIII. Of Barons, or Lords, which are Spiritual and Temporal. THe next and lowest Degree of Nobility, is that of a Baron, which is twofold, Lords Spiritual, and Temporal; but first of the Lords Spiritual, or Bishops. § 1. By Lords Spiritual are meant on∣ly the Suffragan Bishops, for the Archbi∣shops are accounted of the prime Nobility of the Kingdom, of which we have two, viz. of Canterbury, and York. 1. The Archbishop of Canterbury had formerly great Honour; so that no Legate, or Nuntio from Rome could exercise any Le∣gantine Power, without the King's special
License; else he was accountable to the Archbishop of Canterbury. In General Councils he had place before all Archbi∣shops, at the Pope's right Foot, and at home was reputed the second Person in the King∣dom, or first Peer of the Realm, having Pre∣cedency of all Dukes, (not of the Royal Bloud) and of all the great Officers of State. He hath Power to summon the Archbishop of York, and the Bishops of his Province to a National Synod: He is styled (even by the King) by the Grace of God, and writes himself by Divine Providence, as doth the Archbishop of York, (whereas other Bishops write by Divine Per∣mission:) He hath the Title of Grace given him, as Dukes have, and of most Reverend Father in God, and Metropolitan of all Eng∣land. The Coronation of the King hath anci∣ently belonged to him, it being resolved that wheresoever the Court was, the King and Queen were the proper and Domestical Pari∣shioners of the Archbishop of Canterbury. The Bishop of London is accounted his Provincial, the Bishop of Winchester his Chancellour, and the Bishop of Rochester his Chaplain: He hath under his Jurisdiction twenty one Suffragan Bishops, seventeen in England, and four in Wales: His Clergies Tenths are 65.1 l.—18 s. —2¼ d.— his Archbishoprick is valued in the King's Book at 2816 l.—17 s.—9¼d. He may qualifie and retain eight Chaplains,
which is two more than a Duke may. 2. The Archbishop of York, pretended anciently to have all the Bishops of Scotland under his Inspection, and that they should re∣ceive their Consecration from him, and swear Canonical Obedience to his See; (he is al∣lowed to write himself Metropolitan of Eng∣land, but not of All England, as Canterbury doth;) but at length the Bishops of Scotland would not acknowlege any such Power to him, and disowned all Obedience to him, and had Archbishops of their own, Anno 1466. leaving him in England but four Bishops: His Bishoprick is now valued at 1609 l. —19s.—2d. And the Tenths of the Cler∣gy to 1113 l.—17 s.—9 d. 10 b. 1. qu. he hath Precedency before all Dukes not of the Royal Bloud, and before all great Offi∣cers of State, except the Lord Chancellour, or Lord Keeper. He hath the Title of Grace, and most Reverend Father in God; and he writeth by Divine Providence: He hath the Honour to crown the Queen, and to be her perpetual Chaplain, and hath great Pri∣vileges, only Durham hath a peculiar Juris∣diction, exempt from the See of York. Having made this Digression, we come next to speak of the Suffragan Bishops, who though they have some peculiar Precedencies a∣mongst themselves, yet in general they are esteemed as Barons, and from thence have
the names of Lords Spiritual. In their own Courts they have power to judge, and pass Sentence alone; and therefore they send forth their Writs in their own name, and not in the King's: In whatever Princes Dominions they are, their Episcopal Digni∣ty and Degree is owned: In Parliament they Vote in all things, except in matter of Life and Limb. They have the Title of Lord, are styled Right Reverend Fathers in God, and write by Divine Permission: They may qualifie 6 Chaplains (which are as many as a Duke,) and are Barons and Peers of the Realm: And as Spiritual Barons precede all under the Degree of a Viscount, and are pla∣ced on the King's Right Hand in Parliament. All Church-men are prohibited the wearing of Swords, and a Priest the Order of Knighthood. § 2. Of Barons Temporal. We may observe that the word Baron is variously derived; some from the Greek , some from Ba∣ro, which is the same with Vir in Latine, and with Varon in the Spanish; so that Baron signifies a notable or principal man; thus anciently the Burgesses of London were called Barons, as those of the Cinque-Ports now are: but leaving the Name to speak of the Person, a Baron (the Archbishops excepted) is a Dignity next to a Viscount, and though, according to Cambden, they are not by our Common Laws allowed to be of the Degree
of Nobility, yet this of a Baron may be by Tenure; for the Title of Baron by Pa∣tent (which is under the Broad-Seal of England) is Status, Gradus, Dignitas, and being by the King's Writ summoned as Mem∣bers of the higher House of Parliament, they are thereby made Nobles and Peers of the Realm. As they are Barons, without any other Distinction, they wear a Coronet, (by the Ordinance of King Charles the 2d.) ha∣ving six Balls or Pearls set close to the Bor∣der at equal distance, and have their peculiar Parliament Robes, which have two doublings of white Furr. Thus far of Noble Men. CHAP. IX. Of Noble Women, and first of the Queen. THere are three sorts of Queens. 1. A Queen-Sovereign, to whom the Crown descends by Birth-right, and is equal in Power to a King; if she marry she is So∣vereign to her Husband, and he her Subject, (in England,) though he be an Emperour. 2. The Queen-Consort: She hath very great Privileges, and the Laws set so high a value on her, as to make it High Treason to conspire her Death, or violate her Cha∣stity;
her Robes are the same with a Sove∣reign Queen: She sits in State by the King, keeps her Court, and hath the same General Officers as the King hath; though she be an Alien, she needs no Act of Parliament to na∣tralize her, the Crown taking away that defect: She hath the same Honour perfor∣med to her that the King hath, as well from Foreigners as Subjects. 3. The Queen-Dowager: She hath the same Honour done to her also, and takes place next the Queen-Consort; nor doth she lose her Title of Queen, though she marry a private Gentleman, as Queen Katha∣rine, Widow to Henry the 5th. who, though she married Owen Tudor, Esq; yet she maintained her Action at Law, as Queen of England: So in King Edward the 6th's Time Sir Thomas Seymer, Lord high Admiral, ha∣ving married the Queen Dowager to Henry the 8th. she denied Precedency to her Sister in Law, the Lord Protectour's Wife, as be∣longing to her as Queen, which was aggra∣vated so high, that it proved the untime∣ly Deaths of those two famous Men. The King's Daughters are all Princesses; the Eldest is called the Princess Royal, and her Royal Highness. All Noble Mens, Baronets, and all Knights Wives are in Writings called Dames, (whence comes the name Madam.) Esquires
and Gentlemens Wives are called Gentle∣women. Noble Women are so either by Descent, Creation, or Marriage; all which shall remain Noble, although they marry under their Degree. If a Gentleman, or a Peer, marry a Wife of ignoble Birth, she shall enjoy the Title and Dignity of her Husband all her Life; but it is by the Courtesie, not by the Law of England, to give it her after her Husband's Death. If a Woman of Bloud marry a mean Person, he is not at all advanced, but she shall retain her own Honour; and if she be an Heiress, and have a Child by such ignoble Person her Son may bear her Coat Armour; but this is disputed by many, and denied by some, yet there are Examples of it, but are too long to recite here. An Alien Woman married to a Peer, can have no privilege by her Husband, unless she be naturalized. The King may create any Woman to any Title of Honour by Letters Patents to them and their Heirs, which Heirs shall enjoy all the Titles and Honours due to their Mothers; as, if she be a Duchess, he shall be a Duke, &c. and many Men have claimed Ti∣tles of Honour and Dignity in Right of the Wives, by marrying the Sole Heiress of a
Noble-man who had those Honours: And the Children of those persons so claiming have enjoyed the said Titles in right of their Mothers, but if they have no Children, the Husband loseth the Title. CHAP. X. Of Injuries done to Noble Men. THus far briefly of the several Degrees of Noble Men, of whom the Laws of this Land are so carefull, as to make pro∣vision in a most especial manner to preserve their Honour and Reputation indempnified, and therefore in the 2d. of Ric. II. Chap. 1. it is enacted, That all spreaders of false and reproachfull Words and Lyes against the No∣bility, Prelates, and great Men in publick Of∣fices, (the offender) shall incurr the Punish∣ment ordained by the Statute of Westminster, Chap. 33. which ordains, That the offender be imprisoned, untill he have found the first reporter: And in the 12th of Rich. II. Chap. 12. it is enacted, That if the Offender doth not (or cannot) find the first reporter, then he shall be punished by Advice of the Coun∣cil. In the first and second of Philip and Mary it was enacted, That the Justices of the Peace
in the Shire, County, City, or Town Cor∣porate, shall have full Power to hear and de∣termine the Causes abovesaid, and that be∣sides such Penalties as shall be inflicted by such Justices, &c. on the offender, every Noble Man, Prelate, or great Officer, against whom such scandalous Words, false News, or Lyes are spread or spoken, may prosecute the offender in an Action of Scandalum Mag∣natum, and recover Damages. If any Noble Man or Gentleman's Coat-Armour, or Sword, &c. at the solemnizing of his Funerals be set up in the Church for the Honour of the Deceased, and is by the Incumbent (or any other) taken down by pretence of Right, as Offerings due to him, or if they be otherwise defaced by any other Person, he or they may be punished as Ma∣lefactours, but the Action must not be brought by the Widow, but by the Heir, as Defender of his Ancestour's Honour. CHAP. XI. Of Knights of the Garter. WE proceed to those Degrees of Ho∣nour that are less Noble, and accoun∣ted amongst Commoners. The first of which
the Knights of the Noble Order of the Gar∣ter; they are called the Knights of St. George and were instituted by King Edward the 3d. Anno 1350. which was fifty years before the Order of St. Michael in France, 229 years be∣fore the Order of the Holy Ghost in France, 80 years before the Order of the Golden-Fleece in Burgundy, and 209 years before that of the Elephant in Denmark. The Ceremonies of this Order are many, and too long to recite; the occasion was, that King Edward the 3d might more firmly unite the hearts of his principal Peers and Friends to him in the French Wars, the Num∣ber is 26, whereof the King is Sovereign; and upon the Death of any one, another is to be chosen by the King: The Honourable∣ness of this Order appears by the many No∣ble Personages who have took up this Or∣der; there having been eight Emperours, seven Kings of Portugal, five Kings of Den∣mark, three Kings of Naples, two Kings of Scots before the Union, two Kings of Swe∣den, besides many of the German and Italian Princes.
August the 25th 1685. The Knights of this Order were as followeth. King of Denmark. The Sovereign. King of Sweeden. Prince of Orange. Prince Elector of Brandenburgh.   Prince George of Denmark.   Duke of Ormond.   Duke of Buckingham.   Earl of Oxford.   Earl of Strafford.   Duke of Albemarle.   Duke of Beaufort.   Earl of Bedford.   Duke of Southampton.   Earl of Mulgrave.   Duke of New-Castle.   Earl of Danby.   Duke of Grafton.   Duke of Richmond.   Duke of Hamilton.   Duke of Somerset.   Duke of Northumberland.   Duke of Norfolk.   Earl of Peterborough.   Earl of Rochester.   Earl of Feversham, then Installed.  
Knights of this Order, as they are April 1689. King of Denmark. The Sovereign. King of Sweeden. P. Elector of Brandenburgh. Prince George of Denmark.   Earl or Oxford.   Earl of Strafford.   Duke of Beaufort.   Earl of Bedford.   Duke of Southampton.   Earl of Mulgrave.   Duke of Newcastle.   Earl of Danby.   Duke of Grafton.   Duke of Richmond.   Duke of Hamilton.   Duke of Somerset.   Duke of Northumberland.   Duke of Norfolk.   Earl of Peterborough.   Earl of Rochester.   Earl of Feversham.   Earl of Sunderland.   Duke of Ormond.   Duke Fred. Mares. de Schomberg.   Earl of Devonshire.  
They wear, as their daily Habit, the Im∣mage of St. George, encountering the Dragon, set with Pearl and precious Stones, hanging in a blew Ribbon always about their Neck; they have also a Garter enamel∣led with Gold, Pearl, and precious Stones, with a Motto, Honi soit qui mal y pense, em∣broydered upon it; which is fastened with a Buckle about their left Leg, from whence they are called Knights of the Garter: King Charles the first added to these, that all these Knights should always wear on the left side of their Cloaks, or Coats, a Star of Silver, embroidered with the Escouchen of St. George. (viz Argent a Cross Gules) en∣circled with the Garter; without these they are not to appear in publick. The Robes more peculiarly belonging to the Order, are a Cassock of Crimson Velvet, lined with white Sarsenet, a Mantle of pur∣ple Velvet, lined with white Sarsenet also, on the left Shoulder whereof is an Escouchen of St. George, embroidered and encircled with the Garter and Motto; these are only worn upon St. George's Day, and when it shall please the Sovereign to celebrate the Ceremonies of the Installment, at their Feast, and on the King's Offering days, if in Court, and have no other Title of Honour. To each Knight belongs a Collar of the Order, made of pure Gold, weighing 30
Ounces Troy; composed of Garters and Roses enemalled, Red, (and White since Henry 7th,) and since the Union of the Kingdoms mixed with Thistles; which Col∣lar hath the Image of St. George, set with precious Stones appendent, and worn over all their Robes at St. George's Feast, and over their Cloaks or Coats on the King's Offering days; they take place according to the Seniority of their Installment; and if they have no other Titles, which is very rare, they succeed Barons. Their Officers are a Prelate, which is all∣ways the Bishop of Winchester, a Chancellor, a Register, a King at Arms, and an Usher, called, the Black Rod, which was added by Henry 8th. CHAP XII. Of Knights Bannerets. THese are called by some Equites Vexillarii or Cheviliers a Banier, and is a most ancient Order, being instituted by King Edward the first, and always conferred upon the most deserving men for their signal Va∣lour, who in process of time (as some say) obtained the Names of Barons, and were
admitted into the Peerage, and their Heirs enjoyed their Titles: But certain it is they always retained some Ensigns of Honour equal to the Nobility, being allowed to bear Arms with Supporters, which none under the Degree of a Baron are to doe: They take place before the younger Sons of Vis∣counts and Baronets, and are of such esteem, that divers Esquires, and Knights Bache∣lors have served under them. This Order in France was Hereditary, but with us it is only for Life to the meri∣torious Person, yet esteemed as a Glory and Honour to the Family. The Ceremonies of their Creation is most Noble; the King (or his General, if the King be not present,) after a Victory obtained, doth at the Head of the Army, drawn up in Battalia, under his Royal Standard, attended with all his Nobles and Field Officers, receive the Per∣son to be Knighted, led between two re∣nowned Knights, or men at Arms, having his Pennion of Arms in his Hand; and before him the Hearalds, who proclaim his va∣liant Atchievement, for which he is counted worthy to be made a Knight Banneret, and to display his Banner in the Field: Then the King saith unto him, advances toy Ban∣neret; and then he causeth the point of his Pennion to be rent off: Then the new Knight having the Trumpets sounding, the
Nobles and Officers accompanying him, he is attended to his Tent, where they are no∣bly treated. A Banneret thus made may bear his Ban∣ner displayed in the Royal Army, and set his Arms thereon with Supporters, as Nobles doe. The last of this Order was Sir John Smith, so made after Edg-hill-Fight, for his valiant rescuing the King's Standard from the Rebels. CHAP. XIII. Of Baronets. THis is the lowest Degree of Hereditary Honour, and in that case succeeds Ba∣rons: It was Instituted anno 1611. in the 9th of King James the First: They are created by Letters, Patents, under the Great Seal of England, to him and to his Heirs Males; yet sometimes it may be o∣therwise entailed; but this is rare, and must be inserted in the Patent. The In∣tention of this Order was for the propaga∣ting a Plantation in the Province of Ʋlster in Ireland; towards which they were to lend their Aid or maintain 30 Soldiers each for 3 Years in Ireland, after the rate of 8d.
per Day. They have Precedency of all Knights, except those of the Garter, Knights Banne∣rets, and Knights being privy Counsellors. In all Writs, Commissions, &c. they are are sty∣led Baronets, and the Title of Sir added to their Names, and of Lady to their Wives: They take place according to the Priority of the Date of their Patents, unless the King insert a Clause to the contrary, which is very rare. Those admitted are to be of good Reputation, and whose Grand father (at least) by the Father's Side bore Arms; and he must be of the yearly Estate of 1000 l. de claro. They, or their eldest Son, may receive the Order of Knight-hood at the age of 21 Years, and they shall bear on a Can∣ton (or on an Escoucheon, which can be best placed on their Arms) the Arms of Ʋlster, Argent, a Sinister Hand in Pale, Couped at Wrist, Gules. In the Royal Ar∣my they have place in the Gross, near the Royal Standard, and are allowed some peculiar Solemnities for their Fune∣rals.
CHAP XIV. Of the Knights of the Bath. THey are called Knights of the Bath from the manner of their Creation, and also Knights of the Holy Trinity from the Medal which they wear, which is three Crowns, with an Inscription about it, which was formerly, Tria Numina juncta in Ʋno: But at King James the First his Coronation the word Numina was left out; and so it alluded to the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, which were then joy∣ned in one. They are usually made at the Coronation of a King or Queen, and at the Creation of a Prince, or Duke of the Royal Bloud; as at the Creation of Henry Prince of Wales, and Charles Duke of York: These Knights saith Froysard, as quoted by Bloom, were first created in Anno. 1399. but Elias Ashmole Esq; thinks them more ancient, and that Henry IV. who was then King, did not constitute, but rather restore the ancient manner of making Knights, and made it peculiar to the Knights of the Bath, which hath continued so ever since. They are
assigned no Statues; neither are they to wear their Robes but upon the time of So∣lemnity, except a red Ribbon worn cross their left Shoulder, (as those of the Garter do a Blew,) with a Medal above mentioned; and upon a Vacancy, their number (which is uncertain) is not supplied. They are created with many and Noble Ceremonies, and have had Princes, and the prime of the Nobility of their Order. The principal Ce∣remonies are these: The Person is first sent for by the King, (and at his coming to Court, the King usu∣ally Knights him with the Sword of State,) where he is honourably received by the chief Officers and Nobles of the Court, and hath two Esquires to wait upon him, and con∣vey him to the Chamber appointed, (and see him no more that day,) where he is en∣tertained with Musick; then a Bath is pre∣pared by a Barber, who is to trim him, and then the King is informed that he is ready for the Bath; then is he instructed by the most grave Knights in the Order and Fees of Chivalry, the Musick all the while playing at the Door; then they undress him and put him naked into the Bath, at which time the Musick ceases, and one of the grave Knights saith to him, Be this an ho∣nourable Bath to thee. From the Bath he is conveyed to his Bed, which is plain with∣out
Curtains, &c. as soon as he is dry they shall help to dress him, putting over his in∣ward Garment a Russet Robe with long Sleeves, and an Hood like an Hermits; the Barber the mean while takes away the Bath, which, with all that belongs to it, and the Collar about his Neck, is his fees. He is then conducted to the Chapel with Musick, where being entered, the Knights and Es∣quires shall be entertained with Wine, and Spices, and take their leave; then the Priest and the two Esquires, with the new Knight, perform a vigil till almost day, with Pray∣ers and Offerings, beseeching God (and his Blessed Mother) to make him worthy of that Dignity; and being confessed, he shall hold a Taper in his hand untill the reading of the Gospel, at which time the shall deli∣ver his Hood to one of the Esquire, and the Taper to the other Esquire, and a Penny must be laid on the Altar, on or near the Candlestick; and when the priest comes to the Words Verbum caro factum est, he, while Kneeling, shall take the Taper and of∣fer it to God, and the Penny to him who is to make him a Knight: Prayers done, he is conducted to his Chamber for some re∣pose, untill the King's Pleasure be known, then being dressed he is led into the Hall, being girt with a Girdle of white Leather without Buckles, a Coif upon his Head, a
Mantle of Silk over a Kirtle of Tartarin, tyed with a lace of white Silk, and a pair of white Gloves hanging at the end of the Lace; (all which is the Chandlers Fees) then mounting on horse back, the grave Knights conduct him up the Hall to the King (with his Sword, and his Spurs hanging at the po∣mil, carried before him) where the Marshal and the Usher meeting him, desire him to allight, and the Marshal shall take his Horse for his Fee; being brought to the second Table, with his Sword and Spurs held up∣right before him, the King asks for the Sword and Spurs, which being shewed by the Chamberlain, the King takes the right Spur and gives it to the most Noble Person there, and wills him to put it on the Person's heel, and the Knight himself puts on the other, then the King taking the Sword, girds it about him, and puting his Arms a∣bout his Neck; saith, Be thou a good Knight, and kisseth him. The Knight thus made, is conducted back to the Chapel, where kneeling, with his right hand laid upon the high Altar, he pro∣miseth to defend the rights of the Holy Church untill his Death, and ungirding his Sword he offereth it to God: At his going out the King's Master-Cook stands ready with his Carving knife in his hand; Saying, I the King's Master-Cook am come to receive
thy Spurs for my Fees; and if you do any thing contrary to the Honour of Knight-hood, (which God forbid) I shall hack your Spurs from your heels. Then the Knight is conducted into the Hall, where he sits at Table with the Knights that are there, and rising again, he retires into his Chamber, where his Robes are taken off, and he is cloathed in a Blew Robe, having a Lace of white Silk upon his left Shouldier, which ought to be worn upon all his Garments, untill he hath gained some Re∣nown in feats of Arms; or else some Princess or great Lady cut it from his Shoulder. Af∣ter dinner he is conducted by the Knights into the King's Presence, to return him thanks for these Honours; and taking his leave, with craving Pardon for any miscar∣riage, he is dismist by the Title of Knight of the Bath. CHAP. XV. Of Knights Bachelours. THE Title of Knight is a Word taken from Horsman-ship, as their several Names in divers Languages signifie, the Ita∣lians and Spaniards call them Cevalieri, the French Chevaliers, the Britains Margagh,
the Germans, Rutters, and our Ancient Saxons Cinht, whence some observe that Cinht signi∣fies a Servant, and Rutter a Rider; and so it signifies one that serves on Horseback, to di∣stinguish them from Cinht, or Knecht, which is the common Name of Servants; but the Ro∣mans called them Miles, or Soldiers: They are as ancient as History, and have the Title of Sir attributed to them. No man can be born a Knight, but it is an Honour conferred on them by the Prince, either to encourage them to his Service, or as a reward for Service done, chiefly for his Valour in Battel; and he keeps his Title in all Countries where∣ever he cometh, contrary to all other Degrees of Honour. In Ancient time the manner of making or dubbing of a Knight was with great Honour, as in King Arthur's time we find it thus: The King commanded a large Stage to be erected in, or near some Cathedral Church, and thereon was set a Chair of Silver, covered with Green Silk, in which the Person to be Knighted was placed; then he was deman∣ded whether he was of a healthy Body, and able to undergo the Travel required in a Soldier, also whether he were a man of ho∣nest Conversation, and what credible Wit∣nesses he can produce to affirm the same: Then the Bishop or other Chief Prelate took the Bible, and holding it open before the Knight,
in Presence of the King, and all others, spake these words: Sir, You that desire to receive the Order of Knight-hood, shall swear before God, and on this Holy Book, that you shall not fight against this Mighty and Excellent Prince, that now be∣stoweth the Order of Knight-hood upon you, unless you shall be commanded so to doe in the Service of your own King, for in that Case having first yielded up the Collar, Device, and other Ensigns of Honour now received, it shall be lawfull for you to serve against him without Reproach or Offence to all other Companions in Arms; but otherwise doing, you shall incur In∣famy, and being taken in War, shall be subject to the pains of Death. You shall also swear, with all your Force and Power to maintain and de∣fend all Ladies, Gentlewomen, Orphans, and distressed Women. And you shall shun no ad∣venture of your Person in any War wherein you shall happen to be. This Oath being taken, two of the chief Lords led him to the King, who drew forth his Sword, and laid it upon his Head, saying, God and St. George (or any other Saint whom he pleaseth, but commonly St. George,) make thee a good Knight. Then came Seven Noble Ladies in white, and girded on his Sword, and four Honourable Knights put on his Spurs: Then the Queen (if there) took him by the right Arm, and a Duchess or greatest Lady by the left, who led him to
a seat, having three Ascents, and there seated him; the King siting on his Right hand, and the Queen on his Left, the Lords and Ladies siting on the three Steps under the King and Queen; where being entertain'd with a Noble Banquet, the Ceremony's ended. Of Degrading of Knights. Examples of this is rarely found, it being used only for great and notable Offences a∣gainst Loyalty and Honour, and then he was Armed Cap-a-Pee, and placed on a high Scaffold in the Church, where the Priest sung some Funeral Psalms, as though he had been dead; then they take off his Helmet, and so by degrees the rest of his Armour: Then the Heralds proclaim him a disloyal Miscreant, and throw him down with a Rope tyed about him over the Stage: O∣ther ways there hath been, as the reversing their Arms, seizing their Equipage, cutting the Spurs from their Heels; and breaking their Sword over their Heads, but of late they had Marshal Law executed upon them.
CHAP. XVI. Of the Knights of the Round Table. THis Order was founded by King Arthur, Anno 516. who after many Glorious Actions abroad, did at his return constitute this Order of Knight-hood, being (as some say) twenty four in number, (some say more,) amongst whom he himself was chief; and for avoiding controversie about taking of place he caused a round Table to be made, from whence they took their Name, which is (said to be) the same that now hangs up in Windsor; none were admitted but such as made suffi∣cient Proof of their Prowess, and were re∣nowned for their Virtue and Valour. Their Articles were, to be allways well Armed for all occasions, and ready to assail Tyrants and Oppressors, to defend Widows, Maidens, and Children, and to relieve those in necessity, to maintain the Christian Faith, to aid the Holy Church, and to protect Pilgrims, to advance Honour, suppress Vice, to bury Soldiers that want Sepulchres, to ransome Captives, deliver Prisoners, and to help towards the cure of wounded Sol∣diers, hurt in the Service of their King and
Country, to record all noble Atchievements, that it might remain for ever to the Honour of their Order; if complaint was made to the King by any Lady, Gentlewoman, or other Person oppressed or wronged, one or more of these Knights were without delay to re∣dress the same, were it at home or in Foreign Lands; if any Foreign Knight came to Court with desire to shew his Prowess, one of these Knights ought to be ready in Arms to answer him, and also that every one of them should be ready to instruct young Lords and Gentlemen in the Exercises of Arms: They had no Robe that is mentioned, nor any Of∣ficer but a Register. Knights of St. Andrew, or of the Thistle in Scotland. Achaius (by some Hungus) King of the Picts, the night before his Battel with Athelstone, King of England, saw in the Skie a bright Cross, like that whereon St. Andrew suffered Martyrdom; and the day proving successfull to him, the Picts and Scots ever since have bore the said Cross in all their Banners and Ensigns; from hence it's thought this Order took it's beginning, Anno 810. the princi∣pal Ensign of this Order, is a golden Collar composed of Thistles, intermixed with An∣nulets of Gold, to which hangeth the Figure
of St. Andrew, with his Cross, and this Motto, Nemo me impunè lacessit; but for their common Ensign, they weara Purple Ribbon, to which hangeth a golden Thistle, crowned with an Imperial Crown, within a Circle of Gold, with the abovesaid Motto. The grand Day of meeting is on St. Andrew's day, and in St. Andrew's Church, their number 13. in allusion to Christ and his twelve Apostles, they are to be richly apparalled, and in their Parliament Robes, having St. Andrew's Cross within a blew Roundel, embroidered on the left Shoulder; and in the centre of the Cross, a Crown composed of Flower-de-luces of Gold. This Order, after it had continued above 700 Years, was wholly laid aside, after the Reformation which happened in the Reign of Mary Queen of Scots, and not restord a∣gain untill King James the 2d. did by a Pa∣tent dated at Windsor, May the 29. 1687. restore this Order again, appointing his Chapel Royal in his Palace at Holy-Rood-house, to be the Chapel of the Order, in∣stead of St. Andrew's Church, which was ruined in the said Reformation. They are appointed to be of the most Noble Men in Scotland, His Late Majesty being Sovereign, who appointed them a Secretary.
Knights of the holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem. This is held the most ancient of all those Orders that took their beginning in the Holy Land, beginning about Anno 1099. some say Philip King of France instituted it; but the better say it was Baldwin, the first King of Jerusalem, who made his regular Canons Knights of this Order: Their Duty was to guard the Holy Sepulchre, to releive and protect Pilgrims, to fight against Infidels, to hear Mass every Day; their Ensign was two red Crosses united in one. When the Christians were expelled the Holy Land these Knights settled themselves at Perugia in Italy, but by the Bull of Pope Innocent 8th anno 1484. they and all their goods were annexed to the Knights Hospitallers at Rhodes. Knights Hospitallers. They were instituted Anno 1099. by one Gerrard of Tholouse, and had large Pri∣vileges granted them by Baldwin the the 1st. who created them Knights, and obliged them to use their Arms against the Infidels, but the Saladine having won Jerusalem, they retired into Acres which being also taken, they seized upon the Isle of Rhodes, where
they continued untill Solyman forced them thence, anno 1522. after which they betook themselves to the Isle of Maltha, where they still continue. Their Habit is black, with a white Cross near the left Shoulder; they vow Obedience, Poverty, and Chastity; since they have been endued with many Dignities, and are devided into three classes, viz. Knights, Ecclesiasticks and Servants: The Great Master hath his Title, the Illustrous Prince of Mal∣tha, and Goza, both which with Tripolis, was given them by the Emperour Charles the Fifth, anno 1530. Knights Templers. They began about anno 1118. after which the King of Jerusalem gave them a Palace, adjoyning to Solomon's Temple, from whence they took their Name. They wear a white Garment with a red Cross, and vow Obe∣dience, Poverty, and Chastity: They were to fight against the Infidels, but at length they grew very Rich, and then exceeding Proud, and fell from the Obedience of the Patriarch of Jerusalem to the Pope; but they encreasing in Riches and Pride, were by him, or with his consent, turned out all their Possessions, their Riches seized upon, and themselves imprisoned, and some executed, but some think it was more for love of their
Lands, than any Crime they had committed, having, as Dr. Heylen observes, sixteen thousand Lordships in Europe. The Tem∣ple in London was theirs, where many of them lie buried, and those that have been in the holy Wars, or fought in the Holy Land, lie with their Feet a cross. Knights of St. Lazarus in Jerusalem. They were first only a Brother-hood of religious Monks, and became an Order of Knight-hood in St. Bassil's time: They were to take care of persons infected with the Leprosie, and had a famous Hospital in Je∣rusalem, called St. Lazarus: After a while the Saracens, by their Incursions, had almost extinguished them; but when the latter Princes joyned together in the holy War, these religious Men did great Service, and found such esteem of Baldwin the 2d. that they gained great Honour under their great Master; and about Anno 1150. they first made their Vows of Obedience, Poverty, and Chastity, before the Patriarch of Jerusalem, and submitted to the Order of St. Benedict. They wear a green Cross, and are to prove themselves born in Wedlock, of Christian Parents, to be Gentlemen by Father and Mother, and of an unblamable Life.
Knights of St. Bass, or St. Bassil. These were founded under the Rule of St. Bassil, and were also called Knights of St. Mary: Their garment was Sky-colour'd, and a golden Cross on their Breast, in the midst whereof was the Picture of St. Bassil. They were all Servants to the King of America. Knights of St. Katharine at Mount Sinai. They were Instituted about 1063. and were to defend the Sepulchre of St. Katharine, and to secure the passages for the Trave∣lers who came thither for Devotion. They follow the Rule of St. Bassil the Great, and wore a white Garment; some Remains of this Order are still in being, though almost ruined by the Turks. Knights of the Martyrs of Palestine. These followed the Rule of St. Bassil, and on their Garments wore a red Cross, in the midst whereof were the Pictures of St. Cosmas and Damian, their Patrons: They ex∣ercise all Acts of Charity to sick folks that were Strangers, they redeemed Captives taken by the Saracens, buried the Dead, &c.
Knights of the Oak, in Navarr. The Moors having almost over-run Na∣varr, Don Gratio Ximenes, leaving his religi∣ous Life, took upon him to conduct Navarr Army, anno 722. and as he was Marching out against the Moors, there appeared to him on the top of an Oak, the form of a Cross, which was adored by an innumerable company of Angels in this Battail; he obtained so signal a Victory that the Peo∣ple elected him King, and soon after he instituted this Order of Knight-hood, in∣vesting therewith the Nobles of this King∣dom who were obliged to defend the Christian Faith, and to own Obedience to the King. Their habit was a white Gar∣ment, and thereon a plain red Cross, set on the top of an Oak in its Verdure. Knights of the Lilly of Navarr. Gracius the 6th King of Navarr, lying ve∣ry sick of a languishing Disease, sent to di∣vers places to have Prayer made for his re∣covery; and in the mean time there was found in the City of Naiera, (where he u∣sually kept his Court,) the Image of our Lady issuing out of a Lilly, with her Son in her Armes, (saith the Legend,) and soon af∣ter
the King recovered, and in Honour thereof Anno 1048. he erected this Order, consisting of 38 Knights, himself and Suc∣cessors being Sovereign: They wear ordina∣rily a Lilly embroidered in Silver on their Breasts; and on feastival Days a double Chain of Gold, interlaced with the Gothish Letter M, having an enamelled Lilly in an oval Medal. Their Habit is white. Knights of the Band in Spain Were erected by Alphonso King of Spain, Anno 1366. who, for his Security against his many Enemies, instituted this Order: They wear a broad red Ribbon cross their left Shoulders, from whence they take their Name. Knights of the Dove in Castile Were institued by John the First, King of Castile, Anno 1379. Their Collar was com∣posed of Pieces, representing the Sun in his Glory, to which hung a golden Dove, enamelled white, and encircled with Rays. Knights of the Fish Scale in Castile. John the 2d. King of Castile, erected this Order to assist him against the Moors, Anno 1420. their Ensign was a Cross composed
of Fish Scales, from whence they took their Name: They were obliged to fight against the Moors, to accompany the King in his Wars, and to dye in the defence of Christianity. Knights of the Lilly in Aragon. These were erected by Ferdinand King of Aragon, Anno 1403. and dedicated to the Blessed Virgin: Their Collar was compo∣sed of Bough-pots, filled with white Lillies, interlaced with Griffons. Knights of Mount joy. They were instituted in the Holy-Land, to fight against the Moors and Saracens, and lay in Garrison in a Castle on a Moun∣tain near Jerusalem: They wore a short red Mantle, and on their Breast a white Star, with five Rays; they observed the Rules of St. Benedict; but when the Holy Land was lost they retired into Spain, where, after some time, they falling to decay, were in∣corporated into the Order of the Calatrava. Knights of Acon, or Acress. They lived in the City of Acon, and re∣leived and defended the Pilgrims that went
to the Holy Land: They wore a black Gar∣ment, whereon was a white Cross Pattee; they followed the Rule of St. Augustine, and after the loss of Palestine, they retired into Spain, where, in process of time, they were incorporated into the Knights Hospital∣lers. Knights of St. James in Galicia. This Order is of the greatest esteem in Spain; they were instituted to drive the A∣rabians out of Castile; their Number was 13. and a Governour, and had for their Ensign a red Cross in form of a Sword, with an Escallop Shell on it: They have now a great Master, and have power to remove any, and choose another. They meet on All-Saints day, and have great Revenues. Knights of Saint Saviours in Aragon. They were instituted Anno 1118. by Don Alphonso, to endeavour the forcing the Moors out of Aragon, and were composed of Spanish and French Nobility: They wore a white Mantle, and on the Breast a red Cross; but when the Moors were expelled, their Revenues were joyned to the Crown.
Knights of St. Julian, or of Alcantara. They were instituted Anno 1176. in Al∣cantara in Castiglia, on the River Tago, where they had a stately Church, and great Revenues: Their Habit was black, and on their Breast a green Cross. Their first great Master was Ferdinand the Second, King of Leon and Galicia. Knights of Callatrava in Castile. This Order is ancient, being instituted by Sanchio the 3d. King of Toledo, about 1158. and took its Name from their Place: They wore a black Garment and a red Cross on their Breasts. Knights of Truxillo, or Trugillo. They took their Name from their Seat, which was Trugillo in Spain, and were insti∣tuted before the Year 1227. but the true time of their Institution, or Habit, is not certainly known. Knights of our Lady and St. George. They arose upon the dissolution of the Knights Templers and were instituted by James the 2d. King of Aragon and Valen∣cia, Anno 1317. for defending his Kingdom
against the Moors: They wore a black Ha∣bit, with a plain red Cross, vowed Conjugal Chastity, and followed the Rule of those of Callatrava, to whom they were subject. Knights of St. Mary de Merced in Aragon. They were instituted by James the First, King of Aragon, Anno 1218. and had their Name from the Benefit that the Christians might expect from them. Their annual day was Saint Lawrence; their Habit a Coat and Scapular of ordinary white Cloath, garnished with Ribbons and Cordons, wherewith it was fastened to their Necks; and on the upper part a Cap, or Hood, which covered half their Heads: They professed Conjugal Chastity, and Obedience to Su∣periours. Knights of the Rosary in Toledo. They were instituted by Roderick, Archbi∣shop of Toledo, to resist the Moors in de∣fence of the Catholick Religion: They are continually to say the Rosary of the Blessed Lady, and were of the Dominican Order; their Ensign was the Figure of our Lady of the Rosary upon a Cross, quarterly, Argent, and Sable.
Knights of the Golden-Fleece. They were instituted by Philip Duke of Burgundy, and Earl of Flanders, Anno 1429. Their first Number was 24. but were increa∣sed afterwards by Charles the 5th. St. An∣drew is their Patron: Their Habit is a Cas∣sock of Crimson Velvet, over it a Mantle of the same, lined with white, which openeth on the right Side, and is turned up over the left Shoulder, embroidered round with a Border, Flames, Fucels, and Flecces, with a Hood of Crimson Velvet: The Collar which they always are to wear is of Gold, wrought with Flames, Fucels, and golden Fleeces: The lawfull Duke of Burgundy is Great Master, or Sovereign of the Order, who hath absolute Power to bestow it on whom he pleases; but whosoever entereth into this Order must renounce all other Or∣ders of Knight-hood, except the Emperour, and those Kings, Princes, and Dukes, who are Sovereings of their own Orders. They have a Chancellour, a Treasurer, a Register, and a King at Arms, called Toizon D' Or. Their meeting day is the second of May. Knights D' Avis. These were instituted by Don Alphonso Henriquez the First, King of Portugal, and
were at first called Knights of St. Mary E∣vora, and not long after Knights of D' Avis, from a Castle of that Name: Their Badge is a Green Cross Flory, and they follow the Rule of St. Benedict: None are admitted in∣to this Order but such as are Gentlemen by Father and Mother two Descents. Knights of St. Michael's Wing. The same Don Alphonso Henriquez, having obtained a great Victory against the Moors, he in honour of St. Michael, his tuteler Saint, (who appeared on his right side fighting a∣gainst the Moors,) instituted this Order of Knight-hood, Anno 1171. Their Badge was a red Sword crossed with a Flower-de-luce, and this Motto, Quis ut Deus? They were of the Cistertian Order, and were to defend the Country against the Incursions of the Moors. Knights of St. James Were instituted by Don Denys the Sixth, King of Portugal, 1310. by whose help he cleared his Country of the Moors: They pro∣fess Conjugal Chastity, Hospitality, and Obedience: Their Ensign is a red Sword; their Habit white, and none are admitted but Gentlemen of Bloud.
Knights of Christ Were instituted in Portugal, under Don Denys the Sixth above, by Pope John the 22d. who gave them the Possessions of the Knights Templers in Portugal: They follow the Cistertian Order, and wear a black Ha∣bit, with a Cross Pattee, Gules, (upon the Breast,) charged with another Argent. The Knights of Jesus Christ in France. They were instituted by Charles King of France, and Richard the Second, King of England, for recovery of the Holy Land: They had divers Officers, and profest Obedi∣ence, Conjugal Chastity, and Poverty: Their habit was a sad coloured Coat of Cloath, reaching to the Calf of their Leg, girt about them with a Girdle of Silk, or Leather, two Fingers broad, a red Cap, and over all a white woolen Coat, with a red Cross of woolen Cloath, about two Fingers broad, upon the Breast, from top to bottom, and came round their Waste: Their num∣ber were a thousand, each Knight had an Esquire Armed at all points, and three Var∣lets, one to carry his Helmet and Launce, another his Coat of Mail, and the third to lead his Sumpter.
Knights of the Virgin Mary of Mount Car∣mell. They were instituted by Henry the Fourth of France, and confirmed by Pope Paul the Fifth 1608. They are to be the choice Gentle∣men of France, and are to attend the King in War to fight against the Enemies of the Roman Church, and vow Obedience and Chastity; they consist of a hundred Knights, and hold their Feast anually on the 16th of July: Their Badge is a Cross of eight points, of a tawney collour, with a white Border sewed on the left side of their Cloaks, and the Figure of the V. Mary of Mount Carmell, encircled with Rays of Gold, placed in the midst, and embroidered: They wear the like Cross of Gold, enamelled, hanging about their Necks in a tawney Ribbon. The Knights of St. Michael. They were erected by Lewis the Eleventh of France, An. 1469 in memory of an Appa∣rition of St. Michael upon the Bridge of Or∣leance, when that City was besieged by the English: Their Habit is Doublet, Hose, Shooes, Scabard, Cap, Band, and Feather, all white; the Surcoat with Slieves is Cloath of Silver; over all a Mantle of the same, tyed up∣on
the right Shoulder, and turned up over the left, bordered about with an Embroide∣ry of Cockles and Knots; over all the Collar of St. Michael, which is very rich, unto which hangeth the Picture of St. Michael: Their number at first were but thirty six, now much encreased; they meet on Mi∣chaelmas day; the King is Sovereign, and they have a Treasurer, a Chancellour, a Register, and a Herald, named Monsan Mi∣chael. Knights of the Holy Ghost Were instituted by Henry the Third of France, 1578. in honour of Whitsunday, on which day he was elected King of Poland: There number is an hundred, (besides the King who is Sovereign;) in which number are four Cardinals, five Prelates, a Chancellour, a Provost, a Master of the Ceremonies, a great Treasurer, and a Scribe: Their Feast day is the first of January: Their Robe is black Velvet, embroidered with Flower de-Luces of Gold and Silver, with knots of Gold be∣tween sundry Rings, or Cyphers of Sil∣ver, and Flames of Gold, in Imitation of the cloven Tongues; a Mantle of green Cloath of Silver, embroidered as the other, tyed on the right, and turned up on the left, both lined with Orange coloured Satten; their
Hose, Doublet, and Feather were white, but their Bonnets black; over all a Collar of the Order, being the same with the Embroidery work, at which hangeth a Cross, with the Figure of a Dove in the centre thereof. Knights of the Gennet. Some esteem this the most ancient Order in France, and instituted by Charles Martiall, High Steward of France, Anno 726. They were sixteen in number, and had a Collar of Gold made of a Triple Chain, interwoven with enamelled red Roses, and at the end whereof hung a Gennet of Gold, black and red, on a bank of Flowers all enamelled, &c. Knights of the Crown Royal Were erected by Charles the Great, Son to King Pepin, Anno 802. for honouring of those amongst the Frezons who had been valiant in the Army against the ancient Sa∣xons and Lombards: Their Ensign was an Im∣perial Crown, which these Knights wore upon their Breast: They were invested with a military Belt, and a box on the Ear.
Knights of the Lady of the Stan. Instituted by King Robert of France, Anno 1022. in Honour of the Virgin Mary: They wore a Mantle of white Damask, lined with light Carnatian Satten, and Surcoats of the same; on their left side they wore an embroi∣dered Star of Gold: Their Collar was much like that of the Gennet, at which did hang a Figure of a Star; but many Persons of no merit being admitted into this Order, it was discontinued under Charles the Seventh of France. Knights of the Thistle of Bourbonne. Were erected by Lewis the Second, Duke of Bourbone, on New-years day, 1370. Their num∣ber was twenty six, of which himself and Suc∣cessours are Sovereign: Their Habit was a Mantle of Sky-coloured Damask, lined with red Satten, and broad Welts of Gold embroi∣dered on the Collar; the Bonnet was of green Velvet, with a Tassel of Gold, and crimson Silk, hanging at the Band; the great Collar was of Gold enamelled with green, to hang in an oval; the Picture of the blessed Virgin, their Patroness, with the Head of a Thistle, enamelled green and white; they daily wear a Girdle, or Belt of watchet Vel∣vet,
embroidered with Gold, in the midst of which was wrought the word Esperance. Knights of the Porcupine, Instituted by Lewis Duke of Orleance, An. 1393. They were twenty four, besides the Founder: Their habits were Surcoats of violet Velvet, over which were Mantles of watchet Velvet, lined with Carnatian Satten; ther Collar was formed of golden Chains, whereto hung a Porcupine of Gold, upon a hillock of Grass and Flowers. Knights of the Cressants of Anjou. Erected by Rene Duke of Anjou, King of Jerusalem and Sicily, Anno 1464. Their Pa∣tron was St. Maurice, the King and his Suc∣cessours were Sovereigns: Their Mantle was Crimson Velvet, on the right side where∣of was a golden Cressant, whereon was writ L'oz, enamelled; and to this Cressant was fast'ned as many small pieces of Gold in forms of Columes, and enamelled red, as the wearer had been present in Battels and Sieges. Knights of the Ermin in Bretaigne. They were instituted by Francis the First, Duke of Bretaigne, consisting of twenty five,
of which himself was Sovereign: Their Ha∣bit was a Mntle of white Damask, lined with Carnatian, and a Surcoat of the same; the great Collar was of Gold, composed of Ears of Corn, Saltier wise, at the end where∣of hung the Mus Ponticus, or Ermin, passing over a Turf of Grass, at the edge whereof was this Motto, A Marie. Knights of St. Mary the Glorious of Italy Were instituted by Pope Ʋrban, An. 1233. out of certain rich Gentlemen of Modena, and Bolegna, who were fearfull of Troubles, &c. Their Habit was a white Cassock and a Russet Mantle, and for their Badge they had a Pur∣ple Cross Pattee on their Breast: They lived with their Wives, and were obliged to fight against Infidels, and to protect Widows and Orphans. Knights of the Holy Ghost at Rome Were founded by Innocent the Third, about 1198. They were obliged to bring certificates of their Gentility: They profess Obedience, Chastity, and Poverty; they have a Master, and follow the Rule of St. Augustin: Their Habit is a black Mantle, on the left side, whereof (as also on their Breast) they wear a Patriarchal Cross, with twelve Points, their Revenue is 24000 Duckets daily, with which they doe great Acts of Charity.
The Angelick Knights of St. George, Said to be first instituted by Constantine the Great: Their Ensign was a Collar of Gold, to which was fastened a Cross of the same, and thereunto the Figure of St. Georges. They were in Number 50 of the Noblest Persons in his Empire, to whom he gave the Standard Labarum, or Imperial, and a Collar of Gold: They were confirmed by Pope Leo the First, Anno 456. who assigned them the Rule of St. Bassil; they now live in great splendour near Venice, owe no Subjection but to the Pope, with whom they sit at Table, and have many great Privileges: Their Patron is St. George, and their Protectress is the bles∣sed Virgin: Their Habit is a white Garment, and on the left side a red Cross flory, made of Velvet, in the midst of which is the Labarum embroidered in the form of the Letter X. with the Greek Letter Alpha upon one Arm of the Cross, and the Omega on the other. Knights of St. Peter at Rome. They were instituted Anno 1520. by Pope Leo the tenth, their number was 400. who were assigned to wear in an oval of Gold the Figure of St. Paul.
Knights of St. George at Rome Were erected by Pope Alexander the Sixth, Anno. 1498. their Ensign was a Cross of Gold, entowered with a Circle of the same, in form of a Crown. Knights called Pius at Rome, Instituted by Pope Pius the Fourth, 1560. Their number at first was 375. but afterwards increased to above 530. Their Ensign is the Effigies of St. Ambrose, which they wear a∣bout their Necks, hanging on a Chain of Gold. Knights of Loretto at Rome Were instituted by Sixtus Quintus, Anno 1687. whose Ensign was the Figure of our Lady of Loretto hanging on a Gold Chain. Knights of the Glorious Virgin Mary at Rome. Took their beginning from three Brethren of Spella in Italy, sirnamed Petrignanoes, Anno 1618. and confirmed by Pope Paul the Fifth, who gave them great Endowments, making himself and Successours their great Master, appointing them the Rule of St. Fran∣cis
D' Assise: Their Habit is a white Mantle, on the left side a Cross of blew Satten em∣broidered with Silver, and bordered with Gold, having in the midst a circle, wherein is this Motto, In Hoc Signo Vincam, and within it the Letters S. M. (for Sancta Maria:) From the Circle issueth forth twelve Rays, the ends of the Cross are like a Flower∣de-luce, on each a Star, which may signifie the four Evangelists, as the 12 Rays do the 12 Apostles. Knights of Jesus, now at Rome, Were instituted An. 1320. by Pope John the 22d. at Avignon in France, and much enlar∣ged by Paul the Fifth: Their badge is a plain red Cross within a Cross Pattee, Gold, which hangs in a golden Chain. Knights De-la-Calza in Venice Were instituted about 1400. in honour of the Inauguration of Duke Michele Stelo, con∣sisting of Noblemen and Gentlemen: Their Habit, which they wore on solemn days, was a Crimson Senatour's Vest, and their Ensign was a Sun on a Shield, which they also used as their Seal.
Knights of St. Mark in Venice. They are ancient, being instituted about 828. and are created after the manner of our Knights Bachelours, being dubbed with a Sword, and their Title a bare mark of Ho∣nour, conferred upon Persons who have me∣rited well of this Common-weal by the Duke, and also by the Senate, for their great worth: They wear for a Bdge of Honour a Gold Chain over their Shoulders, on which depends a Medal with the Arms of Venice, which is the Emblem of St. Mark, viz. a Lion with Wings expanded, holding in his right Paw a drawn Sword, and in his left an open Book, with this Motto: Pax tibi Marce, Evangelista meus. Knights of St. Geo. at Genoa. This Order was instituted by Frederick the III. Emperour, and dedicated to St. George. Their Ensign is a plain red Cross, fastened to a Gold Chain, which they wore about their Necks.
Knights of the Order of the Precious Bloud of our Saviour Jesus Christ at Mantua. This Order was instituted about 1608: by Gonzago IV. Duke of Mantua; for the greater Glory of his eldest Son's Nuptials: They consist of 20 Knights, of which the Duke was Sovereign, or great Master: Their Collar is composed of Ovals of Gold, some the length one way, some another, in one of which were these words, Domine Probâsti, and on the other Flames of Fire, about a Crusible, full of Ingots of Gold; at this Collar hung another Oval of Gold, whereon were two Angels standing, one on each side, hol∣ding a Chalice crowned, and on the Table of it was enamelled, three drops of Bloud, and about it this Inscription, Nihil isto triste Recepto. The Knights of St. Stephen at Florence Were instituted by Cosmo Duke of Florence, Anno 1561. Their Orders are like those of Malta; the Duke and his Successors are great Masters: Their Habit is a long Mantle of white Camlet, and on the left Breast a Cross of Crimson Satten, bordered with Gold, which is their Ensign; and on feastival days they wear a Ribbon about their Necks.
Knights of the Knot in Naples. Instituted by Lewis Prince of Tarentum, a∣bout Anno 1351. They were composed of 70 of the Noblest Lords in Naples, together with some Strangers: Their Habit was white and their Ensign a true Love's Knot, intermixed with Gold. Knights of the Argonaute of Naples. These were instituted Anno 1382. by Charles the III. King of Naples, for the ad∣vancement of Navigation, (after some,) are to preserve Amity amongst the Nobles, (af∣ter others,) who were the persons invested with this Honour: Their Habit was a white Garment, and their Ensign was a Ship tossed in a storm, with this Motto, Non credo Tem∣pori. Knights of the Ermine in Naples. Were institued by Ferdinand the First, their King, upon the discovery of a Plot against his his Life, by his Brother-in-Law the Duke of Sessa; wherein the King shewed himself so mercifull, that he not only set his Bro∣ther-in-Law at Liberty, but made him a Knight of this Order, amongst others
the Nobles of this Realm: Their Collar was of Gold, intermixt with Spots of Dung, to which hung an Ermin with this Motto, Malo mori quàm foedari. Knights of the Annunication in Savoy. This Order was instituted by Amedeo the 6th. Earl of Savoy, Anno 1362. in Memory of Amedeo the first Earl, who valorously defen∣ded the Isle of Rhodes against the Turks, and won those Arms which are now born by the Dukes of Savoy, viz. Gules, a Cross Argent: They are a very Honourable Order, and have very large Endowments; they at first consisted of 15. of which the Founder was Sovereign, which Number was enlarged to a greater: Their Habit is a purple Mantle, seeded with Roses, and Flames, in Embroide∣ry of Gold and Silver, fringed with Gold, and lined with Cloath of Silver, and tissued blew, under which instead of a Surcoat is worn a white Satten Suit, embroidered with Silk, the Breeches are like Trouses, and reach half way of the Thigh: Their Collar is of Gold, on which are engraven the letters F. E. R. T that is, Fortitudo Ejus Rhodum Tenuit: To this Collar hangeth a Tablet, wherein is the Figure of the Annunication, which is their daily Badg, and is worn about their Shoulders.
Note that these five Orders, viz. the Gartar in England, the Golden Fleece in Flanders, St. Michael in France, the Holy Ghost in France, and this of the Annuncia∣tion in Savoy, are reputed most Honoura∣ble, and in Token of their Excellency, a∣bove all other Degrees of Knight hood, are adorned with great and rich Collars. Knights of St. Maurice. Amadis the the 8th Duke of Savoy, with ten of his Court Knights, retired themselves into a Desart, and soon after, in Anno 1434. did he procure this Order to be instituted in Honour of St. Maurice, and were sub∣jected to the Rule of St. Augustine: Their Habit was an Ash-colour, or gray Gown and Chaperon, the Slieves faced with red Cam∣let, a Vest of the same, girded with a golden Girdle; and on the Breast of the Mantle a Cross Pomattee, of white Cloath or Taffety. The Duke was Master of this Order, which he kept nine years, and then was chosen Pope; which he also kept nine years, and then resigning, returned unto his former Life.
The Knights of St. Maurice, and St. Lazarus Were erected by Emanuel Phillibert, Duke of Savoy, Anno 1572. and were confirmed by Pope Gregory the 13th. the Dukes are the grand Masters: They are obliged to set out two Galleys for the papal Service against the Turks: Their Habit is a Gown of Crim∣son Tabby, with a long Train, and wide Slieves; it is edged about with white Taf∣fety, a Cordon, with a Tassel of white and green fixed to the Collar: Their Ensign is a green Cross of St. Lazarus, charged with a white Cross of St. Maurice, tyed to a Gold Chain or Ribbon. Of the Knights of the Bear in Switzerland. Frederick the 2d. Emperour, erected this Order Anno 1213. at the Abby of St. Gall, on the 16th of October, where the Abbat was made Patron of this Order. Those that were to be invested, were girded with a military Belt, (the Sword being first con∣secrated at the Altar,) and adorned with a Collar of the Order, and a Chain of Gold, which was given them by the Founder, to which Chain hung the Figure of a Bear in Gold, (on an Hillock,) enamelled with black, which Title is taken from St. Ʋrsus of the
Thebane Legion, who was Martyred before the Temple of the Sun at Solevrre in Switzer∣land. Knights of the Tutonick Order of Prusia Were first instituted by a wealthy Gen∣tleman of Germany, who dwelt at Jerusalem after the Christians had taken it, where he kept great Hospitality; amongst those that frequented his House and Hospital, there were some that agreed to erect a Fraternity, and having chosen a great Master, about Anno 1190. they imitated the Knights Templers in their military Employments, and the Knights Hospitallers in their Works of Pie∣ty, and Charity, and were afterwards con∣firmed by Pope Celestine the 3d. They were very valiant, and subdued many of the Infi∣dels; having their Conquest for their Re∣ward. In Anno 1340. they began to build Ca∣stles, and Churches, their Riches being so great, that they might compare with di∣vers Princes for Men and Money; but in 1525. Albertus being great Master, left them, and though they at last chose another great Master, yet they never rose to the height and esteem they were formerly in; but have now advanced their Order much, since the late War with the Turk, and their great Master, grows daily in greater e∣steem:
Their Habit is a white Mantle, and on the Breast a black Cross, charged with a white one, Potence. Knights of Gereon in Germany Were instituted by Frederick Barbossa, Emperour, consisting only of German Gen∣tlemen: Their Habit was a white Gown, and thereon a black Patriarchal Cross, set on a green Hill. They follow the Rule of St. Augustin. Knights of St. George in Austria. These were erected by Frederick the 3d. Emperour, Anno 1470. Their Habit is white, on which they wear their Ensign, namely, St. George's Cross. They profess conjugal Chastity, and Obedience to the Grand Master. Knights of St. Michael, the Arch-Angel, Were instituted Anno 1618. by Charles Gonzaga Duke of Mantua; and the Year following were received at Vienna, and in 1624. were confirmed by Pope Ʋrban the 8th. Their Habit was a white Mantle, over which they wore a shorter of blew Silk; their Buskings were blew, their Cap of
black Silk, and a Cross of Gold of eight Points, hung in a blew Ribbon about their Necks, on one side having the Picture of the Virgin-Mary, and the other that of St. Michael. On the left Side of the white Mantle was a Cross, embroidered with blew Silk, and Gold; in the midst of it was the Figure of the Blessed-Virgin, with her Son in her left Arm, and a Sceptre in her right, Crowned with 12 Stars, and surrounded with the Rays of the Sun, and a Cressant under her Feet; all which was encircled with the Cord of St. Francis, and from each end of the Cross issueth a Flame of Gold. Knights of St. Anthony in Haynault. They were instituted by Albert of Bava∣ria, Earl of Haynault: Their Ensign was a Golden Collar, after the fashion of an Her∣mit's Girdle; to which hung a Walking-staff and a Bell. Knights of the Tusin Order in Bohemia Were instituted by the Arch Duke of Au∣stria, for extirpating the Hereticks out of their Territories. Their Habit was red, and their Ensign a green Cross.
Knights of St. Hubert in Gulick. This Order was instituted Anno 1473. by Gerard, Duke of Gulick, in Honour of St. Hubert, Bishop of Leige; who dyed Anno 727. There is no certain account of their Ha∣bit, &c. Knights of St. James in Holland. They were instituted in the Year 1290. by Florentius Earl of Holland, who invest∣ed 12 of his principal Nobles Knights of this Order. They had a Collar of Gold, or military Belt of Silver, and gilt, adorned with 6 Escallops, to which hung the Figure of St. James the Apostle. The Knights of St. Brice Were erected by the famous Queen Brid∣get of Sweeden, Anno 1366. who endowed them with a great Revenue: They were confirmed by Pope Ʋrban the 5th. who as∣signed them the Rule of St. Augustine; and for their Ensign a blew Cross of eight points, and under it a Tongue of Fire.
Knights of the Seraphim. These were instituted by Magnus the 4th. King of Sweeden, Anno 1334. Their Collar was composed of patriarchal Crosses of Gold, and of Seraphims enamelled red, at the end whereof hung the Figure of our Saviour, or of the Virgin-Mary. The Knights Amaranta Were erected Anno 1645. by Christian Queen of Sweeden, in Honour of a Lady of that Name, celebrated for Vertue; Their Ensign is a Jewel of Gold, composed of two great A, one reversed, enriched with Dia∣monds, within a wreath of Lawrel leaves, banded with white, whereon is this Motto, Dolce nella memoria, which they wear either hanging at a Gold Chain, or at a Crimson or blew Ribbon, which they please. Knights of the Elephant in Denmark. Christian the First, King of Denmark, be∣ing at Rome, Pope Sixtus the 4th invest∣ed him with this Order, and ordained him and his Successours chief: They are obli∣ged to perform Acts of Piety and Charity: Their chief Ensign was the Figure of an Ele∣phant,
on whose side within a Roundal was represented the Crown of Thorns with three bloudy Nails. This is worn on high Days; but usually they wear about their Necks a blew Ribbon, to which hangs an Elephant enamelled white, and set with five large Diamonds in the midst. Knights of Christ, or of the Sword in Livonia. They were instituted by Albert, Bishop of Livonia, about 1200, they imitated the Teutonicks, to whom they were joyned Anno 1237. but in the Year 1561. Gothard, their great Master, surrendered all their Lands, Charters, and Rights, &c. unto Sigismund the 2d. King of Poland; for which the said King gave him a Dukedom, to him and his Heirs for ever. Knights of the white Eagle in Poland. They were erected by Ladislaus the 5th. King of Poland, Anno 1325. Their Ensign was a white Eagle crowned. Knights of the Dragon in Hungary Were instituted by Signismund the Empe∣rour, Anno 1418. on Festivals they wore a
a Scarlet Cloak, a Mantle of green Silk, with a double Chain of Gold, or a green Rib∣bon, to which hung a Dragon dead, with broken Wings, enamelled with variety of Colours, but the Ensign which they daily wore was a green Cross flory. Knights of the Sword in Cyprus. Guy of Lusignan having bought the Isle of Cyprus of Richard the First, King of England, for an hundred thousand Crowns of Gold, Anno 1195. when he first possessed it he instituted this Order, consisting of 300 Barons: Their Collar was of round Cor∣dons of white Silk, woven in Love-knots, and interlaced with the Letters S. and R. to which hung an Oval of Gold, wherein was enamelled a Sword, the Blade Silver, the Hilt Gold; and about the Oval was this Motto, Securitas Regni. The King him∣self was great Master of the Order. Knights of St. Anthony in Aethiopia Were instituted by Prester John, about the Year 370. and dedicated to St. Antho∣ny, Patron of that Country: They followed the Rule of St. Bassil; and for their Habit they wear a black Garment: Their Ensign is a blew Cross in form of a Letter T. They vow
to defend the Christian Religion, to yield Obedience to their Superiours; they ob∣serve conjugal Chastity, but do not marry without License from their Abbat. The eldest Son of a Noble Man cannot be admit∣ted, but the second Son may; and if a Man of any Degree have three Sons, he is bound to enter one into this Order, except he be a Physician. The Knights of the Burgundian Cross in Tunis Were erected by Mulleasses, King of Tunis, Anno 1535. Their Ensign was a Burgundian Cross, to which was added a Steel, striking sparks of Fire out of a Flint, with this Inscription, Barbaria. This Badg hung to a Collar of Gold. Knights of the Broom-flower in France Were erected by Lewis the 9th. Their Collar was composed of Broom-flower Cods, mixed with Lozenges, enamelled with Flower-de-luces; at which hung a Cross formy-flory, with this Motto, Exaltat Hu∣miles.
Knights of the Ship in France. They were instituted by the aforesaid Lewis the 9th. Their Collar was composed of double Escallops, and double Cressants, interwoven with a Medal hanging to it of a Ship under Sail. Many more Orders might be added, as of the Cock and Dog in France, the Order of the fair Lady in the green Field, the Order of the Sword and Military Belt in Sweeden, whose Collar was composed of Sword and Belt; many there are also in India, and in divers other places, which, because of their uncertainty, are omitted. CHAP. XVII. Of Esquires. KNighthood is a Dignity, but Esquire is a name of Worship, and in old time every Knight had two Esquires to attend him, who bore his Armour, and kept allways close to him: They held certain Lands of him in Escuage, as the Knight did of the King by Knight's Service; but now Esquires are divided into five Ranks: The first, and
principal, are the eldest Sons of Viscounts and Lords: The Second, all other Noble-men's younger Sons, with the eldest Sons of Baro∣nets, and Knights: The Third, are those that are Select Esquires of the King's Body: The Fourth, those to whom the King giveth the Title to, (or createth Esquires by put∣ting a Silver Collar of S. S. about their Necks; and in former times they had a pair of Silver Spurs put to their Heels, thereby distinguishing them from Knights, who had the guilt Spur;) and to the first born Sons of these only doth the Title descend; they are now the Esquires that attend the Knights of the Bath: The fifth and last, be those that have any Superiour publick Office in the Kingdom; as High Sheriff, Justice of the Peace, Collonels, Lieutenant Col∣lonels, Majors, &c. or such as serve the King in any worshipfull Calling: But such as are Esquires, or Gentlemen by pla∣ce only, when they lose their Place, they also lose their Title.
CHAP. XVIII. Of Gentlemen. THis Title is of such account, (as is afore∣said,) that it is a general Name, even from the Sovereign to the meanest Person who either bears Coat-Armour, or is im∣ployed in some eminent Office in Church or State; and many there be, who having by Providence rose from a mean condition, and obscure original, to possess large Demeans, have vain-gloriously usurped the Title of Gentleman to themselves; and so impru∣dent (I might have said impudent) have some been, that because their Sir-name have bordered upon the Sir-names of some Person of worth, they have laid down their own paternal Names, and assumed the Names of those Gentlemen so near to theirs, and born their Coat-Armour, and in time have pre∣tended to be of the same Family. Some derive the Name Gentleman as a Compound, partly from the French word Gentile, that is, one born of honest Parents, to which the Saxon Word Man is joyned, and so make it Gentleman, which may sig∣nifie a man well born, and under that
Name are all comprehended that are above Yeomen, Merchants, or Artificers, the An∣cient Saxons called them Edelmen, or Noble Men. Which shews that Gentlemen take their beginning from something that they have done (in War or Peace,) for which the King (who is the Fountain of Honour) doth think them worthy of such Honour, which shall continue to their Posterity: But sometimes it so happeneth that many Persons do claim the Title or Appellation of Gentleman, either from the Places they hold, or from some excellent Art or Sci∣ence they profess; as those that study the Laws of the Land, or profess themselves Masters in the liberal Sciences: And in∣deed, if he can live without Manual labour, and bear the Port and Charge of a Gentle∣man, he shall not only be called so by others, but think himself so indeed: And any such that hath not a true Pretence to a Coat-Ar∣mour, may have one assigned them by the Appointment of the Heralds, whose Po∣sterity may enjoy the Title of Gentile. But to be more particular, we shall find this Ti∣tle to be ranked under nine Heads or De∣grees. 1. A Gentleman of Ancestry, who is called a Gentleman of Bloud. 2. A Gentleman of Bloud, and not of An∣cestry; which is in the third Degree.
3. A Gentleman of Coat-Armour, and not of Bloud, which is he that first beareth the King's Device, given him by the He∣ralds: If he have Issue to the third des∣scent, such Issue is a Gentleman of Bloud, but none under. 4. A Gentleman of Armour not given him, as when the King giveth a Lordship to a Yeoman and his Heirs for ever: If the Family to whom the Lordship did belong be extinct, the Person so admitted may bear the Coat-Armour of the said Lord, being Approved of by the Heralds; but if the Family be not extinct he cannot, only he shall be accounted a Gentleman, and may have a Coat appointed him by the He∣ralds. 5. If a Christian Man, in the Service of God and his Prince, kills a Heathen Gen∣tleman, he shall bear his Coat-Armour (ex∣cept the said Heathen be a Knight Banne∣ret,) and use the same Atchievement with∣out any difference, save only in the Word or Motto of the Infidel, and his Issue in the fifth Degree shall be a Gentleman of Bloud; but no Christian Man can bear another Christians Coat: Yet if an English Man in the Field, when the Banner royal is display∣ed, do put to flight, take Prisoner, or by Fire or Force slay any Gentleman enemy to his Prince, the English Man shall honour his
own Coat in the sinister quarter with ded, said Gentleman's Coat; but in matters  Combate the Victor may not challenge his Enemy's Coat, though the Vanquished may lose his: So by the Courtesie of England, if a Man marry a Gentlewoman, he may bear her Coat, but his Children may not, unless she be an Heiress, and some doubt that also. 6. If the King make a Yeoman a Knight, he is called a Gentleman of Bloud. 7. A Yeoman's Son advanced to Spiritual dignity is a Gentleman, but not of Bloud, unless he arrive to be a Doctor of the Law, and then he shall be accounted a Gentleman of Bloud. 8. The eight is called a Gentleman Un∣tryall, that is, one who being brought up in some Abby, or like Place, and related to the Abbat, &c. doth in time obtain prefer∣ment in the same Abby, &c. 9. The last is a Gentleman Apocryphate, such as being a Footman in the service of his Prince, is at last advanced to be a Steward, or Clerk of the Kitchin, &c. though he hath no Badg of his own; under this Head are comprised all those that have any pub∣lick Office, as above, which take in these three Classes.
1. Gentlemen by Ecclesiastical Prefer∣ment are, 1 Vicars General. 2 Guardians. 3 Deans of Cathedrals. 4 Arch Deacons. 5 Chancellours. 6 Treasurers. 7 Chaunters. 8 Doctours, of which Divinity is first, Law next, Physick last. 9 Provosts. 10 Governours of Colleges. 2. In Military Professions these are cal∣led Gentlemen: 1 High Constables. 2 Lieutenant Generals. 3 Marshals of the Field. 4 Admirals. 5 Major Generals. 6 Quarter Master General. 7 Treasurer for the Army. 8 Guardians of Frontiers. 9 Grand Esquires. 10 Masters of the Artillary. 11 Collonels. 12 Lieutenant Collonels.
13 Serjeant Majors. 14 Captains, and all that receive Com∣missions from the King. 3. In the Civil State, these are Gentle∣men by their Places, 1 The Chancellour. 2 Presidents. 3 Treasurers. 4 Judges. 5 Justices. 6 Chief Officers of the Royal Palace. 7 Secretary of State. 8 Mayors. 9 Provosts. 10 Bayliffs of Incorporate Towns, and all those that hold any Place by Patent from the King: But if any of all these lose their Places, and have no other grounds for their Gentility, they also lose that too. Note, that a Freeman of London may write Master, though never so poor or mean∣ly born. The Ancient English Gentry, as also the Nobility, which are comprehended in one, used to live very nobly, using no Traffick,
practising either Law, Physick, or e like, but living upon their Estates, xercising themselves in Husbandry, feed∣ing Cattle, promoting good House-keeping, supporting Hospitality, and were allways ready to serve the King in his Wars; and in these latter times they live more Nobly than most doe in many other Nations, and more free from serving base Employ∣ments. The Venetians, and Genoiese, are great Merchants, and Traffickers: The Neopolitan, and Spaniards stand so much upon their punctillios, that they scorn to exercise themselves in any industrious Pro∣fession; but chuse rather to live by Op∣pression and Robbery; nay, the German will think it no shame nor dishonour to enlarge his Estate by Robbery, which even in times of Peace they daily practise. The Greci∣ans, Egyptians, Persians, and many others, count no Man worthy of Honour but their Soldiery, &c. The French keep too severe a a Hand over their poor Tenents, who are but their Vassals: Neither are the English Gentry without many and great Privileges peculiar to their Degree, of which these that follow are some. If a Churl defame a Gentleman, he hath a Remedy in Law (Ac∣tione injuriarum,) in equal Crimes a Gentle∣man shall be punished with more favour than a Churl; and if condemned to dye,
he not to be hang'd, but to be beheaded, and to be examined without Torture. There are ceremonial Respects due to a Gentle∣man, which are not to others, in giving of evidence; a Gentleman's Testimony is to be preferred before a Clown's; in Elections of Magistrates and Officers by Vote, the suf∣frage of a Gentleman shall take place; he is excused from base and servile Offices, and when chosen an Officer for two Citys, he may take his choice of either. Those that are Noble are not to be put to their Oath, nor sworn in Juries on Life and Death up∣on their Peers: A Clown may not challenge a Gentleman to Combat. In Marriages of Relations, or Guardians of Estates, a Gen∣tleman is to be entrusted, though there be nigher of Kin. A Gentleman becoming an Apprentice doth not lose his Gentility, and much of the like. Thus have we run through all those Orders and Degrees of Men, who are styled Noble or Gentile, who have also more general Notes of Di∣stinction, the better to distinguish their several Degrees, of which amongst the No∣bility that of the Coronet is most especial, which is mentioned under their several Ti∣tles above, and that of the Helmet exten∣deth it self from the King to the private Gentleman; as, namely,
The Helmet of a Sovereign Prince hath a barred Beaver, looking forward, and so is the Helmet of the Heir Apparent. The Helmet of a Duke, Marquess, Earl, Viscount, and Baron, are barred; and look side-ways toward the Dextre. A Bishop beareth not an Helmet, but a Mitre. Baronets and Knights have their Beavoir up, or open, and looking forward. Esquires and Gentlemen have their Hel∣mets close, and looking toward the Dex∣tre. The Helmets of Nobles stand upon their proper Coronets, but Baronets, Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen, place their Hel∣mets upon a Torce, or Wreath of their Col∣lar; and is always of a Metall and Collour. CHAP. XIX. Of Yeomen. THose of the Commons, who are under the Title of Gentlemen, are by some ranked into three Sorts or Classes; that is, Yeomen, Artificers, and Labourers, the Yeo∣men are those that have some Lands of their own, and are vulgarly called Free-hol∣ders,
especially in some Countries; and of those it is that the Statutes mean, when they say, that none shall pass in any Inquest, un∣less they have Free-hold in yearly Revenue: And by these sort of Men all Tryalls of Cau∣ses in the Country do ordinarily proceed, being Men accounted more apt to under∣stand and discern in doubtfull Cases, than the ruder People, who are used to servile Labour, &c. Besides, the Yeoman can better allow his time, having of his own; for ma∣ny there be that can expend above 200 l. per annum, living more gentile thereon, than some on greater Revenues. Another Reason (as some think) why these Men are chosen into Jurors, &c. is because the poorer sort through need might be easily corrupted. In old time the Yeomen were famous for Man-hood; for our Infantry, which have been so renowned for Archery through the world, (and that so often conquered the French,) were composed of Yeoman: They have many peculiar Previleges, which are al∣lowed to no other Nation; as that no Free∣man of England can be imprisoned, or ou∣ted of his Estate, or Possession, without Or∣der of Law, and just cause first shewn: if he be imprisoned he cannot be denyed a Ha∣beas Corpus, and if no just cause be shewed, he is to be set at Liberty. No Soldier can be quartered upon a Free-man (unless it
be in a Victualing-house) without his con∣sent, and no Taxes imposed upon him with∣out an Act of Parliament: The Yeomanry are not to be prest to serve in the War, nor are the Train-bands compelled to march out of the Kingdom, nor to bear their own Arms, finding a sufficient Person to doe it: He is to be tryed by his equals, nor can be be condemned but by the Laws of the Land. These and many other Freedoms make them most happy, and should ingage them to be loyal to their Prince, under whose Govern∣ment their Privileges are preserved. CHAP. XX. Of Artificers, and Labourers. THe Artificers are next, under which are comprised all Handy-craft-men; Shop-keepers, and other Tradesmen, which enjoy many Privileges which Yeomen do. And lastly the Labourers, &c. and Bond∣men, who have many more Previleges than any of their Degree that live in any other Nation.
CHAP XXI. Of Precedency. 1. OF Kingdoms: And herein hath been great debates, and will be; for no Age could yet find it fully determined, the Sword oftentimes being the decider of that affair. At the Council of Constance, the Embassadours and Bishops were placed as followeth: 1. The Emperour, to whom was united Bohemia, Hungary, Polonia, Dalmatia, Grecia, and Croatia. 2. The French had the second place alone, which was disputed by the English. 3. Then the English, to whom was joy∣ned Scotland, Norway, Denmark, Sweeden, and Cyprus. 4. Then the Italians, who had all the Kingdoms subject to Rome, as Naples, Si∣cily, &c. 5. Lastly, The Spaniards, who were hard∣ly allowed to be a Nation, but at last were put into the fifth place; to whom were joyned Castilia, Aragon, Majorca, Navarre, Portugal, and Granado. Since then the Scene is changed, and some∣times
after the Emperour they have reck∣koned France, England, Spain, and this hath been the usual account. Sometimes Eng∣land hath had the precedency, and the Arch∣bishop of Canterbury had place at the Pope's right Foot: Mr. Howel in his Discourse concerning Ambassadours gives divers Rea∣sons for the Precedency of England; That it was the first Land that was governed by a Christian King; That it hath wholly sub∣dued France; and the Kings of England have been crowned in Paris; That it hath the best Havens in Christendom, &c. 2. The Precedency of the several Degrees in England, are as follows: 1 The King's most Excellent Majesty. 2 The Prince, when there is One. 3 The Dukes of the Royal Bloud, who are: 1 Sons. 2 Grand-Sons. 3 Brothers. 4 Unckles. 5 Nephews Then the great Officers of the Church, and Crown, as, 4 The Archibishop of Canterbury. 5 Lord Chancellour, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal.
6 Archbishop of York. 7 Lord Treasurer. 8 Lord President of the Council. 9 Lord Privy Seal. Then the rest of the Nobility, as, 10 Dukes. 11 Dukes eldest Sons of the Royal Bloud. 12 Marquesses. 13 Dukes eldest Sons. 14 Earls. 15 Marquesses eldest Sons. 16 Dukes younger Sons of the Bloud. 17 Dukes younger Sons Royal. 18 Viscounts. 19 Earls eldest Sons. 20 Marquesses younger Sons. 21 Bishops, which take place accor∣ding to the Seniority of their Con∣secration, except, 1 London. 2 Durham. 3 Winchester. 22 Barons. 23 Viscounts eldest Sons. 24 Earls younger Sons. 25 Barons eldest Sons. 26 Lords of the Privy Council. 27 Judges; and they, 1 Of the King's Bench. 2 Of the Common Pleas.
3 Barons of the Exchequer. 28 Masters of Chancery. 29 Knights of the Garter, if no other∣ways dignified; which is very rare. 30 Viscounts younger Sons. 31 Barons younger Sons. 32 Knights Bannerets. 33 Baronets. 34 Knights of the Bath. 35 Knights Bachelours. 36 Colonels; first Horse, then Foot. 37 Serjeants at Law. 38 Doctors; 1 Divinity, 2 Law, 3 Phy∣sick. 39 Esquires, according to their Degree. 1 Esquires of the King's Body. 2 The Descendents by the Male Line, from some Peer of the Realm. 3 Eldest Sons of Baronets. 4 Eldest Sons of Knights. 5 Esquires attending on the Knights of the Bath. 6 Officiary Esquires; as, 40 Justices of the Peace. 41 Barristers at Law. 42 Lieutenant Collonels. 43 Majors. 44 Captains. 45 Gentlemen. 46 Yeomen. 47 Artificers.
48 Merchants. 49 Retailers. 50 Chapmen. 51 Mariners. 52 Fishermen. 53 Water-men, or Ferry-men. 54 Masons and Builders. 55 Labourers. 56 Bondmen. Note generally, 1. That these great Of∣ficers of Court, of what Title or Degree so∣ever, besides that of their Place or Office, do take place of all others of the same De∣gree or Title, except Secretary of State; that is, if they be Dukes, they take place of all Dukes; if Earls, of all Earls; that is, 1. Lord Chamberlain of England. 2. Lord High Constable. 3. Lord Marshal. 4. Lord High Steward. 5. Lord Chamberlain of His Majesties Hous∣hold. 6. Secretaries of State, if Peers. Note, 2. These Officers take place as followeth: 1. Master of the Wards. 2. Chancellour.
3. Under-Chancellour of the Exchequer. 4. Chancellour of the Duchy. 5. Chief Justice of the King's-Bench. 6. Master of the Rolls. 7. Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. 8. Chief Baron of the Exchequer. 9. Judges. 10. Barons of the Coif. Note, 3. That Deans precede Chancel∣lours, and they precede Prebendaries, and Prebendaries precede Doctours. Note, 4. All Artificers of London take place according to the Precedency of the Corporation of which they are free, and not by their Trade, or Profession. The incor∣porated Merchants take place next after the first 12 Companies, as some account; then the rest, according to the number they bear, 13, 14, and so on. CHAP. XXII. The Procession at a Coronation. THE most magnificent Procession that I meet with was that at the Coronation of King Charles II. of happy Memory, which take as follows:
From the Tower to Westminster. 1. The Duke of York's Horse-Guards. 2. The Messengers of the Chamber. 3. Esquires to the Knights of the Bath. 4. Knights Harbingers. 5. Serjeant Portar. 6. Sewers of the Chamber. 7. Gentlemen Ushers. 8. Quarter Waiters. 9. The six Clerks in Chancery. 10. Clerks of the Signet. 11. Clerks of the Privy Seal. 12. Clerks of the Council. 13. Clerks of the Parliament. 14. Clerks of the Crown. 15. Chaplains having Dignities. 16. The King's Advocate. 17. The King's Remembrancer. 18. Masters of the Chancery. 19. King's Learned Counsel at Law. 20. King's Puisne Serjeants. 21. King's Attorney. 22. King's Sollicitour. 23. King's eldest Serjeants. 24. Secretaries of the French Latine. 25. Gentlemen Ushers. 26. Daily Waiters. 27. Sewers in Ordinary. 28. Carvers in Ordinary. 29. Cup Bearers in Ordinary. 30. Esquires of the Body.
31. Masters of Standing Offices: as, 1. Of the Tents. 2. Of the Revels. 3. Of the Ceremonies. 4. Of the Armory. 5. Of the Wardrobe. 6. Of the Ordinance. 32. Master of the Requests. 33. Chamberlains of the Exchequer. 34. Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber. 35. Knights of the Bath. 36. Knight Marshal. 37. Treasurer of the Chamber. 38. Master of the Jewel-house. 39. Barons younger Sons. 40. Viscounts younger Sons. 41. Barons of the Exchequer. 42. Justices of the Common Pleas. 43. Justices of the King's Bench. 44. Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer. 45. Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. 46. Master of the Rolls. 47. Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench. 48. Knights of the Privy Council. 49. Principal Secretary. 50. Barons eldest Sons. 51. Earls younger Sons, 52. Viscounts eldest Sons. (Kettle-Drums. King's Trumpeter. 2 Pursivants at Arms.)
53. Barons. 54. Maquesses younger Sons. 55. Earls eldest Sons. (Two Pursuvants at Arms.) 56. Viscounts. 57. Dukes younger Sons. 58. Marquesses eldest Sons. (Two Heralds in their Coats and Collars of SS.) 59. Earls, and the Earl Marshal. 60. Lord Chamberlain of the Houshold. 61. Dukes eldest Sons. (Two Heralds.) 62. Marquesses. (Two Heralds.) 63. Dukes. (Clarenceux, Norroy, Kings at Arms.) 64. Lord Treasurer. 65. Lord Chancellour. 66. Lord High Steward. Duke of Normandy, and Duke of Aqui∣tain, represented by two Persons. 67. Gentleman Usher. (Garter, King at Arms.) 68. Lord Mayor of London. 69. Duke of York. 70. Lord Great Chamberlain. 71. Lord Marshal, with the Sword. 72. Lord High Steward. (On each side of these Serjeants at Arms.) The KING. 73. Gentlemen Pensioners.
(Esquires. Footmen.) 74. Master of the Horse, leading a spare Horse. 75. Vicechamberlain. 76. Captain of the Pensioners. 77. Captain of the Guards. 78. Lieutenant of the Pensioners. 79. King's Horse guards. 80. The General's Horse-guards. CHAP. XXIII. The Proceeding on the Coronation-day. FOur Drums. Sixteen Trumpets. 1 Clerks of the Chancery. 2 King's Chaplains having Dignities. 3 Aldermen of London. 4 King's Counsel learned in the Laws. 5 King's Sollicitour. 6 King's Attorney. 7 King's eldest Serjeant at Law. 8 Esquires of the Body. 9 Master of Requests. 10 Gentlemen of the Privy Council. 11 Knights of the Bath. 12 Barons of the Exchequer.
13 Justices of the Common Pleas. 14 Justices of the King's Bench. 15 Lord Chief Baron. 16 Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. 17 Master of the Rolls. 18 Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench. 19 Serjeant Portar. 20 Serjeant of the Vestery. 21 Children of the King's Chapel. 22 Gentlemen of the King's Chapel. 23 Prebendaries of Westminster. 24 Master of the Jewel House. He had Pre∣cedency of the Judges, because he bore the Sword, Spurs, and Ring. 25 Knights of the Privy Council. (Portcullis, Pursuvant at Arms.) 26 Barons. 27 Bishops. (Rouge Croix, Pursuvant at Arms. Blew mantle, Pursuvant at Arms.) 28 Viscounts. (Somerset and Chester Heralds.) 29 Earls. (Richmond and Windsor Heralds.) 30 Marquesses. (Lancaster and York Heralds.) (Clarenceux and Norroy, Provincial Kings at Arms, carrying their Crowns in their hands.) 31 Lord High Treasurer. 32 Lord high Chancellour. St. Edward's Staff.
The Spurs, born by two Earls. St. Edward's Sceptre. A drawn Sword. Sword Curtana, drawn. A pointed Sword, drawn. 33 Lord Mayor of London. (Garter, principal King at Arms. Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod.) 34 Lord Great Chamberlain. 35 Earl Marshal. 36 Lord Marshal, with the Sword of State in the Scaboard. 37 Lord High Constable. 38 Duke of York. The Sceptre, with the Dove. St. Edward's Crown, born by the Lord High Steward. The Orb, or Mound. The Patena, born by the Bishop of Exon. The Chalice, born by the Bp. of London. The KING, supported by the Bishop of Bath and Wells, and the Bishop of Duresme; his Train born by five Lords, and his Canopy by the Barons of the Cinque-Ports. 39 Master of the Robes. 40 One of the Chief Gentlemen of the Bed∣chamber. 41 Two Grooms of the Bed-chamber. 32 Captain of the Guard. 33 Captain of the Pensioners.
CHAP. XXIV. The King's going to Parliament in State. MEssengers of the Court. Esquires to the Knights of the Bath. Gentlemen Ushers. Clerks of the Chancery. Clerks of the Signet. Clerks of the Privy Seal. Clerks of the Council. Clerks of the Parliament. Clerks of the Crown. The King's Chaplains having Dignities. Masters of Chancery. King's learned Counsel at Law. King's Serjeants. Attorney General. Sollicitour General. King's eldest Serjeant. The King's Secretaries. Chamberlains of the Exchequer. Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber. Knights of the Bath. Treasurer of the Chamber. Comptroller. Some place next Knights Bachelours. Some place next Knights Bannerets, and Some place next Knights Baronets.
Two Heralds. Barons younger Sons. Viscounts younger Sons. Barons of the Exchequer. Justices of the Common Pleas. Justices of the King's Bench. Lord Chief Baron. Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. Master of the Rolls. Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench. Knights of the Privy Council. Principal Secretary. Barons eldest Sons. Earls younger Sons. Viscounts eldest Sons. Two Heralds. Barons. Bishops. Marquesses younger Sons. Earls eldest Sons. Two Heralds. Viscounts. Dukes younger Sons. Marquesses eldest Sons. Two Heralds. Earls. Chamberlain of the Houshold. Dukes eldest Sons. Two Heralds. Marquesses. Two Heralds.
Dukes. Two Kings at Arms. Lord Treasurer. Archbishop of York. Lord Chancellour. Archbishop of Canterbury. Dukes of the Royal Bloud. Garter, principal King at Arms. Lord Great Chamberlain. Lord high Steward. The KING. Gentlemen Pensioners. Esquires. Footmen. Master of the Horse, with a led Horse. Vice-chamberlain. Guards. CHAP. XXV. Coronation-Feasts. KIng H. Fourth's Coronation-Feast. The King sate in the middle of the Table, the Archbishop of Canterbury and three Pre∣lates on his Right hand, the Archbishop of York and four Prelates on the Left; the K's eldest Son stood on the Right-hand, with a pointless Sword, the Lord Constable on
the Left with a pointed Sword, both erect, and naked: Before him stood the Dukes of Albemarl, Surry, and Exeter, and two Earls: the Earl Marshal and his Tipstaves made room in the Hall, that the Attenders might with more ease serve the Tables. On the right side of the Hall at Tables set were pla∣ced the Barons of the Cinque Ports, and di∣vers of the Long Robe; at the Table on the left side sate the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and chief Citizens. After the second Course the King's Champian entered the Hall with a Herald, and approaching before the King, made his Challenge three times, and being not answered, retired; but the most splen∣did and most exact Coronation-Feast was that of King Charles II. King Charles II. his Coronation-Feast. First enters the Clerks Comptrollers, then Clerks of the Green Cloath, Cofferer. Six Serjeants at Arms. 1 Earl Marshal. 2 Lord high Steward. 3 Lord high Constable; all three on Horse-back, and in their proper Robes. Six Serjeants. Comptroller of the Houshold. The Sewer, and his Assistents. The Knights of the Bath, who carried up
Service, two and two to a Dish, assisted by the Earl Sewer. Dinner being set on the Table, the King came forth in his Royal Robes, with the Crown on his Head, his Sceptre in his hand, and three Swords born before him naked; being seated, on his Right hand stood the three Noblemen, who held the three Swords naked, and erect; on his Left the Lord Chamberlain, who held the Sceptre; at the Table's end, on the left hand sate the Duke of York in his Robes and Coronet. Then the King's Champian entered the Hall, on a goodly white Courser, armed at all Points in rich Armour, having way made for him by the Knight Marshal. Before him marched, 1 Two Trumpets. 2 The Serjeant Trumpet. 3 The Serjeant at Arms. 4 An Esquire, carrying a Target, with the Champian's own Arms depicted thereon. 5 York Herald. 6 The Champian. 7 The Earl Marshal on his left hand, 8 The Lord High Constable on his right, both on Horseback. The Herald proclaimed the Challenge at the entrance into the Hall, in the middle of it, and at the Steps at the higher Hall: The Cha∣lenge is, That whoever should deny the King to
be the true and undoubted Heir to the Crown, or that he is not King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, doth lye, and that he the Champian is ready to maintain the same, throwing down his Glove as a Gage; which done, he retired with his Fee. The second Course was carried up by the Gentlemen Pensioners. The third Course by other Servants ap∣pointed thereto. In the body of the Hall, below the State, were placed four Tables, two on each side; at the first Table on the right hand, next the State, sate the Bishops, the Barons of the Cinque-ports, the Judges, and the rest of the long Robe, according to their Degrees; at the second Table below on the right hand sate the Masters in Chancery, Six Clerks, and the like; at the upper Table on the left hand next the State sate the Nobility, &c. at the other sate the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and chief Citizens; at a by Table the Offi∣cers at Arms, the Ushers, and Waiters, all in their proper Places, some attending the King, others their Places, as assigned; each Table had three Courses, besides the Ban∣quet, with Trumpets sounding each Course.
CHAP. XXVI. A Royal Feast at other times, the K. present. 1 AT the head of the Table sits the King, at the lower end the Princes of the Bloud; before him, or rather on each hand, stand the Carver, Sewer, and Cupbearer, with the rest of the Gentlemen Waiters, the Ushers making way for the Strangers who come to behold his Majesty. 2. At the first Table on the right hand are placed the Lords Chancellour, Chamberlain, Steward, Treasurer, &c. 3. At the lower Table on the right hand are set the Masters of standing Offices, Master of the Houshold, Clerks of the Green Cloth, &c. 4. At the upper Table on the left hand sit the Treasurer of the Houshold, the Secreta∣ries, the King's Serjeants at Law, Master of the Revels, Dean of the Chapel, &c. 5. Below them, at the other Table, sits the Lieutenant of the Tower, with the great Commanders, Captains, &c. 6. At the lower end of the Hall wait the Buttler, Keeper of the Pantry, Clerks of the Kitchen, &c. with all thing ready, and the King's Guards; there are three Courses, at each of which the Trumpets sound.
CHAP. XXVII. Of Funerals. AS Nobles and Gentlemen have in their Life time Honours shewed them, as their due; so after Death they have peculi∣ar marks of Honour belonging to them, which are not to be given to those of low or ordinary Rank: And therefore especial care is to be taken, that no indignity be offered to a Mourner, and that the Herald marshal them according to their Titles, and Worth, at the Funerals of any Nobleman. And where there is an Officer at Arms (employ∣ed,) he ought to wear the King's Coat; that so the Defunct may be known to have dyed Honourable in the King's Allegiance: His Heir, who is chief Mourner, is, in the Presence of all the other Mourners, to re∣ceive the Coat-Armour, Helm, and Crest, belonging to the Defunct, whereof the King at Arms for that Province, is to make Record with the Defunct's Match, Issue, and Decease. If the Defunct be of the Order of the Garter, and no more, he is to bear his Gar∣ter instead of Compartments: But if he be
also a Nobleman, he must bear his proper Ensigns, as all Noblemen do, besides; that is, Supporters, Coronet, Sword, Target, Gantlet, Helmet, Crest, and Spurs. All Per∣sons have a certain length for their Banners, which the Heralds are to instruct them in; and the higher Degree the Person is, the longer may his Banner be; as, an Earl's Ban∣ner may be two yards long, &c. and also according to their Degrees are they to pay certain Fees, which are appointed by the Earl Marshal in his Orders, which are as followeth: All Noblemen, Baronets, Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen of emi∣nent Place, Birth, and Quality, that shall be either silently buried in the Night, or by Day, without attendence of an Officer at Arms, shall nevertheless immediately after the Death and Burial of such Defunct, re∣turn a true Certificate of the Matches, Issues, and times of their Decease, with their Arms, unto the Heralds Office, or to their Deputy or Messenger; for which they are to pay unto such Office, or Officer at Arms, the Fees under-writ:   l. s. d. For a Gentleman using his E∣scoucheons 03 6 8 Using none. 02 0 0 An Esquire of Coat-Armour 06 13 4 A Knight 10 0 0
A Banneret and Baronet 13 6 8 A Baron or Baroness, that ought to have Banner and Bannerols. 20 0 0 A Bishop 25 0 0 A Viscount, and Viscountess 30 0 0 An Earl or Countess 35 0 0 A Marquess, or Marchioness 40 0 0 A Duke, Dutchess, and Arch∣bishop 45 0 0 All which Summs are to be paid to the Of∣ficers at Arms, unless it appeareth that the Defunct was not worth a thousand Pound; and in such case to be entered without Fees. CHAP. XXVIII. The Proceeding of the Funeral of a Gen∣tleman, Esquire, Knight, or Baronet. POor Children; as, of the Hospital, &c. Two Conductors. The poor Men in Gowns. Gentlemens Servants in Cloaks. Gentlemen in Cloaks. Gentlemen in Gowns. Aldermen in Black, if in a Corporation. The Preacher. A Penion of his Arms.
The Helm and Crest. The Coat of Arms. The Hearse. The Chief Mourner. Two Assistents. Aldermen not in Black. The Master of his Company, if he be free of any in London, &c. Master of the Hospital. Gentlemen not in Black. Lastly Neighbours and others. CHAP. XXIX. The Precedency of a Noblemans Funeral, from a Duke to a Baronet. TWo Conductors with black Staves. Servants in Cloaks, two and two. The great Banner (according to the Degree of the Defunct) which is born by Gentle∣men appointed by the Herald. Gentlemen in Cloaks, two and two. Two Banners, born by Persons appoint∣ed by the Herald. Gentlemen, two and two in Cloaks. The Steward, Comptroller, and the other Chief Officers.
Heralds. Ministers. His Sword and Spurs, Helmet and Crest, Gantlet and Supporters; all born by a Person appointed by the Heralds. Gentlemen bare headed with his Sheild. The Chariot, with four Banners, &c. born about it by Gentlemen of the Kindred. Foot-men bare headed. Chief Mourners supported. Mourners next of Kindred, two and two. The Neighbours, &c. Thus have I run through the several De∣grees of Noble, or Ignoble Persons, accor∣ding to the best account I can find, and have given you the choicest Precedents of Precedency that I can procure: I shall only add a few Observations in Heraldry, which may serve to give some little light to the Reader in that delightfull (though by some contemned) Art. CHAP. XXX. Of Heralds, and their Duty. THe Word Herald, is derived from the Saxon Word Here-haulte; and by ab∣breviation Herault, or Herald, which signi∣fies
the Champian of an Army, and growing to be a Name of Office, it was given to him, that in an Army had the charge of Challenging to Battel or Combat: Their Office is very ancient, and of great esteem amongst the Romans, and other Nations; and amongst us they have been esteemed as Ambassadours, and sometimes have been made so: However they are the Messengers of Kings, and great Monarchs; and though they have less esteem now than in former times, yet their Employment hath been honoured with Messages between Poten∣tates, in matters of Honour and Arms: They are to be Officious and Expert in Co∣ronations, Instalments of Noblemen, in Triumphs, Justs, Combats, Marriages, Christenings, and Interments: They are to attend all great Matters of State, and Ho∣nour; and by them ought Proclamations to be made concerning great Matters of State: The Causes of Chivalry, and Gentility, are referred to their Care, as the right of bea∣ring Arms, Escoucheons, Shields, Targets, Ban∣ners, &c. Correcting of Arms in Visitations, and to observe the Descents, and Pedegrees of Noblemen, and Gentlemen: They are the Prothonotaries, and Registerers of all the Acts and Proceedings in the Court of the High Constable, and Lord Marshal: They have been long established in England, but,
as some think not incorporated untill Ri∣chard the 3d. who incorporated them by Charter, and placed them at Coleharbour in Thames-street, London; from whence they were removed to the place they now en∣joy, which was confirmed to them by Phi∣lip and Mary, and incorporated by the Names of Garter, King at Arms of all Eng∣land; Clarenceaux, King at Arms for the south parts; and Norroy, King at Arms for the north parts; and to the other Heralds and Pursuvants for ever: And that they should have and use a common Seal to sue and to be sued by, (before this King Ed∣ward the 6th. had granted them large Pre∣vileges, of which see at large in Carter, p. 225.) Formerly the Title of Clarenceaux, was (South Roy or) Surrey as some say; but the Dukedom of Clarence coming by Heir∣ship to the King at Arms for the south of England, he assumed the Title of Claren∣ceaux, (from Clarence,) and left that of Surrey, and ever since that King at Arms hath been styled Clarenceaux. But more particularly; there are three Kings at Arms, that is: 1. Garter, Principal, General, and Inde∣finite. 2. Clarenceaux, King at Arms, for the North of England, on this side the River Trent.
3. Norroy King at Arms, for the North of England; that is, of all beyond the River Trent. The Heralds, which are sometimes sty∣led Dukes at Arms, are six; that is, first York, second Somer set, third Windsor, fourth Lancaster, fifth Richmond, sixth Chester. The Pursuvants are four; that, is first Port∣cullis, the second is Blew Mantle, third Rouge Dragon, the fourth Rouge Croix; to which are added two more, who have no certain Names: These Heralds and Pursu∣vants have power to enter into all Churches, Castles, Houses, &c. to view all Arms, Re∣cognizances, and Crests; to make Visitations, and to Register the Pedegrees and Matches of Nobles and Gentlemen; to punish with Disgrace, or Mulct, such as shall usurp other mens Atchievements, or fancy new ones to themselves, against the Law of Arms; to reverse or deface them, and proclaim the pretender infamous at the Assizes, or Ses∣sions. Also such as shall use Mourning, as Gowns, Hoods, &c. contrary to the Law, to limit all Painters, and other Artificers, in the setting forth of Arms, (with many more things too tedious to set down.) And that he may the better know how to give a pro∣per Device, or Coat-Armour, he is to en∣quire: First, Whether he that would bear them desire them, and honour Gentility,
and will keep them from Dishonour. Se∣condly, Whether he be able to declare his Pedegree. Thirdly, He must enquire into his Pedegree, and see whether he may by Right bear Coat-Armour; whether his An∣cestors were Gentlemen, and to give the same with due Augmentation. Fourthly, Whether he be clean of Life, Just in Pro∣mise, cunning in all or any of the liberal Sciences, or hath knowledge in Divinity, or Philosophy. Fifthly, Of whom he hath Praise of good Works done; whether they were Persons of Reputation for Wisdom, or Ho∣nesty. Sixthly, To whom he hath done good Service, whether to the King, the Prince, &c. and what the Service was, whether in War, or as an Ambassadour, or the like. The Herald is likewise to be very expert in the betroathing of Princes; he is not to disclose the secrets of Ladies, nor any other, not proper to be known, appertaining to their own Art; he is to be carefull in gi∣ving Advice, and to acquaint the Bearer of Coat-Armour, that the end thereof is to adorn his Family, and to make him shew more excellent than others; and therefore not to doe any dishonourable Actions: He must be also able to distinguish their Lines, and Issues, the better to doe right to the Person.
When a King of Heralds is to be made, he is brought unto the King, or Lord Mar∣shal, led between two Heralds (or a King and a Herald) in their Coats, the other Heralds and Pursuvants going before in their Formalities, who carry the several Instru∣ments to be used at the Ceremony; one the Coat, another the Crown, a third the Patent, a fourth the Bowl of Water, a fifth a Book and a Sword, a sixth a Book where∣on he sweareth, &c. all making their seve∣ral Obeisance; then he kneels down with those that led him, and one holding the Sword, and Book whereon he sweareth, the other pronounceth the Words; then his Patent is read, and at the Words, Creamus & investimus, his Coat is put on, and at the Words, Non violante Nomine, &c. the Wa∣ter is poured on his Head; when his Patent is read, the Ceremony is ended, &c. CHAP. XXXI. Of Heraldry. THis is a Field too large to be traced through in so small a Volum as this, and therefore I cannot pretend to shew the Art of Blazon, but only (as well as I can
with such Brevity,) give you the general Terms of Art, and Names of those things which are particularly nominated in this Honourable Science. Briefly therefore, Armory is an Art whereby we attain to the Knowledg of the use of Coat-Armour, which consisteth of two general Heads; first Blazoning, second∣ly Marshaling. First, Blazoning is the explication of Coat-Armour in such significant Terms, that the Vertues of the first Bearers may be known, and this is done by expressing what the Colours, Shapes, Kinds, and Po∣stures of those things are which are born in Coat-Armour, with their Position; by which the true signification may be known. Secondly, Marshalling is the orderly placings of several Coats, belonging (ori∣ginally) to divers Families within one Ef∣coucheon, and the well disposing of those Ornaments which belong to them in their proper Places without the Estouchen. Of these in General. More particular Arms are divided into things within the Escoucheon, and things without the Escoucheon, those things with∣out the Escoucheon are the Mantling, Sup∣porters, (where due,) Torce, Helm, Crest, Motto, &c. But not to enlarge on these things, we shall chiefly speak of those things
within the Escoucheon. First, The Escou∣cheon must be spread over with some Metal, Colour, or Furr, which do admit of several Denominations, according to the quality of the Person to whom the Coat doth be∣long; if a King, or absolute Prince, his Coat is blazoned, or express'd by Planets; a Nobleman's by precious Stones, and those of lower Ranks, by Colours; which take as under written: Metals and Colours in Blazon for Gent. un∣der the Nobi∣bility, called By Precious Stones for Nobles, called By Planets for Kings &c. called 1 Gold or Yellow, Or, O. Topaz ☉ Sol. 2 Silver, or white, Argent, A. Pearl ☽ Luna. 3 Red, Gules, G. Ruby. ♂ Mars. 4 Light blew, Azure, B. Sapphir. ♃ Jupiter. 5 Black, Sable, S. Diamond. ♄ Saturn. 6 Green, Vert, V. Emrauld. ♀ Venus. 7 Purple, Purpure, P. Amethyst. ☿ Mercury. 8 Orange colour, Tenne, T. Jacinth. ☊ Dragons head. 9 Murry, Sanguin, Sardonyx ☋ Dragons tail.
The Meaning is only this; if the Coat be a King's, or Prince's, you must say, he beareth Sol, not Tapaz, nor Or; if a Nobleman's, say, Topaz, or Pearl, and not Sol, nor Or; if a Gentleman's, say, Or, or Argent only, &c. The two last Colours are counted stai∣nant, yet are born sometimes by good Fa∣milies. All these have their proper significations, both singly by themselves, and also as they are compounded by themselves, they signifie as follows: Or signifies Wisdom, Magnanimity, De∣light, and Riches. Argent, Innocency, Chastity, and Cha∣rity. Gules, Strength, and Courage. Azure, Heavenly mindedness, and a Vir∣tuous Disposition. Sable, Melancholy, and Divine Studies. Vert, Youth, Gladness, Mirth and Joy in Love. Purpure, a Law giver, Jurisdiction, Dig∣nity, and Justice. Tenne, Self-Glory. Sanguin, Over-haste to Battel. To shew the several Significations of these Metals, and Colours, when they are
mixed together, would take up too much room and time; but the judicious may by a carefull Remark make curious Observati∣ons, or else let him consult Gerard Leigh, who is very large on this particular. The next to Metals and Colours are Furrs, of which some make more, some less; which take as follows: 1. The first is White, by which Blazon it is known to be a Furr, for if it be blazoned, Argent, it is understood to be Metal, and so cannot be proper for a Doubling, or Li∣ning; but if the Bearer have commited Treason, it is called Littute, from a little Beast, so called. 2. The second is Ermin, and is white spotted with black. 3. Ermins, It is black powdered, or spot∣ted with white. 4. Erminits is like Ermin, only this hath on each side of the black spot one Hair of Gules, or red. 5. Erminois is yellow with black spots. 6. Pean is black with yellow spots. 7. Verry is composed of Argent, and A∣zure each spot of an equal big∣ness, one indented in the other thus: 8. Leigh makes the 8th to be called Vere, and to be of the same spot as the last, only to differ in Colour, this being Or, and Vert.
9. The ninth he saith is called Vair, and is of the same spot with the two last; but it is composed of Argent, and Sablè. These two last are disputable and Lacy, saith, that these three are but one, only when it is to be of Argent, and Azure, it must be blazoned Verry or Vair, and no Metal nor Colour named; but if it be of any other Metal or Colour, it must be named Verry, or Vair, of such a Metal and Colour: And instead of these Guilliam adds another cal∣led by him Potent, Counter Potent, because it is like the Head of a Crutch, and placed one in another thus; and is always composed of Argent and Sa∣ble; this some old Blazoners call Varry Cuppe, and Vair Tasse; but Leigh blazons it Meirre. CHAP. XXXII. Of Ordinaries. THe Shield thus covered with some of these Metals, Colours, or Furrs, there is then (unless rare) some Charge laid upon it, which are of two sorts, proper and com∣mon.
Proper Charges are those which more peculiarly belong to this Art, and these are called Ordinaries, being 18 in Number, (some say 19,) of which 9 are called Ho∣nourable, the other nine, or ten, are called less Honourable. The more Honourable Ordinaries are, 1. The Cross. 2. The Chief. 3. The Pile. 4. The Bend. 5. The Fess. 6. The Inescoucheon. 7. The Chevron. 8. The Saltier. And, 9. The Bar. The Nine less Honourable Ordinaries are: 1. The Gyron. 2. The Orle. 3. The Pile. 4. The Quarter. 5. The Quarter Sinister. 6. The Canton. 7. The Canton Sinister. 8. The Flask. 9. The Flanch. 10. The Voider.
These all have an additional Note of Distinction, from the form of those Lines whereof they are composed; if they are drawn with a plain Line only, they are on∣ly called by their proper Name; but if the Line be uneven or irregular, they receive an additional Name accordingly. The Lines are these: 1. Invected. 2. Ingrailed. 3. Waved, or Undee. 4. Nebulee. 5. Crenella. 6. Indented. 7. Dancetty. 8. Ragulee. In some Cases Crenella is blazoned Em∣battellee. But of all these in Order. 1. The Cross signifies Afflictions for the cause of Religion, or being in the Wars against the Infidels; and of all Crosses the Cross waved shews the greatest of Af∣flictions: There are divers sorts of Crosses, as the Cross Flory, the Cross Botony, Pattee, or Form, Fitchee, Moline, the Julian, the Je∣rusalem, Avalan, Potent, Ragulee, and Trun∣ked Croslets, and Cross Croslets, with many more; which to describe would be a work of it self.
2. The Chief contains the upper third part of the Escoucheon, and shews the first Bearer was in Authority, or Place of Com∣mand, when he received his Coat, or had gained the Place by his Deserts. 3 The Pale is the middle third part of the Escoucheon, from top to bottom, and signifies the first Bearer to be skilled in Mining, and such like Arts. 4. The Bend is drawn from the right Corner at top, called the Dextre Chief, to the left Corner at bottom, or Sinister Base, in form of a Belt, shewing the first Bearer to be Valiant in War, and one who moun∣ted on the Enemies Walls. 5. The Fess contains the middle third part of the Escoucheon, drawn from side to side; it is counted a Scarf, and shews the first Bearer a worthy Leader of an Army, or a great part thereof. 6. The Escoucheon, or Inescoucheon, is when an Escoucheon is depicted in the middle of the Escoucheon; it shews the Bearer to have won his Enemy's Arms. 7. The Chevron, taken to the the Rafters of a House, from its form, being like the Ridge of a House, and signifies the first Bearer to be the promoter and top of his Family, the carryer on or finisher of some great Work, and the shelter, &c. of his Family. 8. A Saltier is made like the letter X. Ʋ∣ton
saith it was an Instrument to catch wild Beasts, but Leigh, and others, say it was used to scale the Walls of Cities with. On this Saltier did St. Andrew suffer Martyrdom, as is affirmed, from whence it is also cal∣led St. Andrew's Cross. It shews the Bearer was honourable at some Seige, did some valiant Exploits against the Picts and Scots. 9. The Bar is like the Fess, but narrower, and shews the first Bearer to be serviceable in raising of Batteries, or Fortifications, to the damage of the Enemies, and security of his Prince's Army. Thus much of the Nine honourable Or∣dinaries, the less honourable Ordinaries have also their proper significations; but some of them are very hard to be described by words, as; 1. The Gyron, which is taken to be that which in Man is called the Groin (and it is of∣tentimes so called in Blazon,) they are born many together, generally eight, sometimes six: They are a note of Unity, and shews the Uniting of many into one; in the Escoucheon they shew thus: 2. The Orle is like the Escoucheon in form, but hollow or void, and only the edges left; it shews the first Bearer so va∣liant as to sight untill his Sheild was hewen through. In Armory many times Birds, Beasts, Flowers, &c. are set in this form
and must be blazoned an Orle of such or such. 3. The Pile is broad at top like the Pale, but ends in a sharp point at bottom, shew∣ing thereby the first Bearer to be excellent in Fortifications, and some add rich in Buildings. 4. and 5. The Quarter Dextre, and the Quarter Sinister; it contains a fourth part of the Escoucheon on the right or left side at top, from whence it takes its name, and shews the first Bearer to receive an Aug∣mentation from the King, for service done according to the Charge on the Quarter; or else that he won his Enemy's Shield. 6. and 7. The Canton Dextre, and Ei∣nister, they are of the same form with the Quarter, and stand in the same place, but lesser something, and signifie the same thing, only the Quarter is given to those that are Nobles, and the Canton to those that are under the Degree of a Baron. 8. and 9. The Flask and Flanch, are but little different, the Flask being a little big∣ger than the Flanch, but are generally used promiscuously under the Name of Flanch; they are made Semicircular, from the cor∣ner at top, to the corner at bottom, the Bellies of them meeting allmost in the mid∣dle of the Escoucheon, and are never born but by pairs; that is, one on the one side, and the other on the other side; they are both
Arguments that the first Bearer was true and trusty in the Service he was employed in by his Prince. The Voider is of the same shape, but les∣ser much, and not circular, being the proper Reward for a Woman for the like Service done. CHAP. XXXII. Of Charges Common. Although some Coats of Arms have one of these alone, some have more, ei∣ther of the same or different sorts, and some have other things mixed with them; yet ma∣ny there are which have none, but charged with some other things, which Charges are born sometimes upon these Ordinaries, some∣times by or with them, and sometimes both upon them, and by or with them; and some∣times you shall have these Ordinaries born upon or over such other Charges; but this being too tedious to run through all the va∣riety of Bearing, and the significations of them, when alone, or compounded, I shall reduce what I have to say to these nine heads, and be very brief in them all:
1. Angels. 2. Rational Creatures. 3. Beasts. 4. Fowl. 5. Fishes. 6. Insects. 7. Heavenly Bodies. 8. Trees, Hearbs, Flowers, and Fruits. 9. Things artificial. Sect. 1. Of Angels. Angels, Cherubims, or any part of them, signifie great celerity in business, the Mes∣sengers of Peace and happy News. Note generally, the whole signifies more than the parts. Sect. 2. Of Men. To bear Men in Coat-Armour is honou∣rable; as, 1. For Saints. It sheweth the first Bearer was some Bishop, Abbat, or some Person who built or ruled some Place dedi∣cated to such Saint. 2. Heads shew the Bea∣rer to have done Service against those People whose Head it signifies; as, Saracens, Turks, Moors, &c. 3. Hands or Arms signifie Strength and Fortitude in their Bearers. 4. Eyes signifie Judgment and Apprehension.
5. Legs and Feet shew the Bearer to be swift to pursue his Enemies, and are the emblem of Support and Assistence; as, 6. The Heart is of Knowledge and Understanding. Sect. 3. Of Beasts. Beasts of Prey are more honourable than Beasts of Chase, and the more honourable the Beast is, the more honourable the Coat; the Male is more honourable than the Fe∣male, and those that are gilt, or kerved, less honourable than those that are not; the whole is better than the parts, and the re∣gular posture than the irregular; those at liberty are better than those that are not, by being chained, muzled, or the like: and the proper colour is better than different. Of parts; first the Head, if of a Beast of Prey, shews the first Bearer to head an Army, to be bold and stout; or to destroy or take some General of the Enemies. Next to Beasts of Prey are the Unicorn, Horse, Bull, Ram, Goat, Hart, &c. all whose Heads are honou∣rable according to their several Degrees. Next the Head are the Gambs or Paws, and then the Lions Tails. A Limb or Mem∣ber either of Man, Beast, or Fowl, is better erased than couped, and that better than cabosed; nor are Monsters so honourable as those of true shapes. The nearer any Coat
is to the King's Coat in whose Countrey he lives, the more honourable is that Coat. The Lion shews great Power, Jurisdicti∣on, Mercy, and all other generous Vertues. The Unicorn one of Strength and Cou∣rage, who will fight it out to the last, and never yield; yet withall ready to doe good to his Enemies: It hath significations of Scotland, &c. The Wolf shews one who hath Power and Parts to assemble many together, and might first be given to him that brought a Band of his Tenents, Friends, or Voluntiers, to the King's Service. The Fox signifies one that by Policy and Strategeme hath gotten possession of his Ene∣mies Quarters, or Countrey. The Horse shews one bold and valiant, and a Person that by his Example encoura∣geth others: It also sheweth, that the Bea∣rer might have mounted his General or Prince in Battel. The Ass shews the Bearer to be a most in∣dustrious and submissive Person. The Ram one valiant in War, and profi∣table in Peace, chiefly by his Substance. The Bull a valiant Person, and one that labours the Ruine of his Enemies. The Goat one of mean worth, yet politick in War, whereby he subdues his Enemies. The Cat shews one that by a constant and
prudent care surprises his Enemy, or by a subtile Strategeme seises those that make In∣roads into the Countrey. The Dog an excellent Centinel, and con∣stant adherer to his Prince. The Boar is given to those that are vali∣ant, but not liberal, and one that will dye nobly rather than flie basely. The Hedghog shews one that is expert in gathering Riches, and prudent in laying hold on all opportunities to secure them. The Coney shews a Person to be a skilfull Pionier, and successfull; also good in ma∣king Trenches. The Squeril shews the first Bearer to be an excellent Treasurer and Purveyor for an Ar∣my. The Panthar shews a Person of undaunted Courage and Resolution, yet of so friendly and persuasive a Temper, that all men love him. The Elephant shews a Man of great Lear∣ning and Authority; a wise and sage Coun∣sellour, and one of great valour. The Camel one that is ready and speedy in business. The Bear shews one politick and valiant, though perhaps greedy of Gain. The Ape may perhaps be given to one who first pleased his Prince by his pleasant and facetious Humour; and also shews one
very apt to learn by Inspection, and imita∣tive. The Hart sheweth one carefully politick, who foreseeing the Danger, prevents it, making good his own Party, and circumven∣ting his Enemies. Monstrous Beasts are less honourable than others, and shew that the first Bearers might have something in them which was vitious; which though it did not wholly outvie their Vertues, yet it might be a blemish to the same, and shews oftentimes Illegitimacy. The Leopard shews a subtile man, one that would surprize his Enemies by Policy where his Strength faileth; yet withall too violent when he hath overcome. The Griffin shews one valiant, and to make great spoil of his Enemies Megazines, yet cruel and covetous. The Dragon or Wivorn shews one that invades his Enemies, not in a main Battel, but as a Privatier, or one who hath Letters of Mart, and subdueth Pirates, or the like, and will be sure to keep fast what he gets, though unjustly. The Mantiger shews one to have shewed himself most humane and courteous to all, and withall courageous, yet in his Conquests too much of a cruel Tyrant. The Sphinx and Harpie the same.
The Bat or Reremous shews a low begin∣ning, but by care and industry to arrive to great Wealth, and thereby to Honour, yet sneaking, and of a low Spirit. The Postures of Beasts are differently bla∣zoned, according to the nature of them; for all Beasts of Prey, or Battel, have one denomination for their posture, and those of Chase, or the like, have another. Beasts of Prey and Battel are couchant, passant, guardant, combatant, rampant, sa∣liant, regardant, coward, double quere, quere inflected, quere renowned, &c. Beasts of Chase, &c. are said to be lodg∣ed, tripant, at gaze, respecting, mounting, springing, and the like. Dormant, seiant, endorced, and some others, are common to both. The Lion dormant shews a Person, who, having been victorious, gives over the War, and takes his Ease. Couchant shews the same, but more ho∣nourable; one who hath given over publick Affairs. Passant shews one ready for noble Actions, and one of absolute Jurisdiction. Seiant shews the Bearer to be one placed in some Frontier Garison; a wary, watch∣full Person.
Guardant shews a Person of a vigilant Disposition, who stands upon his Guard in the midst of his Enemies. Saliant shews the first Bearer to be a ready and active Person on all occasions for War. Rampant shews a Person truly valorous. Regardant, coward, &c. shews the Bea∣rers to have been most worthy Persons, but overcome and subdued by some conquering Prince. Note generally, 1st. That oftentimes the bearing of Beasts shew the Bearer to have subdued an Enemy of the same nature, and the Heads shew the same more properly. Note 2dly, That whereas in the first of Edward II. and in the seventh of Henry VI. men that had Lands to the value of 20 l. per annum, were compelled to take upon them the Order of Knighthood, and though the Heralds were carefull to keep out base born People, who had grown rich, yet many were admitted who were but of very mean Extrac∣tion; whence many Devices were given them which in enigmatical Signs shewed the Qua∣lity of the first Bearer, which is not conve∣nient here to name; and though none recei∣ved his Arms for his Vices, but for his Ver∣tues, or Estate, as in those Kings Reigns, and some since, yet those Persons having Vices which were known, and blemished their
other Qualities, the Heralds would and were to take notice of the same, as above, in Monsters, in all irregular postures, and ma∣ny more. Note 3dly, Many received Coats from their Names; because their other Vertues, besides their Estates, were not known; and some have received their Sirnames, and Coat of Arms both, from some quality they have been endowed with; wherefore it is that sometimes the bearing of Coat Armour, ac∣cording to the Name, is both ancient and honourable. I now proceed to Birds. Sect. 4. Of Birds. In Bearing of Birds the Female is more honourable than the Male, except the Cock; proper Colours are better than artificial; Birds of Prey, and those exercised in flight, are better volant or flying, than closs; Poul∣try and all Water-fowl are best closs; also the Martlet; in other things they are the same with Beasts. The Eagle signifies true Magnanimity, and one who scorns to stoop to low or base Acti∣ons. The Falcon shews the first Bearer to be valiant, and one that pursueth his Victory
eagerly, and speedily performeth a warlike Message. The Cock shews an Ambassadour, or He∣rald, and a valiant Person, though apt to brag after Victory. The Stork is an emblem of Obedience and Gratitude to Prince and Parents. The Swallow shews one quick and ready to doe business, but more serviceable in Peace than War. Pigeons shew the Bearer to be a faithfull Messenger, chaste and loyal; they argue Ho∣liness and Innocency, bringers of good Ti∣dings, of Peace and Plenty. The Swan shews a learned Man, Poets, Musicians, &c. a contented person, and contemner of the World. An Owl shews Prudence, Vigilancy, a watchfull temper to prevent a surprize, yet withall loving Retiredness. The Pellicane shews the Bearer diligent in instructing and educating those under his Charge in Learning and Vertues; as, Chil∣dren, Servants, Soldiers, &c. The Raven shews a carefull Gatherer, but yet fraudulent. The Peacock signifies a man of splendid Condition, yet vainglorious; possibly of mean Extraction; if the Peacock be closs, it abates much of the vainglorious Tem∣per.
The Martlet shews one of a younger Fa∣mily, who lived and got his Estate by Indu∣stry, not by Inheritance. The Heads of Birds is the next to the whole, then the Feet or Tallons of Birds of Prey, the Legs next, the Wigs next, which shew Protection, and paternal Love, and the Feathers last. Sect. 5. Of Fish. THE most honourable Bearing of Fish is nayant or swimming, the next spring∣ing, lastly hauriant; sometimes they are fretted, sometimes indorsed, and sometimes respecting; the Dolphin being best in He∣raldry when embowed. Of the Parts of Fish seldom any is born, except the Head and Shells. Amongst Fish the Dolphin is most honou∣rable; it shews the first Bearear to be of a loving and good condition, willing and rea∣dy to help. The Herrin may be accounted next; and shews the first Bearer to be ready to serve his Prince, but willing to have company. The Eel, Place, Flounder, &c. shews the Bearer to be possest of much fenny and wa∣terish Land; also to be a person that lived close and private.
The Lobstar, Crab, and other Shell fish, shew the Bearer to be one, that though he go willingly to War, yet wants that true Magnanimity of Mind to venture far; but if he once hath obtained any thing by his Valour or Policy, will rarely let it go again. The Eschallop Shel is the emblem of Uni∣ty and Friendship, and shews the first Bearer to be a Commander, who by his Valour and Goodness had so united the Hearts of his fol∣lowers to him, as not to forsake him in all Attempts wherever he went. Sect. 6. Of Insects. Insects are very rarely born in parts, and amongst them the Ant shews an industrious, carefull, and provident Person, yet of a Temper unwilling to be observed in the World, and something covetous. The Bee a laborious person, and benefici∣al to Mankind, generous and hospitable, but hasty or passionate. The Snake shews a person who lives a re∣tired, quiet life, yet withall such as never fail to remember their Enemies when they have opportunity. Likewise the Adder, and all such Serpents, shew the Bearer to be a close, subtile, and privately mischievous per∣son.
The Butterflie shews a Person who lives splendidly on that which others got cove∣tously; also a person who though at first by a recluse Life gathered much, yet spent the rest of his days in pleasure, and seeing the World. The Gadflie or Humble-bee shews one who came of industrious Parents, who were be∣neficial to others, but he lives not up to their Frugality, but upon it, &c. The Toad shews a man covetous to get, and unwilling to part with what he hath so got; yet of good Understanding, prudent, and knowing. Sect. 7. Of Heavenly Bodies. Amongst which the Sun shews the first Bearer to live splendidly, and willing to doe good to all persons: It is the Emblem of Glory. The Moon shews one willing to doe good to others, according to his power, though he hath his Dependency on some other e∣minent person, and it is augmented or aba∣ted as the Moon is in its Full, Increasing, or Decreasing. The Cressant shews a younger Family, who in all probability may rife to great Glory.
The Star is a note of Eminency, and gi∣ven for some great knowledge in the Liberal Sciences, or some great Discoveries in the Art of Navigation, &c. The Mullet is variously taken; some e∣steem it to be the Rowel of a Spur, and that those that are pierced are those that are fi∣nished, and those that are not pierced are those that are unfinished; others say, (and they the most,) that they are a falling Star, or Meteor, (possibly those with five points may be Rowels, and those with six points im∣perfect Stars, for Stars have never less than six points, and those waved, but the Mullet is never waved.) It was anciently blazoned Esteiles, whereas the Star is termed Estoiles; however this is certain, that it signifies Ho∣nour, and that the first Bearer studied Divi∣nity, or such things that made him shine in Vertue or Learning. Clouds shew Honour and Eminency, but Uncertainty. Sect. 8. Of Trees, Fruits, Flowers, and Hearbs. Timber-trees are preferred before others, and among them the Oak is first. Amongst Flowers the Rose is first, the Thistle next; the Flower-de-luce and the
Lilly follow; of others the manured are more honourable than the wild. Of parts: The Branches are first, then the Fruit, then Leaves, then Stumps and Roots, and Trunks last; these all hear part of the same signification with the Tree to which they belong. The Oak shews the first Bearer to be a great help and preserver of his Prince or Countrey. The Leaves of Oak, Bays, or Laurel, are given in token of Victory. A Limb of a Tree couped shews the first Bearer eminent in destroying his Enemy in his Hold or Fastness; also that he was ex∣cellent at Fortifications. The Rose shews Service done to the Crown of England; or, that the first Bearer lived upon an hill, according to the British. The Flower-de-luce shews Service in France. Leaves of Holly shews one serviceable in the Church, yet possibly sharp and censorious; but I hasten. Grapes shew a person who is instrumental in procuring some eminent Convocation, which hath produced much benefit to the Kingdom. A Garb or Sheaf shews the first Bearer to be rich in arable Lands, and given to much Hospitality; the better the Grain, the more noble.
Cinquefoil is ancient, and shews the Bea∣rer to be one that masters his Affections, and hath overcome his Enemies as well by Policy as Power. Quaterfoil the same, but lower. Trefoil notes a man possessed of much Meadow, or Pasture Land, and one who lives in Joy and Content. Note, Flowers or Leaves sliped, that is, with the Stalks plucked off, are better than the single Leaves. Sect. 9. Of Things Artificial. There are so many, and so various sorts of this Bearing, that to name them all, if it could be done, would make a whole Volume of itself; and therefore I shall name but a few of the most common. A Helmet shews the Bearer to be a man of Command; if full faced, it shews the more Authority; if sideways, the less. Castles and Towers shew the Bearer to be one that stood much upon his Guard, a per∣son much assaulted by his Enemies, ghostly or bodily, according to the Field. Swords and Instruments of War are ho∣nourable, and shew the first Bearer exquisite in the use of such Instruments, or to over∣come his Enemies by them.
Bridges and Arches shew the Bearer to be a Person of great Stability, and under ma∣ny sufferings for his King and Countrey, a∣midst which he stands stedfast and loyal. The Plow, and all Instruments of Hus∣bandry, shew the Bearer to be an industri∣ous person, and very beneficial to the Com∣monwealth. Utensils of a Kitchen, &c. shew the first Bearer to be a Lover of good Housekeeping. Sect. 10. Of Roundles and Drops, &c. Note, that in Coat Armour there are some things which are all of one form, but have divers Names, and consequently several Sig∣nifications, from their Colours. Of these the chiefest are Roundles or Drops. First, the Roundles, (called by the vulgar Balls, and Bullets.) These have nine seve∣ral names according to their Nine several Metals and Colours used in Armory. 1 Yellow, or Gold, are called Bessants. 2 White, or Silver, are called Plates. 3 Red, or Gules, are called Tortuauxes. 4 Blew, or Azure, are called Hurts. 5 Green, or Vert, are called Pomeis. 6 Purple, or Purpure, are called Golpes. 7 Black, or Sable, are called Pellets, or Ogresses.
8 Tenne, or Orange-colour, are called Oranges. 9 Murry, or Sanguin, are called Guezes. The Bessant shews great profit brought by the Bearer to the King and Countrey. The Plate shews the same, but lesser; al∣so Riches in the first Bearer. The Tortuaux shews the first Bearer to be a Priest, or religious Person, or one that had done much for the Church. The Hurt shews one who had received much hurt by his Enemies, but not to woun∣ding. Guillium calls them Whorts, or, as some call them, Whortle-berries. Leigh calls them Hurts, or Bruises in the Flesh, which look blew; but he saith in Women they are called Tongue-Moles. Pomeis shews one abounding in Ortyards and Fruits. Golps shew one who received Wounds in Battel. Ogresses shew a person expert in Slinging, and in those Warlike Engines which cast Stones and Darts; an Enginier, &c. Note, When these are of different Co∣lours, as in Coats parted, they are most pro∣perly called Roundles. There are also Annulets, which are like Rings, and are esteemed the Rings whereof the Coat of Mail is composed; it is good
Bearing, and shews one who with an united Strength preserved his Prince. The second thing which is of one shape, but distinguished by the Colour, are Drops, therefore called Gutta; as, The Gold are called Gutta de Or, or Drops of Gold. When White, or Silver, then they are called Gutta de Eau, or Water, or Gutta de Argent, drops of Silver, but not so pro∣per. The Gules are called Gutta de Sanguin, or Bloud. Azure are called Gutta de Larmes, or Tears. Black are called Gutta de Poix, or Drops of Pitch. Again, there is the Fucil, which hath four Corners, but the distance between the upper corner and the lower is much more than that between the sides. It is much like a quarril of Glass, and called by Geometri∣cians Rhombus. The Lozenge also, which is of the same form, but not so long, and something broa∣der. Lastly, the Mascle, which is just square, standing also cornerwise, but all open, or hollow within.
The Fucil is taken by most for that which is used in spinning woollen Yarn, called a Spindle. The Lozeuge is accounted that physical Composition which is given for Colds. The Mascle for the Meshes of a Net. The Fucil may shew the Bearer to have more Honour by the Mother-side than the Father's, or else, that their Riches, &c. sprang from the beneficial Emploiment of Weaving or Cloathing, and many English Armorists blazon them Weavers Shuttles. The Lozenge argues the first Bearer to be famous, &c. in the study or practice of Phy∣sick. The Mascle shews one who was very sub∣tile, and could inveagle and circumvent his Enemies; as also one who had advanced him∣self by industry in Fishing. There is also the Billit, which are Letters folded up more long than broad, and shews the Bearer to be employed in Embassies, ac∣cording to the Colour, &c. or Charge, some being charged. The Steel Gad is much like the Billit, but bends a little out on one side, and in on the other; it is an argument of great Strength, but of much passion when provoked.
The Delft is exactly square, it is a Delve or Spit of Earth, and is good bearing when the Colour is not of the Stainant Colours, but then it is a Blot; else it may signifie one that got Riches by gardening, or the like Occupation; also one who behaved him∣self well in working of Trenches. It would fill a very large Volume to speak of all the several things born in Coat-Armour, if they could be all known; and therefore I hope these may be taken in good part, being already gone farther than at first I intended. CHAP. XXXIII. Of Abatements. HAving spoken of those things that make Men Honourable, I shall now speak of those things that do lessen and a∣bate the Reputation of those Persons who have the Honour of bearing Coat-Ar∣mour; and these are therefore called Abate∣ments of Honour, which happens when a Gentleman, &c. doth commit some ungen∣teel Action; for which the Heralds think fit to set some note of Infamy upon the Party: And this is that which we vulgarly
call a Blot in their Escoucheon: Of these Armorists reckon nine, which are ever made of one of the Stainant Colours, viz. Tenne or Sanguin; else it's possible that some of them may be Arguments of Honour as in the Delft, Gusset, &c. The first is the Delft; it is set in the middle of the Escoucheon, else it is not a Blot, (it must stand on one of its sides,) and is given to one that revoketh his Challenge; as if dirt were thrown in his face. The second is an Inescoucheon reverst, which is a small Escoucheon turn'd up side down in the middle of the Escoucheon. This is due to him that discourtiously in∣treateth Maid, or Widow, &c. against her Will; and also for him that flyeth from his Sovereign's Banner. The Third is called a Point, parted Dex∣tre, that is; when the upper right corner of the Escoucheon is parted from the whole, and is given to him, who boasteth too much of his Deeds in War. The Fourth is Point in Point, which consisteth of two arched Lines, and the mid∣dle ends are joined in the middle of the E∣scoucheon, and so both pass circularly to the sides near the Bottom, thereby cutting off as it were a great part of the Escou∣cheon,
at the lower part; and is given to one that is unwilling to fight. The Fifth is called a Point Champane; it is made of one hollow arched Line, which as it were cuts off, or hideth the bottom of the Escoucheon, but more at each side than in the middle: It is given to him that kil∣leth his Prisoner in cold Bloud, and when he may as well save him alive. The Sixth is called a Plain Point, where∣in the bottom of the Escoucheon seems to be covered by a streight Line, drawn from side to side; and is proper for him that inventeth false News, or Lies to his Prince; possibly the late French Ambassadour ought to be so served. The Seventh is called a Gore; it consist∣eth of two hollow Lines, one whereof begins at the upper left Corner, or Sinister Chief of the Escoucheon, and the other at the middle of the Bottom or Base Point, and so meet in the middle. It's proper for him that's a Coward, or Feminine-hearted. The Eighth is called a Gusset; it is made by drawing a Line a little sloping from the upper corner of the Escoucheon, about one third of the Breadth, and then letting it fall perpendicular to the Bottom; it is given on the right side, to shew the Bearer one, who to satisfie his lust neglects his
Battel, and on the left side to him that neglects through Drunkenness. The Ninth, and last, is when the whole Coat is reversed, or turned upside down and is proper for a Traytor; and must be blazoned by expressing the Colours to their common Names, as Yallow, White, Red, Light-Blew, Black, and the like, and not Or, Argent, Gules, Azure, &c. Note, That as no Man, having Coat-Armour bestowed upon him, can communi∣cate the same to any of his Relations, as Brothers, Unckles, or the like; nor can they have any power to use or wear the fame, (whence it often comes to pass, that several Coats belong to the same Name,) the Coat only belonging to his Heirs, and those that shall proceed from the first Bearer; so these Abatements belong to none but to the Person, and his distinct Line; who if they shall by the opposite Vertues shew them∣selves worthy, the Abatement by the Ap∣probation and Order of the Heralds, may be taken away.
CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Points in an Escoucheon. I Conclude with naming those places in the Escoucheon, which in Heraldry are called Points, and by which you are to know the several parts and places in it, which are also Nine. You are to imagine the Escoucheon, as placed before you, to be worn by the bearer; so that the right side of it answers to your left hand, and the left side to your right hand, and therefore are called the Dexter and Sinister sides of the Escoucheon. The Points are as follow: 1. The middle or centre of the Escoucheon is called the Fess Point. 2. The middle be∣tween the Fess point and the top of the Escoucheon, is called the Honour Point. 3. The right corner at the top is the Dex∣tre Chief Point. 4. The very middle of the top is the Chief Point. 5. The left cor∣ner of the top is called the Sinister Chief Point. 6. Then between the Fess Point and the bottom of the Escoucheon is the Nom∣bril Point. 7. The right corner of the bot∣tom is the Dextre Bass Point, 8. The mid∣dle of the bottom is the Bass Point. And,
9. The left corner of the bottom is called the Sinister Bass Point. There being many words in the forego∣ing Treatise, which are not here explained (although most are,) and many other Terms of Art, and some peculiar Charges, which are not therein mentioned, I have thought good to insert the following Table, for the benefit of such who are willing to be in∣structed therein. Abacat, a Cap of High Estate, worn by some Kings. Abatement, (see Chap. 32.) Disgrace or lessen∣ing of Honour. Achievement, the Arms of any Gentleman, or Nobleman, with his Crest, Mantle, Helm, Supporters, Motto, &c. Proper. Adumbration, a shadowing; it is used in Heraldry when a Family is gone to decay, they may bear their Coat shadowed, i. e. only with the plain Lines, and no Co∣lours. Adventail, a Coat of Armour. Annulet, a Ring in Armory, the Rings of a Coat of Male. Avelan, a cross, whose ends are like Nuts, or Philbirds, therefore called a Cross A∣velan. Bar, (see Chap. 31.) less than the Fess, and many have three in an Escoucheon.
Barulet, is a Diminutive Bar, containing a fourth part of the Bar. Barre, is when a Coat is composed of small Bars, both Colours being equal; else it must be blazoned Barre of so many. Bars Gemews, or Gemelis, double Bars, and always born two together. Base, the bottom of the Escoucheon. Battoon, a wand or udgel; it is like a Bend Sinister, reaching from the Sinister Chief to the Dextre Base, but doth not touch either; it is narrower than the Bend, and is a Note of Bastardy. Bend, see Chap. 31. a Belt. Bendlet, a diminutive Bend, three may be born in an Escoucheon. Bendy, when the whole Escoucheon is com∣posed of Bends. Per Bend, is when the Escoucheon is of two Colours, and parted by a Line bend ways. Bessants, are Quoits of Gold, valued 3750 l. Sterling. Billit, Letters, Chap. 32. Sect. 10. Blazon, to describe a Coat of Arms by pro∣per Terms. Botony, see Cross. Border, the edge of a different Colour that goeth round many Coats. Cabosed, when the Head of a Beast, &c. is cut close off, and no Neck left to it.
Canton Dextre and Sinister, see Chap. 31. Castle, is when the Architecture extendeth it self from one side of the Field, to the other; and if it have Turrets, they must be named how many: But if it doth ex∣tend it self so, it is blazoned a Tower, and if it have Turrets, they must be cal∣led Towered. Chaplet, a Garland or Headband of Flow∣ers. Checquee, is when it is Chequered of more rows than two. Chevron, see Chap. 31. Chevronel, a little Chevron. Cheif, see Chap. 31. Closs, birds, &c. when set on their Feet are blazoned Closs, not Passant. Closs, Cost, or Cottises, are very narrow Bends, and by some thought to be the Ribs of a Man: They are born on each side the Bend, and some other Charges, but always in Bend. Combatant, sighting or rampant, face to face; it is only proper to Beasts of Bat∣tel. Complement, the Moon is so blazoned when at full. Compony, or Compounded, is two rows chequered and no more. Counter, to go toward the Sinister side of the Escoucheon, or to go back again.
Couped, cut smooth off. Couchant, lying down, proper for Beasts of Prey. Crenella, see Chap 31. in a Chief, or Fess, or Bar, it is blazoned Embattellee. Coward, a Lion with his Tail between his Legs, and hanging about his Feet. Cronels, is that which is put upon the end of a Tilt, Staff, or Spear, in justing. Cressant, a horned Moon with the Horns upwards. Cross, see Chap. 31. Croslet, a little Cross, when more than one is born in an Escoucheon. Cross Croslet, when those little Crosses are crossed at the ends. Cross Flory, hath a Flower-de-luce, issuing out at each end, some call it Patence. Cross Botony, when each end hath Balls or Buttons on them. Cross Pattee or Form, when the ends are broader than the Bars. Cross Fitchee, when there is a spike in the lower end to stick it into the Ground. Cross Julian, like a Saltier, but crossed a∣again at each end. Cross Potent, when the ends are crossed like a Crutch, some call it a cross Bat∣toon. Cross Ragulee, see Ragulee. Cross Moline, when the ends are parted,
and turn outward like the outside Leaves of a Flower-de-luce; it hath its name from a Mill-Link. Dalmatica, a Priest's Garment; see Chap. 2. Dancette, very much cut or indented; see Chap. 31. Debruised, oppressed. Delft or Delve, a Spit of Earth; see Chap. 32. Sect. 10. Displayed, spread abroad. Dormant, sleeping. Doubled or Doublings. lined or linings. Eau, water; see Chap. 32. Embatalia, see Crenella. Embowed, bended as the Dolphin. Enaluron, a Term proper for a Border, or the like, when it is charged with Birds. Endorsed, back to back, Rampant or up∣right. Entoyer, a Term proper to a Border, when charged with dead or artificial things. Enurny, a Term proper to a Border, and the like, when charged with Beasts. Erased, torn off by Violence. Escoucheon, a Shield whereon Coat-Armour is depicted. Expanded, Spread abroad or set open.
Fess, see Chap. 13. Fillet, that which Women bind up their Hair with; it is when the Chief hath a fourth part of it taken off, as it were, at the bottom. Fitchee, a Spike to fix into the Ground; see Cross. Files, Some take them for Points, some for the folds of Garments, others for Can∣dles; the most likely are Points: they are a note of the elder Family, or Heir to a Family, when rightly placed. Flanch, the Flanck; see Chap. 31. Flasque, a bent Bow, some say; see Chap∣ter 31. Flory, see Cross; also any thing that is flow∣red on the sides. Formee, Broad; see Cross. Frett, it is as when a Square Frame (as of a Picture, or the like,) hath a stick laid on it from side to side, and another on the other side, which binds in the first stick by crossing over it, and, turning again on the other side of the Frame, holdeth all together. Frettee, is when several Sticks or Battoons are wadled or woven together, like our Lattice Windows. Fucils, the French take for Spindles where∣on Yarn is spun; we take them for Wea∣vers
Shuttles, and the Dutch for Mill∣pecks; see Chap. 32. § 10. Frinbrated, bordered or hemmed. Gads of Steel, see Chap. 32. § 10. Gambs, the Paws of Lions, and Beasts of Prey. Guardant, when a Beast of Prey looks upon you as it were with a full Face. Gaze, is the same, and proper to Beasts of Chase. Gemews, see Barrs. Gobonated, cut in pieces. Golps, Wounds; see Chap. 32. Gore, the Gore of a Smock, a Note of Effe∣minacy; see Chap. 33. Gussets, the Gussets of a Smock; see Chap∣ter 33. Guttas, Drops; see Chap. 33. § 10. Gyrone, see Chap. 31. Hauriant, is a proper Blazon for Fish, when they are placed as if they hung at the Line. Heawme and Timbre, are those things that are without the Escoucheon, as, Mantle, Crest, &c. Chap. 31. Honour Point, see Chap. 34. Humett, is a Term in Blazon, when any of the honourable Ordinaries are cut off at ends, so that they do not touch the sides
of the Escoucheon; chiefly the Fess, Bar, and Chevron. Huns, a Bruise in the Flesh; see Chap. 32. Inescoucheon, see Chap. 31. Indented, toothed, Chap. 31. Ingrailed, is when the Heads of the Scallops look inward to one another; Chap. 31. Invected, is when the Heads look outward from one the other; Chap. 31. Jesant, to lie over. Knight-Service, an ancient Tenure of Lands, by which a Man was bound to bear Arms in War for the defence of the Kingdom. Lambeaux, see Files. Larmes, Tears; see Chap. 32. § 10. Lodged, a Term proper to Beasts of Chace, as Couchant is to Beasts of Battel. Lozenges, Physical Compositions; see Chap∣ter 32. § 10. Mascles, Meshes of a Net, Chap. 32. § 10. Mullet, an imperfect Star, or Spur-Rowel; see Chap. 32. § 7. Mounting, a Term proper to Beasts of Chase, as Rampant is to Beasts of Prey. Mound, is the Globe or Ball, with the Cross on it, which the King holds in his hand when he sits in State. Mouline, the Links of a Mill.
Nayant, swimming. Nebulee, Clouds, or clouded. Nombril, the Navil, a point in the Escou∣cheon; see Chap. 34. Orle, an Escoucheon hewed through; see Chap. 31. Or, Gold, or yellow. Ogresses, Pellets, Gunstones, or Bullets. Pale, a Pillar, see Chap. 31. Pallet, a little Pale; three or five may be in an Escoucheon. Paley, when the whole Escoucheon is com∣posed of Pales. Passant, a Term proper to a Beast of Battel, and is used when they are walking along, or passing. Pattee, see Form, or Cross. Pattence-Flory, see Flory; only it is peculiar to a Cross, which Flory is not. Pierced, when there is a hole in the Charge, through which the Field may be seen. Pendent, hanging down. Pile, such as is driven into Foundations when it is extended to the lower end of the Escoucheon; but when it reacheth but half way, it is taken for a Wedge. Plates, Quoits of Silver uncoined. Poix, Pitch.
Potent, see Cross. Proper, the natural colour of any thing. Purflued, a Term proper for those Borders that are composed of Furr. Purpure, Purple. Quarters, see Chap. 31. Quere, the Tail of a Beast, chiefly used in the Lion. Quere Double, forked, or two Tails. Quere Double in Saltier, when the two Tails turn inward at the ends, and cross one the other in Saltier. Quere Inflected, when the Tail comes be∣tween the Legs, and turns over the Back. Quere Renowned, elevated over the Head, Ragulee, when the Branches are cut from the Stock of a Tree, &c. leaving some part on, like the ragged Staff. Rampant, when a Beast of Battel stands up∣right on his hinder Legs. Rebated, the point of a Weapon broken off. Regardant, looking backward. Respecting, when Fish, or Beasts of Chase, stand upright one against the other; see Combatant. Reverse, turned the bottom upwards. Ribon, like a Bend, but very narrow, and doth not touch the corner of the Escou∣cheon.
Roundie, see Chap. 32. § 10. Saltier, see Chap. 32. Saliant, a Term proper for Beasts of Prey, when they are not so upright as Ram∣pant, it signifies to seise the Prey. Scarp, is a very narrow Sinister Bend. Seiant, sitting upon the Tayl. Shaperoon, a French Hood. Sliped, is when a Branch or Flower is pluck∣ed off from the Stock; and not cut or couped. Socage, an Ancient Tenure of Land, by do∣ing some inferiour service of Husbandry to the Lord of the Fee. Springing, is proper to Beasts of Chace; when they leap forward and are placed in the same posture that Beasts of Prey are when Saliant; in fish it is when they are placed in Bend. Steel Gads, see Gads; and Chap. 32. Sect. 10. Stole, a long Garment or Robe of Honour, the Keeper whereof is generally one of the Nobility; and styled Groom of the Stole, by the Vulgar Groom of the Stool. Tenne, Orange Colour; a Colour Stainant. Tripant, a Term proper for Beasts of Chace, as Passant is for Beasts of Battel. Trunked, is when a Tree or the like is cut off, so that the inside thereof is to be seen,
and is also depicted round, both which couped is not. Torce, is the wreath whereon the Helmet in the Crest standeth; and is used in their Coats who are under the Degree of a Baron. Tortuaux, wafers used in the Sacrament (by the Papists.) Tower, see Castles. Vamplet, is that on a Tilt Spear which co∣vers the hand of the Tilter. Verdoy, is a Term proper to a Border charged with Flowers. Ʋlster, is the Canton on the Arms of all Baronets, (which is Argent, a Sinister hand in Pale, couped at Wrist, Gules,) and so called, because it is the Arms of Ʋl∣ster in Ireland. Ʋndee or Ʋndaded, waved. Volant, flying. Voided, is when the inner side of an Or∣dinary or Charge is taken away, so that the Field is seen through. Vulned, wounded. Wreath, see Torce. Waved, see Ʋndee.
THE Number of the House of Peers is about 200 at this time. The Number of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, that make up the House of Com∣mons. are 515. Of Weights and Measures of England, &c. Avoir du pois hath 16 Ounces to the Pound, 16 Drachms to the Ounce, 112 Pound make an hundred Weight, and 2000 Pound make a Tun. Troy Weight hath only 12 Ounces to the Pound, but then they are weightier than Avoir du pois. The least Measure is a Barly-Corn. 3 Barly-Corns make Inch. 4 Inches make a Handfull. 3 Handfulls make a Foot. 3 Foot make a Yard. Yard and a quarter make an Ell. 5 Foot make a Pace. 6 Foot make a Fathom. 6 Foot and an half make a Perch, Pole, or Rod. 0 Perch make a Furlong.
8 Furlongs make a Mile. 60 Miles make a Degree. 360 Degrees is the compass of the Earth. 40 Perch in length, and 4 in breadth make an Acre of Land. 1 Pound Avoir du pois makes a Pint. 2 Pints make a Quart. 2 Quarts a Pottle. 2 Pottles a Gallon. 8 Gallons a Firkin of Ale. 9 Gallons a Firkin of Beer. 2 Firkins a Kilderkin. 2 Kilderkins a Barrel. 1 Barrel and half of Beer measure make an Hogshead. 2 Hogsheads a Pipe or Butt. 2 Butts a Tun. One Pound Troy weight makes a Pint of Wine. 18 Gallons of Wine (Troy weight) make a Rundlet. 42 Gallons make a Tierce. 63 Gallons a Hogshead. 126 Gallons a Pipe or Butt. 2 Butts a Tun. 2 Gallons a Peck. 4 Pecks a Bushel. 8 Bushels a Quarter. 10 Quarters a Wey or Last.
The Worth of Gold.   l. s. d. q. One Pound weight is worth 40 0 0 0 One Ounce 93 6 8 0 One Penny-weight 00 3 4 0 One Grain or Barly-corn 00 0 1 2 The Worth of Silver.   l. s. d. q. One Pound weight is worth 03 0 0 0 One Ounce 00 5 0 0 One Penny-weight 00 0 3 0 One Grain or Barly-corn 00 0 0 1 England is in length 386, in breadth 276, and in compass 1532 Miles. Ireland is in length 303, in breadth 279, and in compass 948 Miles. Isle of Man is in length 28, in breadth 18, and in compass 91 Miles. Isle of Anglesey is in length 21, breadth 18, and in compass 81 Miles. Isle of Wight is in length 22, in breadth 11, and in compass 57 Miles.
Foreign Money. 9 Deniers make an English Penny. 9 Soulx make an English Shilling. 9 Francks make an English Pound. 1 Gilder makes five Shillings and six pence. 12 Blanks, or 6 Marvedys make a Stiver, or English Penny. 6 Stivers make 4 Quartoes. 4 Quartoes make a Royal.
Licensed, James Frazier.
THE Historian's Guide, OR, BRITAIN's REMEMBRANCER. BEING A Summary of all the Actions, Exploits, Sieges, Battels, Designs, Attempts, Preferments, Honours, Changes, &c. and whatever else is worthy Notice, that hath happen'd in His Majesty's Kingdoms, from Anno Dom. 1600. to this time. SHEWING, The Year, Month, and Day of the Month, in which each Action was done. With an Alphabetical Table for the more easie finding any thing out. LONDON, Printed for W. Crook, at the Green-Dragon without Temple Bar, 1690.
A CONTINUATION OF THE Historian's Guide, OR, BRITTAIN'S Remembrancer, &c. 1687. N. THE Duke of Albemarle arrived at Barba∣does. The new Grand Seignior took upon him the Government at Constantinople. Dec. A great Inundation in Ireland. A Proclamation of K. James II. to prize Canaries, to be sold at 18 d. the Quart.
Tho. Shafto executed at Wapping-dock, be∣ing condemned by the Admiralty. Jan. The Marquess of Bedmar, Envoy from the King of Spain, had Audience. A Proclamation against Pyrats in America. Duke of Berwick made Governour of Ports∣mouth. F. A Proclamation against seditious Books. Mar. Two Proclamations to forbid the English entring into foreign Service. The Commissioners sate at Chelmsford to enquire after money levyed on Dissenters. The Duke of Grafton arrived in the Downs. Exeter new Charter brought down by the Mayor. 1688. Apr. A Proclamation against exporting of Wool, &c. May An Order of Council, signed by the Clerk of the Council, for ordering the King's De∣claration of Tolleration to be read in Chur∣ches on the 20th and 27th Instant, being Sundays. The King went to Chatham. Chester Mail robbed night Coventry. Captain Froud arrived at Plymouth from the West-Indies. The Seir de Lente, Envoy from the King of Denmark, had his Audience of Congé. Jun. The Archbishop of Canterbury, and six Bi∣shops more, committed to the Tower for Pe∣titioning the King not to reade the Declara∣tion of Toleration in Churches. Sir Roger Strickland with 20 Sail of Men of War in the Downs. The Archbishop of Canterbury, Bishops of St. Asaph, Ely, Chichester, Bath and Wells, Pe∣terborough, and Bristoll, were brought to the
King's-Bench Bar, from the Tower, (where they were sent the 8th.) and arraigned, try∣ed, and acquitted the 29th of May, Instant. Prince and Princess of Denmark came from the Bath. Appointed a Day of Thanksgiving for the Birth of the Prince of Wales, that was said to be born on Thinity Sunday, about 10 of the Clock in the morning. Naples almost ruined by an Earthquake. Seignior Garstorf, Envoy from the King of Denmark, had Audience. Marquess Cattaneo, Envoy from the Duke of Modena, had Audience. Seignior Zeuglestm, Envoy from the Prince of Orange, had Audience. A Call of Sergeants, viz. W. Leffant, John Rotheram, V. Denn, Sol. Lovell, Sir H. Chancy, W. Moses, H. Trinder, H. Fuller, and W. Tomson. Tho. Jifford, Mayor of Exeter, Knighted. The Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen, went to kiss the hand of the young Prince of Wales, the Recorder did present the Marchio∣ness of Powis, his Governerness, with a Purse of Gold. July Thomas Elmes, Esq; Knighted. Fire-works on the Thames, for the Birth of the Prince of Wales. James, Duke of Ormond, dyed in the 79th year of his Age, at Kingston-Hall in Dorsetshire. The King and Queen went to Windsor, and went the third of August to Richmond, and on the ninth to Whitehall. Aug. The new Charter was brought to Newcastle upon Tyne. Samuel Gerrard, Esq; Knighted. The Mayor of Scarbrough tossed in a Blanket by a Captain that quartered in the Town.
Judge Allybone dyed. Sep. Sir Robert Vyner dyed. Sir John Shorter, Lord mayor of London, dy∣ed, and was buried the 12th at St. Saviour's in Southwark. Belgrade taken by Storm by the German Forces. Sir John Eyles sworn Lord Mayor of Lon∣don. Countess-Dowager of Feversham dyed at Tunbridge. Lieutenant Coll. Beaumont, Captain Paston, and four Captains of the D. of Berwick's Re∣giment, were at a Council of War at Windsor cashier'd for not admitting of Irishmen into their Companies. Tho. Lane, of St. Lawrence Lane, Knighted. Prince and Princess of Denmark came from Tunbridge. Coll. Bevile Skelton, Esq; sent to the Tower. The King came from Windsor to Whitehall. He went to Chatham. The Queen and Prince of Wales came from Windsor to Whitehall. The King's Declaration about the Parlia∣ment. Sir Tho. Fitch, that made Fleet-Ditch, was buried at Eltham. Came out the French King's Memorials a∣gainst the Pope, and against the Emperour. The King's Proclamation came out against the Dutch, and the same day came out the King's general Pardon. The Bishop of London was restored. Octob. The Charter of London restored by the Lord Chancellour, and Sir W. Pritchard desired to take the Chair, but he refused it: The same day the general Pardon came out again with Alterations.
Sir J. Chapman sworn Lord Mayor of Lond. The Prince of Wales named at St. James's Chapel, James-Francis-Edward. A Proclamation, and an Order of Council, came out, for restoring of Charters, Liberties, Rights, and Franchises to all Corporations. The Earl of Derby made Lord Lieutenant of Cheshire and Lancashire. The Prince of Orange set sail with 50 Ca∣pital Men of War, 26 smaller, 25 fire Ships, 300 fly Boats, Pinks, &c. for England, but by a Storm that Night was driven back again. The Birth of the Prince of Wales was exa∣mined before the Privy Council. The Earl of Sunderland put out of the Coun∣cil and Secretary of State. The Lord Viscount Preston made Secreta∣ry, &c. in his room. Nov. The Prince of Orange set sail with the Fleet that he had put out on the 19th of Octob. with about 100 small Ships more than was then, so here was 500. A Proclamation against the Prince of O∣range's Manifesto. The Dutch Fleet sailed by Dover, and lost a small Vessel of about 100 men. The Prince of Orange landed at Torbay, nigh Dartmouth, in Devon, with the Dutch Army, about 15000 men. The Lord Lovelace, and thirteen of his party, were taken at Cyrencester, as they were going to the Prince of Orange. Dr. Lamplugh, Bishop of Exeter, having left Exeter on the Prince of Orange's coming, came up to London, and K. James made him Arch∣bishop of York. Eighteen Lords Spiritual and Temporal pe∣tition K. James for a Parliament.
The King went to Windsor in order to his Journey to Sarum. K. James came from Sarum to Whitchall. Coll. Bevile Skelton made Lieutenant of the Tower. An Order by K. James for a Parliament to sit Jan. 15. The French King's Ordinance for a War with the Dutch came out. Dec. Dyed at St. James's the Countess Dowager of Ossory. A false Allarm of an Irish Massacre in and about London, which Allarm spread over all England. The Rabble up in several places for several days, pulling down Mass houses, and Papist's houses; (among others,) great mischief done to the Spanish Ambassadour's: It ceased De∣cemb. 12. The Lord Chancellour Jeffreys taken in Wapping, and sent Prisoner to the Tower of London. The Lords publish an Order to keep London and Middlesex quiet. The Lords and Citizens waited on the Prince of Orange at Henley with an Address. K. James stopped in a Smack nigh Fever∣sham in Kent; with him, the Earl of Peterbo∣rough, Sir Ed. Hales, &c. Four Coaches were sent for him, and on the 16th he came to Whitehall; on the 18th he left Whitehall, and went to Sir Richard Head's, nigh Rochester; on the 23d he withdrew for France. The Prince of Orange came to Windsor. The Duke of Grafton assaulted in the Strand at the head of his Regiment: The person shot dead that assaulted him.
The Lords publish an Order for the quieting of the Irish. The Prince of Orange came to St. James's, and his Forces to London. The Prince of Orange visited the Queen Dowager at Sommerset-house, and this day the Prince and Princess of Denmark came to White∣hall. The Aldermen and Citizens of London wai∣ted on the Prince of Orange at St. James's. The Prince of Orange published an Order to return the Arms into the publick Store, and an Order about quartering of Soldiers. The Lords Spiritual and Temporal assem∣bled at Westminster, and ordered F. Guine, Esq; to sign such Orders as were made by them. The Prince of Orange, ordered the French Ambassadour to leave England. The Peers present to the Pr. of Orange two Addresses; the first, of Thanks, &c. and to desire his Highness to accept the Government till Jan. 22. next; the second, to issue out Letters to the Coroners to chuse Convention∣men, to sit Jan. 22. The Aldermen and Citizens of London a∣greed to the said Address. The Prince of Orange gave his Answer to the said Addresses. The Prince of Orange put out his Declarati∣on, authorising Sheriffs, Justices, &c. to act; the same day his Highness received the Sacra∣ment at St. James's by the hands of the Bishop of London. Jan. The Prince of Orange published a Declara∣tion for the better collecting the Revenue. The Lord Dartmouth with the Fleet came into the Downs.
The Prince of Orange published an Order for regular Election of Convention-men. The Sedgmore Frigot lost nigh Plymouth. Dr. Seth Ward, Bishop of Sarum, dyed. Coll. John Darcy, Heir to the Earl of Hol∣derness, dyed. James Howard, Earl of Suffolk, dyed. The Prince of Orange published a Declara∣tion for quartering of Soldiers. The Countess of Huntingdon was carried through London in order to her Interrment. Scotland address the Prince of Orange to take their Government upon him till March next. The Prince of Orange's Declaration for pay∣ing the Seamen. The Prince of Orange's Order for paying and keeping the Soldiers in order. The Convention met at Westminster; the Marquess of Hallifax made Speaker of the Lords House, and Mr. Powle of the Commons: then they desired the Prince of Orange to take on him the Administration of the Government for a farther time; also, ordered that a Thanks∣giving-day be kept Jan. 31. at London, &c. and Feb. 14. in all England. The Prince of Orange sent a Letter to the House of Lords about set∣tling the Government. Feb. The Order to forbid Feb. 6. to be kept a Thanksgiving-day. A great number of people go to Westminster to desire the Convention to crown the Prince and Princess of Orange. The Lord Mayor published an Order to pre∣vent the tumultuous meeting at Westminster. The Prince of Orange's Proclamation to pre∣vent the abuses in Forests. The Lords in the Convention agreed with the Commons, that the Throne was vacant,
and that the Prince and Princess of Orange ought to be King and Queen. The Princess of Orange landed at White-hall. The Prince and Princess of Orange proclai∣med King and Queen of England, France, and Ireland, by the name of William and Mary, at London; on the 19th at Rippon, Beverly, Lan∣caster, Hartford, Ware, Royston, Baldock, Trig, St. Albanes, Stamford, Alesbury, Wendover, Che∣sham, Beaconsfield, Rewsborrow, Colebrook, Burn∣ham, Ivingo, Marlo, &c. the 18th at Bath, Car∣digan, &c. the 23d at York, Taunton, &c. March 5. at Bridgewater, Bristoll, &c. the 6th at Sandwich, &c. K. William put out a Proclamation for the collecting of the Revenue to continue as in December last. K. William's Order in Council for alteration of the Royal Family's Names in the Common-Prayer. K. William made a Speech to the Lords and Commons at Westminster. The Bishop of London, and the Clergy of the City, waited on K. William at White-hall. K. William's Declaration to order the Irish to lay down their Arms by April following. K. William signed the Act for the sitting of the Parliament, and after, the King and Queen went to Hampton-Court. Sir John Read's House was robbed at Brac∣ket-hall in Hartfordshire. A Proclamation for the discovery of Mr. Brent. Another for bringing in Arms imbe∣zelled. Mar. Serj. Maynard, Serj. Rawlinson, and Sir An∣thony Keck, are made Commissioners of the Great Seal of England.
Henry Pollexfen, Esq; Attorney General. Sir Geo. Treby, Sollicitor General. Lord Willoughby, Chancellour of the Dutchy. Lord Lovelace, Captain of the Band of Pen∣sioners. Lord Lucas, chief Governour of the Tower of London. The Earl of Sandwich his Funeral. William Harbord, Esq; sworn of the Privy-Council. The Brandenburghs got a Victory over the French at Nuis. The Lords and Commons present an Ad∣dress to stand by K. William with their Lives and Fortunes. K. William desires their care of the Dutch, Ireland, and the Fleet. Arthur Herbert, Esq; John Earl of Carbury, Sir Michael Wharton, Bart. Sir Tho. Lee, Bart. Sir John Chichesly, Sir John Lowther, Bart. of White-haven, and William Sacheveril, Esq; Commissioners for the Admiralty. Dr. Gilbert Burnet elected Bishop of Saraum, (in the place of Dr. S. Ward, deceased) and consecrated at Fulham, by the Bishops of Lon∣don, Winchester, Lincoln, Landaff, St. Asaph, and Carlile. The City of London made an Address to K. William. Charles Sedly, Esq; of Southfleet, in Kent, Knighted. K. James II. arrived at Kingsale in Ireland, and on the 24th entred Dublin on Horseback, and the next day published three Proclama∣tions. K. William made a Speech in the House of Lords, and passed two Acts. The Parliament addressed the King to put his Proclamation out against the Soldiers that disserted.
The Sheriffs of all Counties of England were appointed by K. William. A Proclamation for Crowning K. William and Q. Mary, and Proclaimed at London on the 20th, for the Coronation to be on the 11th of April next. The Convention of Scotland met, and chose Duke Hamilton Speaker, and on the 23d sent their Answer to K. William's Letter, by the Lord Rosse. Sir John Chapman, Lord Mayor of London dyed. Sir John Berry came into the Downs with a Squadron of Men of War. The Lord Lieutenants of all the Counties of England appointed by K. William. Alderman Pilkington chose Lord Mayor of London for the remainder of the year. 1689. Mar. K. William signed the Act for a present Aid of 412000 l.. THE Lord Coot made Treasurer and Recei∣ver General to Q. Mary. Being Easter day, Sir Geo. Lockhart was shot dead as he came from Church at Edenburgh; he was Lord President of the Sessions of Scot∣land. Apr. A Proclamation for bringing in of Arms. The Convocation of Scotland voted the Throne vacant; and on the 4th, voted to set∣tle the Crown on K. William and Q. Mary; and on the 10th proclaimed them, and de∣clared against Bishops, and made a new Oath of Allegiance to K. William and Q. Mary. K. William passed three Acts of Parliament at Westminster. Coll. Cunningham and Coll. Richards shipt their Regiments at Liverpool, in Lancashire, for Ireland.
Duke Frederick Mareschal de Schomberg, and William Earl of Devonshire, made Knights of the Garter; Dr. Burnet, Bishop of Sarum, sworn Chancellour of that Order. King William's Declaration to secure all Sol∣diers of English Pay, though sent beyond Seas. The Duke of Ormond installed Knight of the Garter. Admiral Herbert sailed with his Fleet from Spithead. Monsr. d'Avaux, the French Ambassadour, made his publick entrance into Dublin, and had his Audience of K. James II. at the Ca∣stle. The Irish beat by a Sally made by the Pro∣testants out of Colerain. Charles, Viscount Mordant, (since Earl of Monmouth,) Henry Lord de la Mere, Sidney Lord Godolphin, Sir Hen. Capell, Rich. Hamb∣den, Sen. Esq; made Commissioners of the Treasury. Jonathan, Lord Bishop of Bristol, elected Bishop of Exeter. K. William passed the Act for the Coronati∣on Oath, and 2 Acts more, Dyed at Rome Queen Christiana of Sweed∣land. Prince George of Denmark made Baron of Ockingham, Earl of Kendale, and Duke of Cum∣berland. The Marquess of Winchester made Duke of Bolton. William Bentinek, Esq; made Baron of Cy∣rencester, Viscount Woodstock, and Earl of Portland. Viscount Faulconberg made Earl of Faulcon∣berg.
Viscount Mordant made Earl of Monmouth. Lord Mountague made Viscount Mounthermer, and Earl of Mountague. Lord Churchill made Earl of Marlborough. Henry Sidney, Esq; made Baron Milton, Vis∣count Sidney, of Sheppy in Kent. Lord Lumley made Viscount Lumley of Lum∣ley-Castle in Durham. Lord Cholmondly made Baron of Cholmondly, of Wich Malbanch, alias Nantwich, in Cheshire. Tho. Pilkington, Esq; Lord Mayor of London, Knighted. Sir Geo. Hewit made Baron of James-Town, and Viscount Goran in Ireland. K. William and Q. Mary crowned at West∣minster, by the Bishop of London, and the day kept with great Ceremony in most of the chief Towns in England. The House of Commons walked on foot from Westminster to White-hall, to congratulate their Majesties on their Coronations. Admiral Herbert arrived at Kingsale, in Ire∣land. George Jeffereys, Baron of Wemm, and late Lord Chancellour of England, dyed in the Tower of London, and was buried in the Tow∣er privately the Sunday night following, by an Order his Relations got from K. William. The Sieur de Schmittan, Envoy extraordi∣nary from the Duke of Brandenburgh had Au∣dience of the King and Queen, at Hampton-Court. George Booth, Esq; Sir Richard Temple, Sir John Worden, Sir Robert Southwell, Sir Robert Clayton, Sir Patience Ward, made Commissio∣ners of the Customs. The Lords Address to K. William to sapport the Church of England, and to call a Convo∣cation.
Sir Henry Fane, Sir Hen. Ashurst, Sir Hum. Edwin, Tho. Frankland, Esq; Fran. Parry, Esq; John Danvers, Esq; and John Wilcox, Jun. Esq; made Commissioners for the Excise. The Earl of Danby made Marquess of Caer∣marthen. K. William passed six Acts of Parliament. An Address of the House of Commons to K. William, for a War with France, and the King's Answer to it. The Baron de Schutz, Envoy extraordina∣ry from the Dukes of Lunenburgh, &c. had Au∣dience of their Majesties at Hampton-Court. Two Proclamations came out, 1. To incou∣rage French Protestants. 2. For prohibiting French Goods. The Estates of Scotland named the Earl of Argyle, Sir James Montgomery, and Sir John Dalrimple, to go Commissiones for England, to offer the Crown of Scotland to K. William and Q. Mary, which was done accordingly, on the 11th of May, in great solemnity, in the Ban∣queting House at Whitehall, to which place the Commissioners came by Post. Arrived at Portsmouth the Wolf, from Vir∣ginia, having on Board the Lord Howard of Ef∣fingham, Governour of Virginia. K. William put out two Proclamations for prohibiting Seamen to serve foreign Prin∣ces, &c. May K. William passed at Westminster the Poll Act, and two more. A Fight betwixt Admiral Herbert and the French at Bantry Bay in the N.W. of Ireland. The Estates of Scotland adjourned to the 21st instant. A Call of Serjeants, viz. Sir Hen. Pollexfen, Nich. Lechmore, Tho. Rookesby, John Thurburn,
Will. Wogan, Will. Pawlet, Nath. Bond, Gyles Eyres, Hen. Hatsell, John Blencow, Peyton Ven∣tris, John Powell, Roger Bellwood, John Tremain, John Trenchard, and John Turton, Esqs; The same day the Judges were constituted, viz. Sir John Holt, Ch. Just. Sir W. Dolben, Sir W. Gregory, and Gyles Eyres, Esq; of the King's-Bench; Sir Henry Pollexfen, Ch. Just. Sir John Powell, Tho Rookesby, and Peton Ven∣tris, Esqs; of the Common Pleas; Sir Robert Atkinson, Ch. Baron, Sir Ed. Nevile, Nich. Lech∣more, and John Turton, Esqs; of the Exche∣quer. John Trenchard, Esq; Ch. Just. of Chester. Sir Geo. Treby, Attorney General. John Summers, Esq; Sollicitor General. The Plate Fleet arrived in the Downs, rich∣ly laden. A Declaration of War against France came out. A Proclamation against a Libell called The History of the Convention, offering 100 l. reward to discover Author or Printer. The Thanksgiving-day was kept in Scotland for their Deliverance from Popery and Sla∣very. K. William gave his Royal Assent to five Acts at Westminster. A Proclamation for appointing Commissio∣ners for the Poll Act, and another to prevent false Musters. K. William came to Portsmouth, and on board the Elizabeth Frigot dined with Admiral Herbert, where he declared his Royal inten∣tion to make Admiral Herbert an Earl; and there Knighted Capt. John Ashby, and Capt. Clowdes. Shovell, and the King returned that
Evening to Hampton-Court, after giving 2600l. amongst the wounded, &c. Seamen. A great Sally by the Protestants at London∣derry, with success. George Lord Melvill made sole Secretary of State in Scotland. Frederick Count de Schomberg made Gene∣ral of all his Majesty's Forces, Master Gene∣ral of the Ordinance, and of his Majesty's Pri∣vy Council, Baron of Teys, Earl of Brantford, marquess of Harwich, and Duke of Schomberg. About 120 Seamen came Voluntiers from Norwich to serve his Majesty, and about 150 more went by Land to Portsmouth on the same account. Robert Casor, Master of the Advice, a Cole Ship, beat two French Prizes. Sir Robert Wright, late Lord Chief Justice, dyed in Newgate. The Assistence Frigot came into Plymouth with the Body of the late Duke of Albemarle. K. William's Declaration, with an Order of Council, for encouraging Seamen. K. William's Proclamation for a Fast to be kept about London, on the fifth of June, on the 19th all England over. K. William gave his Royal Assent to the Act for Toleration of Dissenters, and two Acts more. The Estates of Scotland read K. William's Letter to make them a Convention, which they acccepted with thanks, and adjourned to June 5. and ordered all their Members to meet then. The Heers Engelenburg, Witsen, Odyck, Cit∣ters, and Dyckvelt, Ambassadours extraordi∣nary from Holland, made their publick En∣trance, and on the 30th had their publick Au∣dience
at the Banquetting House at White∣hall. K. William gave his Royal Assent to two Acts of Parliament. Vice-Admiral Almonde arrived at Portsmouth with part of the Dutch Fleet. The Scanderoon Fleet came to Plymouth. The Dutchess of Albemarle arrived at Ply∣mouth, from Jamaica. The Duke of Somerset was installed Chan∣cellour of Cambridge, at Northumberland House in the Strand. Major General Kirke set Sail from High-lake, nigh Leverpole, with his Forces for London-Derry. June Admiral Herbert created Earl of Torrington, and Baron Herbert of Torbay. The Assistant Frigat with fourteen Mer∣chant men from the West-Indies, came into the Downs. John Ashburnham Esq; Created Baron Ash∣burnham of Ashburn-Hall in Sussex. The Dutch Ambassadours had Audience. The Dutch Fleet of Thirty Capital Ships came to the Spit-head. Edward Mosely, Esq; of Lancashire Knigh∣ted. Edinburgh Castle deliverd up, by the Duke of Gourdon. His Majesty set Sail from the Spit-head. London-Derry made another advantageous Sally. Major General Kirke came to the Lough be∣fore London-Derry. The Fortress of Keyseawreart surrendered by the French to the Duke of Brandenburgh. Above Eighty of the Clergy of London went in a Body to take the Oaths at West∣minster-hall.
The Parliament of Scotland met, and passed an Act to ascertain King William's Au∣thority. King William went to the Parliament at West∣minster, and passed Ten Acts. King William's Proclamation to offer one Hundred Pound to discover either Sir Adam Blair, or Doctor Robert Grey, for dispersing King James's Declaration. John Studer was executed at Kingston for deserting His Majesty's Service. King William went to the House of Lords and made a Speech to the Parliament. King of Sweden's Envoy had Audience. July An Act passed in Scotland to take away the Supremacy over Ecclesiastical Affairs. James Ermendenger made Master of their Majesties Hand-Guns. A Plot discovered to have fired Edinburgh, and to have destroyed the Estates, on the Eight instant, on which discovery about For∣ty Persons were secured. The Earl of Pembroke had Audience of the States of Holland. There landed from Three French Men of War about Eight hundred Irish in Argile-shire in Scotland, from Carrick fergus. King William called by Writ to sit as Barons in the House of Lords, Charles Lord Dursley, and Robert Lord Viscount Lisle, who took their places. The Protestants at Inniskilling by a Sally beat a Convoy of four hundred, and took two Firkins of money, and fifteen Waggons of Ammunition and Provisions. A Proclamation to offer Ten pound to dis∣cover any High-way man. Robert Serle Esq; appointed to be Consul of Leghorne.
Duke Schomberg left White-hall in order to his journey to Chester, towards his Relief of Ire∣land. Duke Schomberg came to Chester, being recei∣ved with great respect, next day viewed the ground where the Camp was to be. A French Man of War brought in as a prize to Plymouth, which came from Ireland. The Act for Abolishing the Episcopacy in Scotland, was touched with the Sceptre. The Spanish Ambassadour had his publick Audience. About four of the Clock in the Morning her Royal Highness Princess Anne of Denmark was brought to Bed of a Son, and on the Twenty seventh was Christen'd by the name of William, by the Bishop of London at Hampton Court, where his Majesty declared him Duke of Glo∣cester. King William passed nine Acts of Parlia∣ment. Came out a Proclamation against exporting of Salt Petre. Martin Wiscomb made Consul of Cadiz, and Saint Maries. London-derry in Ireland was relieved after it was brought to that extremity, that five hun∣dred ninety one Bombs had been shot into the Town, and six thousand dyed for want of Provisions, and five thousand fighting men left in it; the same night the Duke of Ber∣wick with King James's Forces raised the Siege, and went away burning all places they left behind. Aug. A great fight in Scotland betwixt General Mackay, and the Lord Dundee, where the lat∣ter was killed.
The Parliament of Scotland Adjourned to the eighth of October. Pope Innocent XI. dyed in the 79th year of his Age, and was the sixth buried at Saint Peter's Church at Rome, after he had lain three days in the Church for publick view. The Earl of Torrington with the Fleet nigh the Isle of Silly, designed for the Coast of Ireland. Four Ships went with Provisions from High∣lake to London-derry. Launceston in Cornwall, did present an Ad∣dress to King William, being the first of any County of England. Duke Schomberg set Sail from Highlake, and on the thirteenth landed at Bangor (in the North of Ireland) with the English For∣ces. A Fight betwixt Prince Waldeck, with the English, and Dutch Forces, and Mareschal d'Hu∣mieres with the French, where near two thou∣sand of the latter were killed. the fight at Dunkell in Scotland. William Forester, and James Forbes, Esqs; and Clerks of the Green-cloth, were Knighted at Hampton Court. Francis Blake of Ford Castle, Knighted at Hampton Court. Carrick fergus in Ireland surrendred to Duke Schomberg after four days Siege. The North Male Robbed nigh Newington; in Middlesex. Mr. Walker, late Governour of London-derry, waited on their Majesties at Hampton Court, where the King presented him five Thousand pound as a Reward.
The Earl of Levins is made Governour of Edinburgh Castle. The Earl of Torrington with the Fleet at Torbay. Mr. Walker late Governour of London-derry, waited on King William at Hampton Court, and presented an Address. Sept. The Chester Male Robbed betwixt Highgate, and Whetstone. A Proclamation Authorizing Commissio∣ners for the Act of 12 d. in the pound. Duke Hamilton sworn of his Majesty's Privy Council at White-hall. Edward Smith Esq; appointed Consul for the Canary Islands. The East-land Fleet of 34 Sail passed by Weymouth. Parliament met and Adjourned to October the 19th following. The Dutch Ambassadours had their Audi∣ence of leave. Sir John Holt, Lord Chief Justice of England, sworn of the Privy Council. Sir Thomas Pilkington continued Lord Mayor of London for the ensuing year. The King left White-hall towards his jour∣ney for New-Market. Octo. The Fleet under the Earl of Torrington Sai∣led out of Torbay to the Spit-head. A Proclamation to preserve the New River Water. The University of Cambridge waited on King William at New-market. The King din'd at New-market. Bonn taken by the Duke of Brandenburgh af∣ter 55 days being blocked up, and 26 days close Siege.
King William returned from Cambridge, and New-market to Hampton-Court. Doctor Stillingfleet, Bishop of Worcester, Doctor Patrick, Bishop of Chichester, Doctor Ironside Bishop of Bristol, were Consecrated at the Bishop of London's Chapel at Fulham, by the Bishop of London, Bishop of St. Asaph, and Bi∣shop of Rochester. The Parliament met at Westminster, where King William made a Speech to them. Queen of Portugal was brought to Bed of a Son. Was kept in London by the Irish Protestants the Anniversary for the deliverance from the Massacre in 1641. King William was made free of the Grocers Company, and on the presenting his Freedom Ralph Box Esq; was Knighted. Sir George Davis made Conful of Naples. Nov. Richard Lord Coot made Earl of Earles of Bellomont in Ireland. Was brought into Falmouth a French Vessel taken going to Ireland, with 4000 Armes, and Powder, and Officers. A Fleet of Eighty Sail with six Thousand Foot, and one Thousand Horse on Board of Danes, Sailed by Hull for Scotland. Envoy from Spanish Flanders had his Au∣dience. Thomas Kirke Esq; made Consul of Ge∣noua. The Danish Forces arrived at Hull. A Proclamation offering 200 l. for appre∣hending of Edmund Ludlow. Lambert Blackwell Esq; made Consul of Leghorne. Walter Doleman Esq; made Consul of Ali∣cant in Spain.
An order of the Lord Mayor and Alder∣men offering 500 l. to discover the Person that offered an Indignity to King William's Picture in Guild-hall. Dec. Thomas Papillion, Simon Macne, John Agur, Humphrey Ayles, and James How were appoin∣ted Commissioners for the Victualing their Majesties Navy. FINIS.
A TABLE OF Persons, Places, and Things, &c. men∣tioned in the Historians Guide, &c. To this little Book an Alphabetical Table was wanting: To prevent the swelling of the Book, all contracting possible was to be used; so that you have often but one word for Place, and Person; and some∣times by Name, othertimes by Title: In the main I hope it will be usefull. A ABbington, 12, 148. Abbot, 6, 11. Acts of Parliament, 199, 200, 201, 202, 204, 205, 206, 207. Adderton Heath. 22. Address, 196, 197, 198, 200, 203, 204. Admiral, 159. Admiral Herbert, 202, 203, 204, 205, 207. Admiral Almonde, 207. Admiralty, 116, 117, 182, 200. Agur, 213. St. Alban's, 41, 45, 80, 93. Albemarle, 41, 58, 55, 59, 61, 76, 77, 151, 189, 191, 206, 207.
Aldermen, 197, 193. Aldern, 28. Aldgate, 3. Alford, 119. Alisbury, 174. Allarm, 196. Allegiance, 3, 201. Allen, 49, 50, 75. Allington, 10. Allum, 3. Allybone, 194. Ambassadours, 139, 148, 166, 167, 168, 169, 171, 172, 173, 175, 176, 178, 179, 182, 183, 192, 193, 196, 197, 202, 203, 204, 206, 207, 209, 211. Amboyna, 7. America, 78, 192. Andrews, 34, 107. Anglesey, 146. Anjou, 156. Annasophia, 182. Queen Anne, 6. L. Anne, 12, 15, 92, 111, 135. Anstruther, 10. Appleby, 23. Appleford, 23. Apprentices, 60, 137, 149. L. Arrabella, 5. Argier, 45, 49, 73, 75, 78, 80, 82, 95, 118, 139, 140, 144. Arlington, 86, 93, 165, 171. Argyle, 12, 42, 43, 44, 196, 170, 204. Argyle-shire, 208. Armagh, 37. Armin, 24. Arminian, 7. Arms, 197. Armstrong, 160. Army, 13, 33, 36, 37, 38, 39, 43, 106. Arnold, 120. Arthur, 103. Artillery, 4, 156, 160, 163. Arundel, 7, 8, 11, 24, 25, 149, 150. Ascough, 59, 67. Ashburnham, 207. Ashby, 205. Ashenden, 135. Ashurst, 190. Astly, 29. Aston, 35, 104. Atkins, 116. Attorney Gen. 200, 205. Aubigney, 19, 20. Auburn, 23. Ayles, 213. B. Bacon, 6, 8. Bail, 122, 124, ib. Banbury, 19, 26, 30. Bantam, 142, 143, 145, 146. Bantry-Bay, 204. Barbadoes, 36, 94, 137. Barbary, 183.
Barbones Parliament, 36. Barnardiston, 158. Barnstable, 23, 29. Basing, 26, 29. Basing-House, 23. Basset, 141. Bastwick, 12, 15. Bateman, 175. Bath, 2, 28, 43, 47. Bawden, 190. Baxter, 170. Beaufort, 148, 160, 165. Beaumont, 194. Beddingfield, 102. Bedford, 18, 23. Bedlow, 101, 105, 125, 129. Beeston, 24, 29. Belgrade, 194. Bellasis, 51, 58, 63. Bellingham, 10. Belvoir, 20, 29. Bennet, 46, 148. Bercly, 15. Berkley, 77, 111, 141, 147. Berkshire, 74. Berry, 110, 145, 201, 209. Berty, 29. Berwick, 13, 31, 32, 184, 186, 192, 194. Best, 162. Bethel, 126. Beverley, 18, 23. Bible Engl. 3, 4. Biddleford, 23. Bishops, 15, 16, 17, 19, 47, 180.192. Bisse, 117. Black-friars, 6. Black Rod, 16, 150. Blake, 36, 210. Blazing-Star, 50. Blackwell, 212. Blood, 80, 124. Bodman, 118. Bodwin, 20. Bohemia, 4, 11, 43, 45. Bolton, 25, 29, 201. Bonefires, 119, 1 174. Bonne, 211. Booth, 38, 148. Bowes, 159. Box, 212. Boyce, 103. Brabant, 164. Brackethall, 199. Braddon, 157. Bradford, 22. Bradshaw, 33, 38, 147. Bramhall, 47. Brandenburgh, 109, 200. Brandford, 19, 206. Brandon, 25, 72, 109. Bredah, 7, 39, 64, 65, 66. Brent, 199. Brereton, 30. Brest, 26. Bridgewater, 21, 28, 63. Brill, 20. Bristol, 8, 21, 22, 26, 27, 28, 29, 116, 165, 201. Britain, 2, 145. British Seas, 11. Brook, 2, 20. Brown, 33.
Bruges, 98. Buccaniers, 161. Buckingham, 8, 9, 66, 81, 86, 119, 124, 136, 185. Buckle, 137. Budah, 179. Bulstrode, 172. Burford, 25, 34. Burleigh, 26, 32. Burlington, 26. Burnett, 200, 202. Burningham, 20. Burton, 12, 15, 22. Bushel, 35. Butler, 5, 163, 189. Byron, 25, 30. C Cadiz, 7, 209. Caermarthen, 204. Calvert, 6. Cambrey, 96. Cambridge, 42, 62, 64, 81, 97, 119, 138, 142, 144, 211. Canary, 67. Canterbury, 18. Capel, 33, 34. Cards, 163. Care, 117. Carey, 26, 125. Cargile, 137. Carickfergus, 210. Carisbroke, 32. Carlisle, 28, 32. Carnarvan, 24, 30. Carr, 4, 68, 83, 127. Carribee, 60. Carteret, 115, 137, 190. Cartwright, 179. Casor, 206. Castell, 96. Castlehaven, 10. Castlemain, 109, 112, 123, 129. Q. Catharine, 45, 46. L. Catharine, 82. Catharine Laura, 94. Cavendish, 21. Caversham, 31. Cawdron, 157. Celier, 112, 115, 123, 126, Chalgrove, 22. Chaloner, 22. Chapel Windsor, 23. Chapman, 195, 201. K. Charles I. 7, 14, 17, 19. K. Charles II. 33, 35, 69, 165. Pr. Charles-James, 8, 9. Pr. Charles, 1, 45, 6, 1 11, 14, 16, 17, 27, 28. Royal Charles, 89. Charleton, 89. Charlotte Mary, 147. Charter, 7, 148, 152, 160, 161, 162, 163, 164. Charter-house, 4. Chatham, 64, 83, 192, 194. Chatwell, 25. Cheapside, 21. Chelsey-College, 3. Chepstow, 32. Chester, 29, 192, 205.
Chesterfield, 114. Chichester, 20. K's Children, 35. Chinner, 22. Chipping-norton, 25. Cholmondley, 20, 203. Christ-Church, 82. Christian, 124. St. Christophers, 81. Churchill, 149, 203. Cirencester, 20, 195, 202. Clarendon, 43, 66, 68, 103, 122, 165, 175, 183. Clark, 163 Clayton, 118. Cleaveland, 63. Clergy of Lond. 199, 207. Clerk, 2. Clifford, 56, 62, 71, 88. Cobham, 2. Coffee-house, 95. Coin new, 34. Colchester, 32, 52. Coleman, 100, 101. Colerain, 202. Colledge, 136, 137, 138. College Jesuits, 103. Cologne, 93. Comet, 5, 129, 146. Commissioners, 63, 199, 200, 202, 203, 204, 205 213. Common-Pleas, 205. Commons, 203, Common-Prayer, 26. Commotions about Church Ceremonies, 12. Conde, 95. Condon, 62. Coningsmark, 141. Consecration, 166. Convention, 198, 201. Convention-men, 23, 198. Convocation, 43, 201. Conway, 113, 132. Coot, 45, 201. Copredy, 26. Corfe, 29. Cornish, 126, 174, Cornwallis, 45. Coronation, 43, 167. Corporation, 45, Cotterell, 181, 183. Cotton, 170. Covenant, 21, 24, 43. Covenanters, 13. Covent-Garden, 10. Coventry, 13, 49, 52, 60, 66, 86. Council, 116, 138. Privy-Council, 106, 131, 179, 184. Council of Peers, 14. Council of State, 34. Courland, 114. Court, 2, 159. H. Court of Justice, 33. Court Officers, 165. Cowley, 66. Craven, 133. Creation of Honours, 84. Crew, 24. Cromwell, 29, 34, 36, 37. Crown, 80. Culpeper, 123. Cumberland, 202.
Cunningham, 201. Curtis, 116, 158. Cuttings, 52. Cutler, 141. D. Dalrimple, 204. Danby, 105, 106, 107, 135, 158, 204. Danes, 212. Dangerfield, 112, 127, 170. Daniel, 154. Danvors, 164. Darcy, 198. Dare, 117, 119. Dartmouth, 29, 149, 159, 197. Dashwood, 154. St. David, 63. Davis, 67, 212. Dawson, 123. Dean, 108, 109, 117, 124. Deans, &c. 16. Declaration, 134, 192, 194, 197, 198, 199, 205, 206. Deering, 115. D'Estrees, 90, 99. Defiance, 56. Delamere, 170, 176. Denbigh, 8, 31. Denmark, 3, 5, 7, 8, 41, 62, 74, 75, 153, 154, 164, 166, 178, 183, 186, 187, 189, 193, 194, 197, 202, 209. Dennington, 26, 29. Derby, 36, 195. De Roche, 61. Desborough, 38, 57. Devises, 29. Devonshire, 202. De Witt, 87. Digby, 29. Diggs, 8. Disnie, 169. Doleman, 212. Doncaster, 18, 20. Don John, 111. Dorchester, 4, 23, Dorislaus, 34. Dorset, 3. Dover, 18, 40. Dover Cliff, 115. Douglas, 59. Downs, 13, 201, 207. Downing, 48, 82. Drapers-Hall, 79. Drummond, 164. Dryden, 114. Dublin, 119, 200, 202. Du Bois, 151. Dugdale, 102, 103. Dudley, 30. Dunbar, 35. Duncomb, 64, 88. Dundee, 209. Dunkell, 210. Dunkirk, 3, 37, 46. Dunster, 30. Duppa, 180. Duras, 88. Durham, 14, 175, 176. Dursley, 28. Dutch, 47, 50, 52. Dutch-Fight, 36.
Duttoncolt, 159. Du Vall, 76. E. Earl Marshal, 189. Earthquake, 194. East-India, 53, 67, 88, 133, 139, 162. Edes, 176. Edgar, 72, 121. Edgcomb Mount, 29. Edghill, 19. Edinburgh, 35, 76, 113, 114, 130, 132, 164, 207, 208. Essingham, 204. Elizabeth, 133. Q. Eliz. 1. L. Eliz. 4. Pr. Eliz. 35. Elliot, 8, 140. Ellis, 5, 129. Elmes, 193. Emperour, 5, 6, 97. Episcopacy, 209. Ermendenger, 208. Essex, 1, 4, 10, 18, 20, 24, 25, 26, 27, 31, 43, 87. Estates Scotland, 204, 206. Evertson, 51. Euston, 87. Exchange, 3, 14, 35, 67, 75. Exchequer, 88, 205. Excise, 23, 152. Exeter, 23, 26, 27, 29, 192, 193, 195, 202. Eyles, 194. F. Fairfax, 28, 30, 31, 35, 117. Falmouth, 52. Fanshaw, 60. Farnham, 33. Farrington, 30, 135. Fast, 206. Faulconberg, 74, 202. Ferdinando, 5. Fetherstonhaugh, 36. Feversham, 28, 126, 194, 196. Fienes, 24. Fight, 210. Finsh, 92, 95. Fire, 61, 62, 70, 78, 79, 80, 81, 85, 95, 104, 106, 109, 117, 132, 148, 151, 159. Fire-works, 3. Fish great, 113. Fishing, 3. Fishmonger, 125. Fitch, 4. Fitzharding, 70. Fitzharris, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136. Flanders, 98. Fleet, 11, 40, 42, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 59, 60, 61, 64, 65, 72, 73, 84, 85, 86, 87, 89, 90, 108, 110, 195, 197, 205, 207, 210, 211, 212.
Fleetwood, 38. Florencce, 1. Fly, 60. Forbes, 210. Forester, 210. Foulk, 104. Fox, 143. Foy, 29. France, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 30, 42. Freedom, 94. Freeman, 132. French, 1, 36, 58, 95, 97, 98, 109, 110, 131, 139, 184. French K. 55. Friars, 20. Frost, 157. Froud, 192. G. Gadbury, 112, 115, 117. Gage, 26, 27. Gainsborough, 23, 148. Gallaway, 12. Game, 187. Garrisons, 115. Garter, 85, 96, 126, 131, 133, 134, 156, 167, 169, 170, 171, 185, 186, 202. Gascoign, 109, 117. Gauden, 67. Gaunt, 28. Gayland, 60. Germany, 12. Gerrard, 120, 175, 193. Ghent, 95. Gibbons, 35. Gibbs, 148. Giles, 121, 122, 123, 124. Glascock, 105. Glemham, 28. Glocester, 14, 23, 40, 41, 144, 209. Godfrey, 100. Godolphin, 159, 161. Godstow, 28. Goodenough, 146, 170. Goods Prohib. 116. Goran, 203. Goring, 32, 34. Gowry, 2. Grana, 142, 143. Grand Seignior, 191. Grafton, 24, 130, 140, 145, 149, 155, 187, 192, 196. Grant, 185. Grantham, 18, 20. Gravesend, 170. Gray, 36, 170. Great Seal, 24, 30. Greenvill, 40. Greenwich, 17, 18. Gregory, 105. Greencloth, 210. Grocers-hall, 17. Guernsey, 36. Guild-hall, 11, 40, 82. Guilford, 172. Guinne, 114, 197. Guinney, 50. Gunfleet, 64, 65. Guns, 139.
H. Hague, 40. Haines, 37. Hales, 80. Halifax, 109, 147, 165, 198. Hambden, 18, 22, 158, 175. Hamilton, 13, 25, 147, 201, 211. Hamilton Hill, 28, 34, 189. Hampton-Court, 17, 31. Hanover, 130, 133. Harboard, 200. Harcourt, 107. Harman, 65, 70. Harris, 116. Hartfordshire, 199. Harvey, 37, 72. Harwich, 93, 206. Hatton, 45. Hawarden, 24. Hawkers, 110. Head, 196. St. Hellens, 61, 74. Henrietta, 26, 42, 73, 76. Pr. Henry, 2, 4. Herbert, 155, 158, 173, 174. Hereford, 28, 29. Hertford, 18, 24. Hewit, 37, 203. Hewson, 38. Hide, 35, 113. Hide-Park, 43. Highway, 135, 166. Highway-men, 150, 163. Highworth, 28. Hill, 105. Holderness, 149. Holland, 34, 48, 68, 82, 83, 92, 93, 124. Hollaway, 152, 155, 159. Hollis, 58, 59, 63, 64, 66. Holmby, 31. Holmes, 50, 51, 60, 67, 83, 109. Holstein, 96. Holt, 211. Hone, 153. Hopton, 20, 25, 29. Mr. of the Horse, 115. Hotham, 18, 23, 26, 27. Howard, 4, 15, 75, 91, 136, 198. Howell, 124. Howley, 22. Hull, 18. Hungarford, 26. Hungary, 12. Huntington, 18, 28, 150, 175. Huntley, 9. Hurst, 33. I. Jamaica, 46, 126, 128. James, 44. K. James, I. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 15. K. James, II. 62, 196, 200. Royal James, 79.
St. James's, 33, 49. Jeffereys, 120, 128, 155, 161, 173, 179, 180, 196, 203. Jenkins, 117, 120, 173. Jenner, 155. Jerison, 128. Jersey, 36. Jesuits, 100, 103, 108, 109, 110, 118, 121, 136. Jifford, 193. Indempnity, 41. Ingolsby, 39. Inniskilling, 208. Inns of Court, 11. Inundation, 191. Johnson, 47, 181. Joice, 31. Jones, 155. Jordan, 52. Ipre, 98. Ipswich, 73, 139. Ireland, 10, 17, 43, 47, 67, 77, 84, 113, 191. Irish, 199, 202, 208. Ironside, 212. Isabella, 111. Isis, 30. Isle of Wight, 33, 35. Judges, 15, 17, 121, 130, 176, 177, 178, 184, 205. Julian, 156. Juxon, 12, 47. K. Keck, 199. Keeling, 152. Kelsey, 57. Kendall, 64, 202. Kennedy, 178. Kent, 32. Keysearweart, 207. King, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 35, 40, 41, 46, 47, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 58, 60, 71, 73, 75, 78, 79, 81, 82, 83, 84, 90, 91, 93, 100, 104, 105, 109, 110, 111, 116, 118, 119, 121, 122, 125, 126, 127, 131, 133, 134, 135, 138, 142, 143, 144, 145, 147, 149, 150, 151, 154, 155, 158, 161, 162, 164, 171, 173, 178, 179, 181, 186, 187, 188, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194. Doctor King, 176. Kingsale, 128. King's-Bench, 156, 205. Kingstone, 32. Kirk, 135, 207, 212. Knight, 142, 179, 181. Kniveton, 24. L. Lamb, 9. Lambert, 38, 39, 46. Lampleugh, 195. Landsdown, 165. Landsdown-hill, 22. Lane, 194.
Langdale, 27, 32. Langhorn, 100, 101, 102, 108, 109. Langport, 28. Lapely, 24. Latham, 25. Latimer, 31. Laud, 11, 16, 27. Lauderdale, 76, 77, 84, 147. Launceston, 29, 210. Lawson, 49, 52. Lee, 153. Leeds, 20. Legate, 4. Legg, 19, 26, 142. Leicester, 16, 28. Leighton, 10, 102. Lenox, 37. Lenthall, 46. Lesly, 13. Lesthithiel, 26. L'Estrange, 27, 132, 167. Letter, 198, 201, 206. K's Letter, 39. Levins, 112, 132, 211. Levison, 30. Libellers, 95. Liberty of Conscience, 184. Lord Lieutenants, 201. Lilbourn, 12, 36. Lime, 136. Linch, 80, 140. Lincoln, 14. Lindsey, 9, 11, 19, 62, 145. Lisbon, 46. Lisle, 33, 172, 208. Litchfield, 20, 21, 29, 30. Littleton, 28, 77, 116. Liverpool, 201. Lizzard, 29. Lockhart, 201. Lockier, 34. London, 19, 21, 24, 31, 32, 38, 40, 46, 48, 49, 50, 52, 54, 55, 60, 62, 67, 82, 111, 112, 141, 143, 146, 148, 150, 151, 179, 190, 194, 199. Bishop London, 95. Loyal London, 59. London-bridge, 10. London-derry, 206, 207, 209, 210. Longford, 25. Lords, 35, 106, 158, 184, 188, 197, 198. Lorrain, 98. Lort, 45. Love, 35. Lovelace, 195. Lowdon, 14. Lucas, 33, 200. Ludlow, 30, 212. Lumley, 126, 203. Lynne, 23. Lynne Regis, 160. M. Macclesfield, 171. Macmahone, 26. Macquire, 27.
Maidenhead, 31. Maidstone, 32. Maile, 177, 178, 186, 210, 211. Malbanch, 203. Malmsbury, 20. Man, 36. Manchester, 71, 80. Manifesto, 195. Mansfield, 7. Marches of Wales, 44, 45. Mardike, 36. Marlborough, 9, 19, 52, 203. Marriage, 7, 36. Martins-Fort, 8. Marston, 33. Marston-Moor, 26. Mary, 95, 97, 169, 183. Q. Mary, 42, 46, 52, 75, 76. Pr. Mary, 16. Lady Mary, 10. Massacre, 196, 212. Massey, 27. Pr. Maurice, 25, 27, 30. May, 135. Maynard, 88, 199. Mayor, 138, 193, 194, 195, 201, 203, 211, 213. Mazarine, 43. Meclenburgh, 98. Melvill, 206. Members Five, 17. Memorials, 4. Mere, 57. Messina, 98. Mew, 163. St. Michael, 75. St. Michael's Mount, 29. Middleton, 21, 123, 161. Militia, 17. Millenaries, 2. Milton, 203. Mings, 52, 55, 56, 59. Modena, 92, 119, 187. Monday, 90, 91, 92. Monk, 38, 39, 40. Monmouth, 68, 72, 77, 90, 91, 93, 108, 110, 111, 114, 156, 169, 170, 203. Mons, 99. Montague, 7, 41, 82, 203, Montgomery, 204. Montross, 28, 29, 31, 35, 43. Moor, 125, 138, 139, 150, 151. Moorfields, 5. Moorlanders, 21. Mordant, 3, 38, 203. Morland, 147. Morley, 39, 58. Morocco, 75, 140, 141, 145, 146. Morton-Henmarsh, 28. Moseley, 207. Mount Edgcomb, 29. Mounthermer, 203. Mulgrave, 93, 114, 123, 125, 171, 174. Munster, 57. Musgrave, 164.
N. Napier, 132. Naples, 193. Nantwich, 203. Narborough, 108. Naseby, 28. Navigation, 158. Navy, 13, 32. Nevill, 108. Newark, 18, 25, 30, 73. Newberry, 14, 24, 26. New-Castle, 13, 14, 26, 30, 193. New-England, 146. Newgate, 206. New Market, 18, 31. Newport, 1, 56, 71, 88. News, 115. Nicholas, 75. Nimeguen, 95, 99. Noel, 142. Nonconformists, 46, 69, 139. Nonsuch, 53, 55, 73. Norfolk, 167, 189. North, 129, 147, 149, 150, 154, 172, 173. Northampton, 9. Northumberland, 3. North-West-Passage, 75. Norway, 53. Norwich, 34, 206. Nottingham, 19, 135, 149, 159, 160, 162. Noy, 11. Nuncio, 190. O. Oath, 37, 207. Oatland, 31. Oates, 99, 100, 103, 104, 113, 134, 138, 140, 147, 159, 160, 167, 168. Oates-men, 163. Ockingham, 202. Office Kingly, 34. Ogle, 78. Old-Baily, 41, 56, 70, 103, 116, 153, 173. St. Omers, 96. Pr. Orange, 16, 18, 41, 42, 78, 79, 97, 99, 195, 197, 198, 199. Order, 192, 195, 196, 197, 199, 206, 213. Ordinance, 196. Orleance, 78. Ormond, 41, 44, 70, 75, 79, 144, 146, 148, 165, 193, 202. Osborn, 84, 87, 90. Ossory, 59, 61, 90, 117, 120, 125. Overbury, 5. Oughtred, 40. Owen, 31. Oxford, 7, 19, 24, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 54, 55, 74, 75, 133. Oxly, 106. P. Packer, 157.
Packet-Boat, 164. Padbury, 22. Pr. Palatine, 4, 6, 42, 99, 125, 126. Pamphlet, 121, 131, 150, 158, 159, 160, 162, 163, 169, 170, 178. Paper, 185. Papillion, 151, 162. Papists, 114, 127, 130, 141. Pardon, 39, 177, 194. Paris, 70. Parliament, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 27, 32, 33, 37, 38, 39, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 61, 62, 63, 65, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 84, 86, 87, 90, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 111, 114, 116, 119, 120, 121, 124, 125, 127, 130, 131, 133, 10, 168, 170, 171, 173, 175, 176, 177, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 211, 212, Parma, 127, 129. Parre, 11. Paston, 194. Patrick, 212. St. Patrick, 63. St. Paul's, 10. Payton, 115, 117, 122, 130, 131, 132. Peak, 80. Pedlars, 159, 181. Peirce, 78. Pemberton, 117, 149. Pembroke, 9, 31, 124. Pen, 37, 49. Pendennis, 25. Pennington, 15. Penny-Post, 148. Penruddock, 37. Pensioners, 10. Pepys, 108, 109, 117. Peterborough, 47, 93, 113, 135, 150, 167. Petition, 15, 114, 115, 116, 131, 195. Petitioners, 14. Pett, 67, 125. Philipsburgh, 96. Phipps, 186. Picture, 140. Pilkington, 145, 201, 203. Pitcher, 33. Plague, 1, 2, 7, 50, 62. Plate-Fleet, 205. Player, 94. Play-house, 4. Plimouth, 26, 65, 149, 198, 206, 207, 209. Plot, 3, 100, 101, 112, 115, 128, 129, 152, 153. Poland, 10, 112. Pollexfen, 200.
Pontefract, 27, 28, 32, 34. Pope, 6, 113, 129, 210. Portland, 23, 36, 51, 202. Portsmouth, 19, 192, 204, 205, 206, 207. Portugal, 28, 108, 109, 113, 138, 212. Post Office, 154, 172. Powle, 198. Powys, 113, 117, 122. Poyer, 32. Prance, 102, 105, 178. President, 201. Preston, 173, 198. Prin, 12, 15. Prince, 59. Pritchard, 147, 155, 194. Privy-Seal, 175, 184. Prizes French, 206, 212. Proclamation, 118, 191, 192, 194, 195, 198, 199, 200, 201, 204, 205, 206, 208, 209, 211, 212. Protestation, 16. Purbeck, 102. Purse, 35. Pyrates, 3. Q. Queen, 7, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 47, 53, 54, 167, 189, 193, 194. Queen-Mother, 12. Q. Dowager, 197. Q. Mary, 201, 203. Q. Christiana, 202. R. Rabble, 196. Radcliff, 154. Radley, 124. Radnor, 30, 109, 112. Ragland, 31. Rainsborough, 33. Rainsford, 138. Rawleigh, 5. Rawlinson, 199. Raymond, 116. Read, 199. Reading, 21, 106. Rebellion, 17. Receiver-General, 201. Recusants, 69. Redwood, 105. Regicides, 41. Reresby, 143. Resolution, 68. Revenue, 199. Reynolds, 34. Rich, 147. Richards, 201. Richardson, 104. Richmond, 88, 91, 193. Rioters, 151. Rippon, 14. Roberts, 74. Robinson, 40, 62, 92. Rochell, 9. Rochellers, 8, 17. Rochester, 4, 86, 161, 165. Roehampton, 71. Romans, 12.
Rome, 202. Rosewell, 162. Rosse, 201. Rossiter, 27. Rouse, 136, 138, 153. Routon Heath, 29. Roxborough, 12. Royston, 18, 31. Rumbold, 169. Rumsey, 152. Rundway Down, 23. Rupert, 12, 19, 24, 25, 26, 27, 30, 49, 52, 56, 58, 59, 61, 75, 148, 149. Ruthen, 29. Russell, 153, 154. Russia, 46. Rye-House, 152, 153. S. Sackvile, 105. Sacrament, 197. Salisbury, 36, 53, 103. Saltash, 20, 29. Salt-Petre, 209. Salt-Water fresh, 151. Sandal, 29. Sandwich, 56, 58, 68, 73, 86, 200. Sanguine, 4. Saniein, 93. Sarum, 197, 198, 200. Savile, 126. Saunders, 150. Savoy, 44, 56, 96, 110, 195, 141. Sawyer, 132. Saxon, 178. Scanderoon, 207. Scarborough, 28, 193. Schomberg, 202, 206, 209. Scilly, 31. Scotland, 10, 17, 28, 29, 35, 42, 47, 62, 64, 108, 109, 116, 119, 122, 124, 125, 128, 136, 138, 141, 160, 163, 166, 198, 201. Scots, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 23, 27, 28, 30, 31, 32, 35, 108. Scroggs, 116, 136. Seamen, 98, 206. Secretary, 206. Sedgmoor, 198. Sedley, 200. Seely, 63. Seneff, 93. Serle, 208. Serjeants, 121, 156, 177, 193, 204. Seymour, 89, 105, 129, 131. Shadwell, 79. Shaftesbury, 87, 88, 111, 136, 137, 138, 139. Shafto, 192. Shandois, 132. Sharp, 107. Sheerness, 66, 71, 75. Sheers, 114. Sheppard, 152. Sheppey, 126. Sherbourn, 28.
Sheriffs, 161, 201. Ship-money, 11, 12, 15. Shipton, 127. Shorter, 194. Shovell, 205. Shrewsbury, 27. Shudley, 20. Shute, 145. Sidney, 113, 155, 203. Silk-Worms, 3. Sindercomb, 37. Sion, 31. Skelton, 194. Skinners-Hall, 121. Slawell, 150. Slingsby, 37. Smith, 52, 56, 57, 67, 96, 99, 114, 116, 134, 145. Smyrna, 83. Soldiers, 179, 184. Sollicitor General, 200, 205. Sommerset, 4. Southampton, 2, 43, 64, 88. Southold-Bay, 61. Southwell, 30. Spain, 2, 4, 7, 10, 41, 69, 84, 96, 124. Spalato, 5, 6. Spaniards, 1, 5, 6. Speake, 157. Speech, 199, 200, 208. Speke, 181. Spensor, 188. Sports, 5. Sprag, 52, 65, 78, 83, 91. Stafford, 122, 130. Stamford, 18, 176, 177. Stapleton, 137. Stately, 101. Statue, 35. Staunton, 165. Stetin, 98. Stevins, 180. Stillingfleet, 212. Stopford, 25, Stow, 29. Stowell, 30, 45, 117. Strafford, 13, 15, 16, 17, 94. Straights, 74, 78. Stratford, 5. Stratton, 21. Street, 162. Strickland, 192. Stuart, 19, 25. Sturton, 3. Stutcomb, 25. Suffolk, 198. Summers, 205. Sunderland, 24, 93, 104, 147, 150, 175, 195. Suns three, 26. Supremacy, 208. Surrey, 32. Swansie, 98. Sweeden, 7, 10, 60, 63, 69, 87, 104. Sweepstakes, 56. Sylvius 118. Synod, 5, 6, 14. T
Tabago, 96. Tadcaster, 19. Talbot, 57. Tamworth, 22, 28. Tangier, 45, 46, 106, 109, 113, 123, 127, 128, 130, 131, 135, 156. Tasborough, 105, 122. Taunton, 21. Tempest, 118. Temple, 71, 125. Term, 33, 40, 55. Texell, 51. Teys, 206. Thames, 37, 68. Thanksgiving, 205. Theatre, 74. Theobalds, 13, 18. Throne, 198, 201. Thwing, 118. Thynne, 141. Tichbourn, 122. Tiddiman, 52. Tide, 71, 111, 142, 145. Tiltyard, 62. Tinmouth, 32. Tirconnell, 180, 183. Tiroen, 3, 114, 130, 131, 139. Tiveot, 48. Toleration, 205. Tomkins, 23. Tompson, 34, 128. Tongue, 25, 99, 100, 127, 140. Torbay, 65, 195, 207. Torrington, 29, 207. Tower, 38, 106, 114, 200. Tower-hill, 44. Tower-street, 34. Townesend, 149. Trade, 68, 95, 132. Traquare, 13. Treaty, 2. Treason, 122, 138, 139, 146, 152, 153, 170, 174, 175. Treasurer, 64, 88, 134, 182, 201. Treasury, 106, 202. Treby, 131, 200, 205. Trenchard, 205. Trevor, 71, 73, 85, 168. Tripoly, 46, 94. K's Tryall, 33. Tunis, 46. Turbervile, 128, 140. Turkey, 120, 132. Turner, 5, 48, 80, 152. Tuscany, 74. Tweddell, 74. Twine, 48. Tyburn, 26, 42, 44, 45, 77, 101, 104. V. Valentiennes, 96. Vane, 70, 102. Venetians, 5. Venice, 72. Venner, 42. Vere, 77. Vernatti, 176. Vienna, 153, 154. Villiers, 32.
Viner, 85, 194. Virginia, 3, 95, 156, 204. Vivonne, 95. Voluntiers, 206. Votes, 32. Vratz, 141, 142. Usher, 37. Utbert, 63. Uxbridge, 27. W. Wakefield, 20, 21. Wakeman, 100, 109. Walcot, 153, 155. Wales, 161, 193, 194, 195. Waller, 23, 25, 26, 119, 129. Wallingford, 30. War, 196, 205. Warcup, 163. Ward, 198. Warder, 25. Warder Castle, 21. Warspight, 59. Warwick, 34. Wentworth, 9. West, 152. West-India, 37, 88. Westminster, 197, 198. Weston, 116. Weymouth, 23. Whitaker, 102, 136, 148, 181. Whitehall, 13. Whitfield, 117. Wiche, 141, 203. Wightman, 4. Wildman, 45. K. William, 201, 204, 207, 208, 211, 212. Williams, 7, 111, 132. Williamson, 83, 94. Willoughby, 60, 200. Wilmore, 137, 144. Wilson, 138. Winchelsea, 74. Winchester, 202. Wind, 45. Windebank, 15, 27, 28. Windsor, 17, 33, 34, 193, 194, 196. Windsor Chapel, 23. Wine, 154. Winton, 33. Wiscomb, 209. Witherley, 162. Witness, 120, 121, 132. Wood, 114. Woodmongers, 68. Woodstock, 30, 202. Wool, 187. Woolcards, 99. Woollen, 177. Worchester, 19, 25, 30, 35. Wormleyton, 29. Wright, 159, 162, 206. Writs, 33. Wymondley, 149. Y. Yarmouth, 100, 183. Yarum, 20.
York, 2, 11, 13, 14, 17, 18, 26, 30, 32, 45, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 53, 54, 55, 58, 60, 66, 71, 72, 73, 75, 78, 79, 80, 81, 85, 92, 93, 97, 107, 110, 111, 112, 117, 118, 119, 126, 127, 142, 143, 146, 195. BOOKS lately Printed. 1. BRitain's Glory, and England's Bravery: Wherein is shewed the degrees of Honour, from the Prince to the Peasant, with the Honour of the Nobles, and Privilege of the Commons; the proper Places, and the Precedency of all Persons from the Throne to the Bondman; as also the Honour of Arms, the Power of Heraulds, Significations of Charges and Coat Armour, a Dictionary explaining the Terms of Heraldry, and an account of the Orders of Knighthood all Christendom over, &c. price bound, 1s. 6d. 2. A Discourse of Schism, for the use of humble Christians. By Thomas Wight of Little Henden in Berk∣shire, in 4o. price 6d. 3. A Discourse of Prayer. By G. Budgell, Rector of Symondbury in Dorsetshire, in 4o. price 6d. 4. Peppa, a new Novell, with the Songs all exactly set to two Voices, in 12o. price bound 1s. 6d. 5. Family Herbal, or the Treasure of Health; shew∣ing how to preserve Health, and long Life, by the rules to be observed in eating and drinking, in 12o. price bound 1s. 6d.
6. A Modern view of such parts of Europe that have lately been, and now are the places of great Transacti∣ons, viz. Italy, France, Germany, Lorrain, Spain, &c. with Curious Remarks of Antiquity, in 8o. price bound 2s. 6d. 7. Compendium Geographicum, or a more exact, plain, and easie Introduction to Geography than any yet extant, after the latest discoveries, and alterati∣ons; with an Alphabetical Table of the Ancient Names of Places, and another of the Modern. By P. Chamber∣lain, of the Inner-Temple, price 1s. 8. The Buccaniers of America, in 2 Volumes com∣pleat, in 4o. price 10s. FINIS.
