S5424B 99833184 37659
CONSIDERATIONS FOR Competitors and Electors of Representatives IN PARLIAMENT WITH Special Considerations FOR ELECTORS of REPRESENTATIVES FOR THE Next Parliament. By the Author of the REFLECTIONS. Printed in the Year, 1690.
Considerations for Competitors and Electors of Representatives in Parliament. TRƲSTS are things, which all men agree, nemine contradicente, ought to be performed with all Faithfulness, and for that pur∣pose with all the care and diligence, that the nature, impor∣tance or difficulty of the matter doth require. Hence it is that Honest men, who make Conscience of the due performance of their Obligations, are not easily perswaded into such Undertakings, unless where near Relation, intimate Friendship, great Charity upon some special advantage and need of their assistance doth move, and in some sort oblige them to it; much less are they apt to intrude into such Employments, or offer themselves, except where there is appa∣rent need of their assistance, and upon due consideration of their own abilities to discharge what they undertake: And therefore when men are without any such special motives found to thrust themselves into such Imployments, or stand in competition with men as well, or bet∣ter qualifyed for the business than themselves, this is generally looked upon as a just Cause of suspicion of some sinister Ends and Designs in them. This being so in Private Trusts, Why is it not, or should it not be much more so in Publick, since they are of greater Importance? And yet it is not always in these? The reason is this: Of Publick Offices of Trust, some are also Offices of Profit, and reason good they should be so, being Offices of great Skill and Pains, and requiring the expence of living proportionable to the Dignity of the Office: And such as Providence hath left to get their Livings by their Labour, may reasonably desire such honest Imployments as they are duly qualifyed for. But in this there are usually great saults committed, as 1. When men, who are in a competent, decent, and convenient way of living, are not contented therewith, but Ambitiously aspiring, or Insatiably gaping, after greater and higher Matters: These are not, nor cannot be either compleat Christians, or truly good Men, and when the Tentation comes, do usually shew themselves. 2. When they seek such Places meerly for the Profit, and are not sufficiently qualifyed
duly to discharge the Office and Trust. 3. When by their Interest or Friends, they interpose to keep out better or fitter Men than them∣selves; in both which cases they do Prejudice to the Publick, and are Obstacles and Impediments to its Service. Other Offices and Employments are of great Trust, Honour and Authority, but of little or no Profit, but rather occasion of Expense. These, I conceive, are neither to be sought for the Honour or Autho∣rity by any, nor to be refused for their trouble or expence, by such as are well qualifyed for them, when they are regularly called to that Service. But of all Publick Trusts in this Nation, there is none, ta∣ken singly, of greater weight and concern than that of Enquiring, Consulting and Acting, in Parliament; of which I shall speak a little more particularly, as to the Persons to be Chosen for Represen∣tatives of the Commons, and the Duty of the Electors. Each of these hath a double Trust reposed in him, the one by the Electors for the special good of the place for which he is chosen, the other by the Constitution of our Government for the good of the whole Nation, wherein the Religion, Lives, Liberties, Properties, and whole con∣cern of all that is valuable is comprehended, and many times great concerns of other Nations also: And in this the Representative of the meanest Borough hath an equal share with a Knight of the largest County. The Qualifications of a Person to be chosen for such a Service, ought to be proportionable and agreeable to the Extent and Weight of the Trust, which is to be reposed in him. As 1. Integrity, and such In∣tegrity as is not to be mov'd by any prospect of Profit, Honour, or Fear of the Faces of Men. 2. Knowledge and good Understanding in that variety of Matters, which may occur, and are there to be con∣sider'd, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, the Principles of Laws and Government in general, and the Laws and Government of England in particular, and many other matters, with a good Sagacity, Pros∣pect and Foresight, into the remote consequences of things. 3. Di∣ligence and Industry, to attend and consider, and prepare and forward matters of Importance to the Publick. These are necessary, if not indispensable qualifications; to which may be added two others of great use, that is, 4. Elocution, so as to speak pertinently and closely to business, and 5. Reputation of Integrity and good Judg∣ment which usually makes what is spoken by such a Person to
be the more regarded by the rest. These five qualifications are as requisite to a compleat Parliament Man, as are the five Senses to a Compleat Man. Such indeed are to be desired, to be sought for, to be preferred and chosen, where they may be had. But where persons thus qualified in all particulars, and in the highest degree, are not to be had, in such case they that come nearest are to be chosen, especially at such times when matters of great moment and concern are to be ordered. This is plain and evident, because the End, which all men in such cases are by the Laws of God and Nature obliged to intend, is the publick Good, and by consequence are likewise obliged to make choice of the most just and proper means and Instruments for the attaining of that End; and such only are those who have most of the principal qualifications aforesaid, and in the highest degree. And by this Rule may all such, both Competitors and Electors, who are more concerned to discharge their Duty and serve their Country, than to gratify their Ambition or serve a private interest, easily di∣rect their Actions, and judge of the actions of others. And there∣fore 1. for Competitors, whoever, because of his Quality, his E∣state and Ability to spend most Money, or his interest among his neigh∣bours upon any other score than the qualifications aforesaid, shall oppose another better qualifyed in those respects for this purpose than himself, does certainly either Act upon mistaken Principles, or is transported with a vain Ambition, or has not that Affection for his Country, and Sense of his Duty, as he ought to have. And this may be further demonstrated from a familiar Instance, for there is no Wise and Considerate Man, but in his private matters of Law, in matters relating to his Health, in matters of Dealings with other Men, and the like, will seek assistance from such as are of more Ability in those respects than himself; and therefore in matters of greatest moment to himself to his Posterity, and whole Country, not to do the like, is in∣consistent both with common Prudence, and that sense of Duty, and of the weight of his undertaking, which every Honest man hath in the acceptance of but a private Trust; and certainly mens so forward intruding into a Trust of so great Importance, deserves no other Con∣struction than it doth, and usually hath, in the case of a Private Trust, under the like Circumstances. By the same Rule also may the Electors as easily direct their choice,
if they intend the Just and Honest discharge of their Duty; that is, if they regard only or principally the true and proper qualifications of the Person for the business for which he is to be chosen, and lay aside all by respects and private concerns. Some men pretend that a good Estate is a necessary, or principal qualification, to oblige the person to be the more concern'd for so considerable an Interest, but that is but a meer Fallacy; for a Covetous or Ambitious Man will be apt to use that as a step to Sacrifice the Interest of his Country, to the satis∣faction of his Humour, which soever it is, whereas an honest man con∣tented with his condition, will be no less careful to preserve the little he hath, than he that hath more. Others are carried on upon the consideration of Friendship, which is as unreasonable as if a man in∣stead of an able Lawyer or Physician, should make choice of a person but meanly Skilled in either of those Sciences because he is his Friend: and as absurd and unreasonable it is for any man to take it ill from his Friend, who chooseth the assistance of a more proper Man in a special case than himself. The first of these does plainly prefer his private Friendship before the publick good of his Country, and the latter his own Interest or humour before either. A like mistake is ve∣ry common in Cities and Boroughs, where they think themselves ob∣liged to choose their actual or expected Benefactors, and they again expect to be chosen. Of these we may judge by what is said of the last. In the Country many are swayed by Fear of the displeasure of their Landlords or great Neighbours, and they as unreasonably expect their compliance. The former do in a matter of greater importance, the choice of Trustees for their Country, what they would not do in a less, the choice of Trustees for a small Estate of their own: And the latter take from their Neighbours that Freedom, which they would not have taken from themselves; or having basely given up their own, would injuriously Usurp their Neighbours Right, as hath often been the case of late times. For that Rabble of Brutes who are ready to Sacrifice all to their Bellies, they are scarce capable of hearing Reason, Venter non habit aures, but if any of them have so much hu∣manity lest as to listen to it, the Rule before expressed may direct them. FINIS.
Special Considerations for Electors of Repre∣sentatives, for the Next Parliament. BEsides the precedent General Considerations, some things there are, which deserve a Special Consideration, in re∣spect to the present State of the Nation, and the next Parlia∣ment which is shortly to Assemble. Wherein two Things will be greatly necessary to be taken care of, in order to a more happy State of this Nation, for the future. The one, an Effectual Reformation of the Corrupt and Disso∣lute Manners, which the Licentiousness, and Evil Examples of the late Kings, through the Midianitish Wiles and Policies of the Romish Balaams, had introduced; and which like a Torrent, soon overspread the Nation. This wicked Policy had two mischievous Effects: First, It depraved and debased the Minds of the People, and most of those, who were nearest in Degree, or Employment; and thereby rendred them the more unfit, either for Prudent Counsel, or Generous Action. And Secondly, It provoked the Displeasure and Judgments of God; which yet his Infinite Wis∣dom and Goodness, so ordered and moderated, that the principal Authors and Instruments of that Wickedness, first felt the evil Effects, and deserved Punishment of it. For, as that Baseness and Depravation of Manners, produced such Flatteries in the Peo∣ple, by Abhorrences and Addresses, and evil Counsels, as by Animating, betrayed those Princes to such unjustifiable Courses and Attempts, as the natural Genius of the English could not long bear; so it disposed even the Army, in which the late King repo∣sed his greatest Confidence, the more readily to Desert Him, in a Case indeed dangerous to himself, but wherein those Courses into which he had been so betrayed, made them judge it reasona∣ble so to do. But we are not to think, that the Malign Influence of that Wickedness, is all spent in this. There is a Root of Bitter∣ness still remaining, which is like to produce the like evil Fruits
and Effects, upon the whole Nation, if it be not speedily entire∣ly Eradicated. We have felt some evil Effects of it the last Year, even after so admirable a Mercy to this Nation, as we late∣ly received, and are in danger to feel greater, if it be longer neg∣lected. And because in things of so great and common Con∣cern, every one ought to put to his helping Hand, I think it will not only be an Act of free Charity, but an absolute Duty, to ac∣quaint all, even the meanest of the People, how much they may, and are obliged to contribute to so desirable a Work, as the Re∣formation of these cursed Relicts of Popery. There is a plain Christian Duty, which if it were taken notice of, and practised as it ought to be, by the meanest of Christian People, would have a very good Effect toward the Reformation of the greatest. And that is, To withdraw from, and avoid all Communion and avoidable Conversation, with such as profess them∣selves Christians, and yet live disorderly in any scandalous Sin; as Prophane Swearing, Incontinence, Drunkenness, &c. This is the express and positive Doctrin of the sacred Scriptures, and so appa∣rently, and highly reasonable in it self, that I need not say more of it. And since God by his Providence, hath so ordered the Condition of Men upon Earth, that the greatest, must in many things, have need of the meanest; were it but well observed and practised, as it ought to be, it would soon bring such Inconve∣niences upon those who are vitious, as would necessitate them to mend their Manners: But in nothing ought it more carefully to be observed, than in Elections of Representatives in Parliament: For they are intrusted to act in that Employment, not only for those who Elect them, but for the whole Nation, and in matters of greatest Concern; in respect, not only of the Civil Rights and Interests of Men, but also of Religion, and the Honour and Service of God, upon whose Favour and Blessing, the happy State of the Nation doth absolutely depend. And acting in the name, or sted of those who Elect them, if they act amiss, and be such as are likely so to do; the Electors are Partakers of their Sins and Faults, and accountable for the same before God. If therefore, Reformation of the Manners of the Nation, be a thing to be de∣sired and endeavoured by every Man in his Station; for any Man to give his Voice for a vitious scandalous Person, who needs
to be reformed himself, and is more like to oppose and obstruct a Reformation of others, than promote it, is not only Absurd, but Impious. What can be more unreasonable, than to chuse such to consult concerning the great Concerns of a Mans self, his Country, and the whole Nation; who are either so impotent and brutish, as to subject their Reason, and prostitute their Reputation to the Gratification of their sensual Appetite, in unlawful Lusts or Drunkenness? or so inconsiderate, as either out of a base com∣pliance with dissolute Company, or vain Affectation of a Gigan∣tick Audacity, to profane the Sacred Name of God, or Imprecate his Judgments upon themselves? or to choose such to make Laws, who do themselves violate all Law, Divine, as well as Humane; contemn all Authority, and by their evil Example, teach others to do the like? Nor can any Man, who hath any sense of Religion, with any reason expect, that the Divine Pro∣vidence will ever favour with his Blessing, either the Actions of such Persons, or those who choose them. Only where there is a Profession and apparent hopes of Reformation for the future, I would not discourage it by rejecting such, if otherwise well qua∣lified. The other thing to be taken care of, is the Reformation of those false and corrupt Notions, concerning the English Government; which by the Frauds and Flatteries of the four last Reigns, have been in∣troduced and promoted, to the great Disturbance of the People, and greater Mischiefs to some of the Kings. The present State of the English Government, is composed of what is best in each of the single Forms of Government: It hath the Majesty of a Monarchy, the standing Council of an Aristocracy, and the great Council and Strength of a Republick. And the Distribution be∣tween the Regal and Republick parts, is thus: The Republick part is the most ancient in our Government, and as it hath always done, doth at this Day with the Aristocratick, retain all the Power; but for the greater Majesty of the State, refers all the Honour that may be to the Regal. But the King can neither make Laws, Impose Taxes, or legally do any thing concerning the State, without the Advice and Concurrence of some Legal Council. Yet doth not the Monarchy need any separate Power
to support it, as some have inconsiderately imagined, or dishonest∣ly pretended. For the other two parts would even naturally sup∣port the Monarchy, for the greater Honour, Majesty, Unity, Dis∣patch of Business, and other Advantages to the whole, was not the kind Intercourse between them interrupted by evil Men, for their own Advantage. Of this, they who will may see more in two Papers; The one Entituled, IMPORTANT QUESTIONS UPON THE LATE REVOLUTION: The other, AN APOLOGY FOR Mr. STAFFORD. These wicked People designing only their own Advantage, without any regard, either to the Honour or Safety of the Prince, or to the Peace and Prosperity of their Country; have always sought the Princes Favour, and thereby their own Advancement, by two very common, but pernicious Methods of Flattery: 1. By Magnifying the Power of the Prince above the Truth. 2. By Calumniating those, who perceived and opposed their Pernicious Designs, as Republicans and Enemies to Monarchy. By these means, they ingratiated themselves with the Prince, as the only Loyal and Faithful Subjects, and Friends to Monarchy; and, which served the better to secure themselves in his Favour, made him jealous of all others. But by the same means, though they occasioned great Troubles and Disturbance to the People, yet brought they the greatest Michiefs of all upon the Kings them∣selves, for whom they pretended the greatest Zeal and Service imaginable. For as on the one hand, they partly flattered, and partly frighted, and both ways betrayed them into such illegal Courses, as made their Cause unjustifiable; so on the other, they gave just cause of Discontent and Jealousie to the People, and did as much as could, to render Monarchy it self, as odious to them as possible. These are the Men, who occasioned and even necessitated the late Civil War, and in effect brought King Charles the First to the Block, and have reason therefore enough still to keep the 30th. of January, untill they have more worthily repented of the hand that they or their Party had in it. These are they, who had betrayed King Charles the Second into the like Mischiefs, had he been a Man of a more Martial Spirit. And these are they who so lately by their Flatteries, Addresses, and illegall and wick∣ed
Compliances, betrayed King James the Second into those Mis∣chiefs which he is fallen into. And to conclude all, these are the Men, who have been the greatest Obstructors of the most neces∣sary Proceedings of the last Parliament, for a firm and honour∣able settlement upon the true English Foundation, and undoubt∣edly will be acting the same part again in the next, if they meet with the like encouragement either from number or otherwise, as they had in the last. And therefore after so great experience of the Mischiefs already done by this sort of Persons both to King and People, one would think there should need no more to perswade all those who have any sincere love to their Country, that is, any hearty concern for the Honour and Safety of their present Majesties, or for the Peace and Prosperity of this Nation, to be very wary how they commit so great a Trust as that reposed in a Member of Par∣liament to any such Person upon any private consideration; and to that end and purpose it may be of some use to note the several Forms under which they Acted. And the first may be such Members of Parliament as did ac∣cept of any gratification in either of the last Reigns, for their Vote or for any secret Service, inconsistent with the Trust re∣posed in them by their Election, or to oblige them indefinitly to the Kings Service, as Members of Parliament. Secondly, Such Judges as gave any illegal Judgment or Opi∣nion tending or subservient to any of the Arbitrary Designs or Practices of either of the said Reigns. Thirdly, Such base and mercenary Lawyers as by abuse of their Profession were accessary to, or promoted the Murder, or illegal, or unjust Condemnation or Conviction of any Person in the late Reign, or were otherwise subservient to any of the Ar∣bitrary Designs or Practices then in agitation. Fourthly, Such as were officiously forward, and active for the Surrender of Charters; which, as was evident to every ordinary Capacity, was designed for the Subversion of the Government, or Promotion of Arbitrary Power. Fifthly, Such as by Abhorrences, or other Addresses renounced the Rights of their Country, and betrayed the late Kings, by en∣couraging them to illegal Actions, contrary to their Coronation Oath.
Lastly, Such as by any notorious Compliance have been any way Instrumental towards the Subverting of the Foundations of our good old English Government. It the Designs and Tendency of these things be duly consider∣ed, the Fault of those, who were Agents in them, will easily appear to be such, as in Modesty, they ought to abstain from in∣truding into any Publick Employment at this Time; but espe∣cially that of the Parliament, till things be better setled. And those whom Modesty cannot restrain, one would think Prudence should, at least, so far as not to expose themselves to the Censure of such an Assembly, and even invite and provoke it upon themselves. For it is plainly in my Apprehension, an impudent Affront to the House, for Criminals to intrude into the Seat of Judgment, when those very Crimes whereof they are Partakers, are to be Discussed and Censured. Nor do I think it for the Honour of the English Nation, or consistent with the Prudence requisite in an English Parliament, to suffer it. And had not the last Convention over∣looked much of their proper Business in this respect, as well as in other matters, it is likely they would have found less Op∣position and Disturbance in their Proceedings. Nor ought any one to think, that this is inconsistent with that Freedom of Electi∣ons, or of Debates in Parliament, which the Constitution of the English Government alloweth, and authorizeth in each. For it extends not that Right and Freedom to Criminals. And the Ele∣ctors, who will presume to make such Elections, ought to know, that they are accountable to the whole Nation, and to the Parliament, for what they do in that respect. I am as little for Severity in these Matters, especially where the Criminals are numerous, as any Man: But as some Exam∣ples are to be made, so the Honour of the Nation, and Justice of what we have done in this great Affair, ought to be asserted and maintained; and not the whole Nation be abused, with foolish and unreasonable pretences of Mercy. FINIS.
