T1081 R25823 9148071 42524
THE MARROW OF Chymical Physick; OR, The Practice of Making Chy∣mical Medicines. Divided in Three Books: viz. Shewing the true and perfect Order to Distil, or Draw forth from vegetables, Minerals, and Metals, their Spirits, Oyls, Vinegars, Salts, Extracts, or Tinctures, Essences and Magisteries, Flowers, and Salts, &c. Whereunto is added at the end of every such Preparation, its Vertue and Medicinal Use, for the Preservation of Health, and Restoring the Diseased to Sanity. A rare way of Making Metaline Glass af any colour whatsoever. Very useful for the making Artificial Rubies, Saphirs, Ja∣cinths, &c. Likewise for the Enameling of Rings, or for Jewels; being very excel∣lent and easie. By Will. Thraster Philo-Astro-Medicus, and Student in Chymistry. LONDON: Printed, and are to be sold by Peter Parker, at the Leg and Star in Cornhil, against the Royal Exchange, 1679.
TO THE READER. Courteous Reader, HAving from my youth de∣lighted in the Art of Chy∣mistry, at length by help of my very good Friend Dr. Bolnest, I received some Methodical Instru∣ctions. Part of my Studies and En∣deavors having collected together, I here present you with, being drawn from the best Authors, and most of my own experience, and brought into such a Method, that by help of this Book onely, may be truly prepared all Vegetables, Ani∣mals, Minerals, and Mettals, into
excellent and efficacious Medicines, in so plain a Method, that if thou tread the Hermetick Path aright, you may by help of what I have written, finde the way to do thy self and Countrey good; And if thou by my painful Pleasure doest but procure to thy self some know∣ledge more than thou hadst, or cause any good to be done to the Diseased, it is all that is aimed at by At the Sign of the Razor by the May-pole in East-Smithfield. W. T.
Chymical Physick. Book I. What the Distillation of Chymical Medicines are; the Kindes thereof, with the Instru∣ments and Vessels thereunto belonging. YOu may observe that our Chymi∣cal Preparations here intended, are no other than a noble and in∣genious way of preparing of Phy∣sick, for the benefit of the Sick, and credit of the Physitian, by the Art of Distillation; which Art, as some affirm, came first to knowledge from the Arabians, as the first Inventers thereof: but as this is not very easie to prove, so 'tis not much material to our purpose. We ought to understand that the Art of Distillation is the separa∣ting, or drawing Juices, Liquors, and other
Moistures more subtile (by vertue of diffe∣rent heats, as the matter may require) from most kinde of things. Or Distillation is by Art to separate a running Moisture first in vapors, arising to the head of the Still, and from thence is condensed and turned into liquor, running into the applyed Re∣ceiver: or it may be termed the changing of gross Bodies into thin and pure substan∣ces, separating the most pure part from the corrupt; or the making things perfect, which are yet immature or unperfect, by which way matter or things are brought to a far greater purity, with augmentation of their Vertues. Also by this Art of Distil∣lation, are separated the pure, essential, spiritual Humidity, from the watry or fleg∣matick Matter. Or in few words, by Di∣stillation may (from Herbs, Flowers, Roots, Seeds, Berries, Woods, &c.) be drawn Spi∣rits, Flegms, and Oyls, and from their Fe∣cies by expression a Vineger, and out of those Fecies after calcination, their fixed Salt. Out of Gums and Rozins are produ∣ced Spirits, Oyls, and at last a Balsom, or Red Oyl. In Salts, Minerals, and Met∣tals, are various preparations, too tedious here to relate, the particulars you may find in the Treatise. For in this Art are many,
and various Considerations necessary to be learned, that is according to the matter to be distilled, to use seemly and proper ways whereby the Work may be brought to a happy end. Now all manner of Distilla∣tion may be performed divers ways, and in divers Vessels, according to the judgement and pleasure of the Operator, yet ought he carefully to minde that way most expe∣dient for the guiding the Work after the best manner, and for that purpose to use such Vessels and Instruments most expedi∣ent for his intended Work. As for the Di∣stilling of Herbs, Roots, Flowers, Leaves, Berries, for the obtaining their Spirits, Oyls, Vinegers, and Salts, there necessarily go∣eth before Distillation, Infusion and Fer∣mentation. As for Vessels and Instruments useful in other Distillations, read in their proper places. Of Lutum Sapientia, or Chymical Lute▪ BEfore we Treat of Distillations, it is convenient to declare the manner of Luting or Defending the Vessels from the violence of the Fire, and for the closure of the Joynts of the Vessel, which many neg∣lecting,
do thereby loose their best Volatile and Penetrating Spirits, and so their Me∣dicine becomes less efficacious, than if care had been taken; and for the prevention of such dangers, I have here at large described several sorts of Lutes, as followeth. The best Lute for building of Furnaces, is made of sifted Potters Earth; or in defect of that, good Lyme, being laid abroad: sift into it a little fine Sand, and adding some Horse-dung, mixing the same with Brine of Flesh, or Salt-water, after incorporate and labour it well together with great dili∣gence, the more the better; and if you add the Caput Mort of Aquasortis, first made soft by the addition of water, and mix them all well, this Clay will not crack, but re∣main fixt in the fire. Some add filings of Iron, powdered Glass, &c. If equal parts of the Caput Mort of Vi∣triol, or Aquasortis, be mixt with Tobacco-pipe Clay and some Horse-dung, it serves for the Coating of Glasses, and so will the former. For the Closure of the Joynts of Glasses, you may first close the Receivers to the Re∣torts with the aforesaid Lute, and when dry you may smeer it over with a mixture made of equal parts of Red-led and Quick-lime,
or Lime onely, ground well together with Lin-seed Oyl. Or Tobacco-pipe Clay ground, or mixt with the White of an Egg, and spread upon a Cloath, and so applyed. Or Ox-bladders dipped in the Whites of Eggs well beaten, and so applyed. Old Loam and the White of an Egg, mix them into a Paste, and spread it upon a Cloath. Or Linnen rags dipped in the water of Whites of Eggs, and applyed to the Cracks of Glasses, & so strowed powdered Quick-lime upon the same, put in two or three one upon the other. Another Lute for broken Glasses is thus: Take old tough Rindes of Cheese, soak it in water all night, and then beat them up in a Paste, and spread them abroad upon a board, and strow upon it equal weight of Quick-lime powdered, and grinde them again; then mix them with well beaten Whites of Eggs, and make it into Paste.
Of the Structure of Furnaces for the Di∣stilling of Vegetable Spirits and Oyls. First Furnace In this first Furnace A represents the body of the Still, set in Brick-work. B The Head of the Still. C The Woodden Vessel, containing the Worm, and the Water to refrigerate, and con∣dense the Spirits. D The Receiver. This Form of Stills being common in use, need no farther Explanation.
This second Furnace was invented for the saving of cost and charges of a Copper-Still, and is to be understood as followeth: Second Furnace A Represents the Furnace, which may be built of Brick, or made of Iron, and so be carried from place to place, with a Cover fitted to it, and sive Vent-holes to take off, and put on. B Represents the Copper Globe, made with a long Neck, passing through the Furnace into the Distilling Vessel near the bottom, and to the mouth of the Globe that is in the Vessel, must have a Basket, or some thin cloath over it, that nothing but water may come into the Globe. G The Distilling Vessel, containing the mate∣rials to be distilled, made of Wood, and well bound with Iron Hoops, and in the Head let
be a great hole to put in the materials, which after the materials are in must be fast luted. H The Cock, to let out the water after Distil∣lation. I The Pipe from the Wooden Vessel passing into the Worm, which ought to be large, that the Spirit may seek no other passage. D Represents the Vessel containing the Worm, or Refrigeratory. E The Receiver. All the ill convenience that is in this way of Distillation, it performs not its work so quick as Copper Stills, yet less dangerous, because the degrees of fire cannot harm. The use of this Furnace followeth. The manner of Distilling by the second Furnace. THe Materials being put into your Di∣stilling Vessel, let it be fast joyned to the Copper Globe in the Furnace on the one side, and to the Refrigeratory on the other, and the hole at the top where the materials are put in, kindle the fire under the Globe, until all the matter in the Distil∣ling Vessel boyl well, and the Spirit arise
and pass into the Refrigeratory, and there condensing runs into the Receiver; conti∣nuing the fire until all the Spirits be out of the Still, which is known by the taste. Of the Distillation by Balneo, and by Sand or Ashes. fireplace for distillation COnsidering that in the former Treatise of Oyl, I have mentioned Distilling by Balneo Maria, or by Water and by Sand, I thought therefore good here to make men∣tion of the Forms of such kinde of Furna∣ces which seemeth to be best, although eve∣ry man may vary his Form at his pleasure, and to his own conveniencies. AA Here represents the Fire-place, which ought to be fitted with Stopples of Stone.
The inner part of the Furnace under the Kettles, ought to be round. B Is the Ash-hole, or the place where the Ashes are taken out, and to clear the Grates. DD and o the Kettles wherewith to put Water or Sand in, for the placing the Bolt-heads, Retorts, or other Bodies for Distiliations or Digestion; and if you distil by Balneo Ma∣ria, or Water, you must have another Kettle with warm Water besides the Kettle your Retort or Long-body is in, to supply what evaporates. If you Distil by Balneo Maria, the Glass-body ought to be fixed to a plate of Lead that is round, and formed thus: glass vessel for distillation But between the Lead and the Glass ought to be some Straw or Cotton, to hinder the breaking of the Glass against the Lead. E Represents the Glass, a Limbeck, or Long-body.
CB Is the plate of Lead whereon the Glass stands, and has a hole in the middle, that the heat may come to the Glass bottom. CCG The strings fastened in the Lead. DD The Collar about the Glass, to which the strings are fastened to the Glass-body. Now the Glass being made fast to the Lead, put it as near as you can in the mid∣dle of the Kettle, and then fill it up with water: which being done, make your fire under. The water that evaporates must be supplyed with hot water, that the Glass be not left dry. As for Distilling in Ashes or Sand, let them first be sifted and strewed all over the bottom of the Kettles about three fingers thick, then place in your Glass, let it a lit∣tle stoop or curuate to that side where you intend to place your Receiver, and then fill the Kettles full of Sand or Ashes, and af∣ter apply your Receiver; then make your fire first small, after increase it according to Art. If you intend to distil by moist Sand, which is the best way, toward the latter end, that your Oyl may not be burnt or taste of the Fire, then keep pouring into your Sand-Kettle where your Glass stands in, hot water; always supplying it with
more hot water, until all the Oyl be come over, and the Distillation ended. By help of these Furnaces may the Spirits and Oyls of Vegetables be made, that is, the first Furnaces serve for the making of Oyls, and these for the rectifying of them; and the oftener any Oyl is rectified from calci∣ned Tartar it borrows, the more subtle, pe∣netrating, and of much more vertue. The Form of a Winde-Furnace, with the way of Distilling by an open Fire. furnace I Shall here in a brief way discover the Furnace, and manner of Distilling by a
naked Fire, used by Chymists for the distil∣lation of the Spirits of Salt and Minerals, requiring a strong Fire: but first I shall ex∣plain the Furnace. This Furnace may be built greater or lesser, at your pleasure, or according as your occasions serve, and may contain three or four Retorts at once, to be distilled at your pleasure; but I have proportioned this but for one onely. Let your Furnace be made like a Cillender, that is, round within, even from the bottom to the top. A Represents the Ash-hole, with Door or Stop∣ple made to it, for the drawing forth of the Ashes, and clearing the Grates above this: within the Furnace let a Grate be placed of the same height. B Representeth the way going into the Grate, or to put the fire in, which must be fitted likewise with a Door or Stopple, after this over-thwart you must bestow a strong Bar of Iron fenced with lute of Wisdom, which must reach from one side to the other of your Fur∣nace, signified by the Letter C, to place te Retort there upon D the Retort, whose neck cometh out at E, which is a part of the Fur∣nace left open till the Retort is in. E The Cover of the Still, to be placed on
after the Retort is in likewise. G The Vent-hole at the top, fitted with a stop∣ple. H The Receiver, to be luted at the neck of th Retort. I The Stool on which the Receiver standeth▪ Likewise 'tis necessary there were, besides th Vent-hole at the top, four Vent-holes on eac side, fitted with stopples. The Furnace being thus well understood▪ and all things ready, your Materials being in the Retort of Glass coated, or Earthen Retorts, and ready to be distilled, set th Retort in the Furnace, so that the bottom stand upon the Iron Bar, and the neck o the Retort come out on the open side, stoo¦ping downward as in the Figure, then lut a Receiver to the neck of the Retort wit good lute; which being finished, put o the Cover, and lute it fast to the Furnace and close up that open place where the nec of the Retort cometh out, very diligently stopping the greatest Vent-hole at the top and leaving one or two of the small hole open; let the Furnace be heated with little fire, and stop close the Door or Stop¦ple B, but let the Stopple A be open, o almost open at least, that it may have som
air to preserve the fire, and after take out the lower Stopple, increasing your fire ac∣cording to Art. Of the Distillation of Spirit, or Aquavitae, from Lees of Beer, Wine, &c. TO procure Spirit from Lees of Wine, Beer, &c. need little preparation, by reason they freely of themselves yield their Spirits, unless they be grown dry by stand¦ing, which then must be made moist again, that they may not burn; and being well mixt may be put into the Distilling-Vessel, the Joynts well closed, and so distilled until all the burning Spirits are come. By the same Rule after fermentation may the Spi∣rits of Pears, Apples, Herbs, Seeds, &c. be distilled. To Draw Spirits from all manner of Corn, or Grain. FIrst they must be prepared into Malt, and then ground, put into a Wooden Vessel, and pour upon the same so much cold water, as will mix it well; then after
add so much warm water as will suffice to make the mixture moist, and but just warm; mix then with it some new Barm, cover it close, expose it to a warm place, and then 'twill ferment and ascend, and after the se∣cond or third day descend again: Then di∣stil it, as before. Spirit of Fruits, Herbs, Flowers, Seeds, Roots, &c. SEed must be broken, or ground small. Fruit beaten in a Wooden Mortar and Pestle; Flowers, Herbs, Roots, onely cut small; and upon these pour warm water and ferment added to vivifie it as before, and so distilled. Spirit of Herbs, Flowers, Seeds, Roots, &c. another way. TAke eight Gallons of Aqua Vitae, ma∣cerate in the same about 3 l. of any dryed Vegetable, let it stand till the next day, and distil it according to Art, and dul∣cifie it with the one eighth part of fine white Sugar.
Of Chymical Oyls of Vegetables in general. THey must be prepared as for Spirits; Woods must be rasped, upon which pour as much water as may make them swim, so that when the Distillation is end∣ed, there may remain some water, that the Oyl may contract no stinking favour; let them stand until the next day, and then di∣stil the same, and the Water and Oyl will come over; which let stand in a temperate place until the Oyl ascend above the wa∣ter, or descend according to the nature of the Oyl, which after separate. Oyl, or Essence of Vegetables. LEt the Tincture of a Vegetable be ex∣tracted with good Spirit of Wine, which separate from fecies, and pour upon the same so much Spirit of Sulphur, as the one fourth part of the Spirit of Wine, digest it in a Long-body in Sand, until the Red Oyl swim at the top, which is Essence of that Vegetable the Tincture was extracted from, and must be separated with a Sepa∣rating-Glass.
The Elixirating of Vegetables, or their true Essence. BY the former Rules extract the Spirit, and Oyl; the Fecies calcine, and R with the Water of the Vegetable extract the Salt which filter, and after congeal in∣to a body of Salt, from which draw off the burning Spirits, and calcine the Salt a∣gain, rectifying the Spirit from the same so often, every time calcining the Salt, until the Spirit be so pure as that it will inbibe its own Oyl: then put the Salt dry and well calcined in an Earthen Pan glased, and set it in such a place as may be open to the air, yet not in the least toucht by any water; pour upon the same so much of the Spirit and Oyl as will just cover the Salt: cover it with a thin Lawn cloath, stirring it three or four times a day, inbibing it every day until the Salt has inbibed three times its weight of Oyl and Spirit, and this is true Elixir of the Vegetable.
Oyl of Vegetables in general by Expression. TAke what thing you please affording Oyl; stamp, beat, or grinde them small, put them in an Earthen Pan well gla∣sed, and moisten them with good rich wine, and set them over the fire until it be so hot that you cannot endure your hand in the same, stirring it well about, then put it into a square Canvas-bag, and press it strongly in a Wooden Press, and you obtain both Oyl and Water; keep the Oyl for your use, These Oyls have different vertues, according to the nature of the Vegetable they were made of, viz. Oyl of Hemp-seed maketh a man pleasant, merry, valiant, hardy, fierce to fight, void of fear; out∣wardly by Unction makes the face fair. The Oyl of Raddish-seeds, made with Rhenish-wine, is an excellent Dissolver of the Stone, provokes Urine, driveth out Gravel, expels Winde. Oyl of the Seeds of St. Johns-wort, is good against Poisons, Fluxes, Hemroids, Scabs, Ruptures newly begun, the place anointed, and wearing a Truss. It helpeth all manner of Wounds.
Of the making most excellent, durable Balsams of Vegetables. PRepare your Spirit, Oyl, and Salt, as in the Elixiration of vegetables, the Salt being often purified with the flegm of its own vegetables, and gently calcined every time (not melt) abstracting the Spirits eve∣ry time from the calcined Salt, until they will assume their own Oyl; Then dissolve the Salt again in its own proper flegm, and admix it with the burning Spirits and Oyls, put them into a Bolt-head, stop it well that the Spirits may not exhale, let it stand in B. M. until it be firmly united, and turned into a white Balsam, and then let the Glass cool, and before 'tis quite cold pour it out into a pot, and 'twill congeal into a Bal∣sam, which will dissolve in any liquor, and of very good odour and taste, for the same use as the vegetable, to be used inward or outward; and by reason of the Admixtion of the Spirit of Salt, these Balsams are dure able, and may be coloured according to th pleasure of the Artist, with the tincture o vegetables drawn with Spirit of Wine, an coagulated in the said Balsams.
Particular Ways of making Oyls of Spices, Herbs, Roots, Seeds, &c. with their Vertues and Ʋses. Oyl of Cynnamon. TAke of Cinnamon 2 lb. grosly beaten, to it add of Tartar and decrepitated Salt, of each 4 ℥, mix them together, put them into a Glass body, and pour thereunto so much Spirit of Wine as will almost cover the same; fit thereto a blinde head, lute it close that no Spirits may exhale, set it in Horse-dung or B. M. for fourteen days, then take off the blinde head, and apply an A∣limbeck close luted with its Receiver; di∣stil it with moist Sand, increasing the fire by degrees, so you obtain both Oyl and Spi∣rit, which separate and keep each close stopt for your use. The Vertues of the Oyl and Spirit of Cinnamon. This Oyl is very penetrating, and is good against all cold Diseases, especially for the Heart and Head, cures the shortness of Breath; although a man lay speechless with obstructions, and could scarce breathe, this would recover him. It helpeth all Diseases
coming of cold or flegmatick matter. It drives down Womens Terms, it bringeth forth Birth and After-birth, it helpeth the Cough, consumeth old Fluxes, causeth quiet sleep; it comforts the stomach, and exicates all noxious humours, corroborates the Heart, and is good in Feavers, Swoun∣ings, Poison, by taking two or three drops in Venice Treacle. It helpeth all wounds quickly; also the Spirit is good against the Diseases aforesaid, but the Oyl exceeds: But if to one pint of the said Spirit be added one ℥ of choice Myrrh, one ℥ of the best Aloes, and one ℥ of good Saffron, decre∣pitated common Salt and Tartar, of each three ʒ, digest them together in a body and blind-head fourteen days, and then distil∣led in moist Sand, you obtain an Oyl cu∣ring all the aforesaid Diseases, and like∣wise the Cough, Catarhs, Agues of all sorts, continual Feavers, Hectick Feavers, Asth∣ma, Epelepsis, Convulsions, Palsie, Dige∣stion lost, Tabres or Consumption of the Lungs, Cachexia, or Consumption of the whole body, the Dose to six drops. Oyl of Cloves. THe making of this is the same with the Oyl of Cinnamon.
The Vertue of the Oyl of Cloves. It strengthneth the Brain, Head, Heart, and Liver, reviveth the Vitals; it comfort∣eth the weak and feeble Stomach, helpeth Concoction, openeth Obstructions. It stay∣eth Vomiting, consumeth Flegm, helpeth a stinking Breath. It maketh the Heart mer∣ry, purgeth Melancholly. It healeth all manner of Wounds, Thrusts, Cuts. It com∣forteth the natural parts, it asswageth the Hemoroids, five or six drops may be drank every morning, or made into Lozenges, Troches, or Manus-christi, and so used. It preserveth from gray hairs, helpeth the Cholick, the belly being anointed. It cor∣recteth the wind, and swelling of the Spleen. It corroborates the Womb, erradicates the Yellow Jaundice; three or four drops ta∣ken every morning, helpeth the suffocati∣on of the Womb, or Mother. Oyl of Nutmegs. THis Oyl is made as the Oyl of Cinna∣mon. Its Vertues. It helpeth the Concoction of the Liver, by anointing the lower part of the Ribs on the right side; two or three drops drank cureth
the Cholick, outwardly used asswageth the swelling of the Spleen, by mixing two or three drops with Oyl of Fennel-seed, and anointing the Temples cures the grievous pains in the Head. If it be drank in Sweet-Marjorum water moves Venery, cures Ca∣tarrhs, Rheums, helps a cold and moist brain, strengthens those parts by anointing two or three drops at a time upon the crown; helps Swounding Trances, by ta∣king one drop upon the tongue. It brings down Womens Courses, brings forth the childe alive or dead, helps the palpitrations of the Heart. Oyl of Mace. THis Oyl is made as the Oyl of Cinna∣mon. The Vertues. It hath great vertues against the Cholick that cometh of cold, and against Rheums. It comforteth the Heart, Stomach, and Womb, the Palpitrations of the Heart, Ob∣struction of the Bladder, the Strangury, by drinking three or four drops fasting, in a convenient Vehecle, or it may be made in∣to Lozenges.
Oyl of Pepper. THis Oyl is made as the Oyl of Cinna∣mon. Its Vertues. This Oyl is hot and penetrating, it is good in windy Obstructions, the Cholick or flegmatick Humors; two or three drops drank it cures Agues, and is beneficial in all cold effects of the body. Oyl of Saffron. THis Oyl of Saffron is made as the Oyl of Cinnamon. Its Vertues. It is good in Pestilential Feavers, and against hot burning of the Body, Head, the Apoplexy, the Vertigo, the Hypocondraick Melancholy, the Cramp, or Convulsion of the Sinews, the Lethargy, Catarrh, Hoarse∣ness, Squinancy, the pain of the Teeth; it corroborates the Heart, helpeth the beating or panting. It helpeth Sadness or Sighing, without manifest cause; it increaseth lust, and helpeth sterillity: it stoppeth the run∣ning Hemroids, hinders Miscarriages in wo∣men,
strengthens the children in the womb, helpeth the hardness of the Spleen, Cholick, Jaundice, the Sciatica, Erysiplas; the Temples anointed helpeth a drunken man, cures St. Antonies fire. It stoppeth the run∣ning of the eyes, one dropt mixt with wo∣mens milk and dropt in. The Temples an∣ointed cureth Madness, causeth rest, clean∣seth old Sores. To make Oyl of Bay-berries. TAke of the best ripe Berries six lb, put them into a glass body, and pour there so much good strong Wine as will overtop it eight inches, put to every pound of Ber∣ries the powder of Tartar two ℥, and de∣crepitated Salt one ℥, let it stand close co∣vered in a warm place eight days, then put on a Still head, and distil the same in Sand, according to Art, with a moderate fire first, after increasing the same until almost all be come forth, pour then into the Sand warm water, continually supplying it as it evapo∣rates, that the matter burn not in the Glass, and so distil until the matter be all come o∣ver; separate then the Oyl from the Spi∣rit, and keep them both for your use. By
these ways may Oyls of all Berries be ex∣tracted. Oyl of Bay-berries. THis Oyl is made as the Oyl of Cinna∣mon. Its Vertues. It is good to be used for the Megrim, the Cholick, cold and rawness of the Stomach, the Hemroids, the pains of the Womb; hel∣peth cold effects of the Nerves and Joynts, the Iliack Passion, the Lethargy; it is good against the Quotidian and Tertian Feavers, anointing the Back-bone a little before the Fit. To make Oyl of Juniper-berries. TAke ten lb of Juniper-berries bruised in a Mortar until they be masht, put them in a Still-body, pour upon them so much water until it come within six inches of full, then lute on the head fast to the body, and to the Worm, make a moderate fire accord∣ing to art, and there will come over a water and Aetherial Oyl swimming on the top, which carefully separate that it mix not with the water, and keep it for your use.
Oyl of Juniper-berries. Its Vertues. THis Oyl separated and well rectified, doth excel almost all other Oyls, for it penetrateth through all the fleshy parts, the Veins, Nerves, and Bones, makes all Wounds and Ulcers apt and fit for healing, being drank every morning, or taken in warm Broath, it preserveth the body in health, it restores crooked, contracted, dead Members caused by the Palsie. It takes a∣way the black spots that are in the flesh after healing in Wounds or Ulcers. It healeth Cancers, Fistulas, Cramps, Swellings, old Ulcers, trembling of the Members, pains in the Side or Loyns, it resisteth poison and the Plague it self. It helpeth Imposthumes of the Liver, Spleen, Lungs, applying it outwardly, and taking it inwardly every day. It helpeth much sweating, by taking one ℈ thereof with warm Wine and Vine∣ger fasting in the morning. It disperseth flegmatick humours from the stomach, hel∣peth the Appetite to meat or drink. It ex∣pelleth all Feavers from the root, mundifies the Reins, breaks the Stone, helpeth the De∣centery,
Swelling of the Belly. It killeth Worms, it cures the Cholick, Fits of the Mother, Running Gout, being Elixirated with its fixed Salt, it causes much Urine without pain, brings forth Gravel, consumes the Stone, cures the Dropsie, helpeth the Strangury. Oyl of Calamus Aromaticus. TAke the newest and sweetest, make it very thin in subtile slices, and bruise it very well in a covered Mortar, then put it in a long body of Glass, and to every pound put of Tartar and decrepitated Salt, of each two ℥, mix them well, and pour thereon so much clear Fountain-water as will overtop the materials a hands breadth, lute fast a blinde-head, and digest it in a horse belly, or B. M. for twenty days, then put in a Re∣tort, and in Sand distil it with a gentle fire for four or five hours, after increase it until all the liquid substance be come off; sepa∣rate the Oyl from the Water, keep the Oyl close stopt. Its Vertues. It comforts the Memory, taketh away the Head pains and Catarhs proceeding of cold,
it helpeth the weakness of the Stomach, cures Swouning, or those faln into a trance, stayeth Vomiting, moveth the Terms, ta∣keth away the suffocation of the Matrix, mundifies and opens obstructions of the Reins, breaketh the Stone, stayeth involunta∣ry fluxes of the Seed and of the Urine; it re∣storeth the Hair, and preventeth Doting, Madness, and Melancholy. Oyl of Zedory. THis Oyl may be made as those afore∣said. Its Vertues. It hath a peculiar power against conta∣gious and evil Vapours exhaled from the Earth, infecting the Spirits and natural Fa∣culties: It cures biting and stinging of ve∣nemous Creatures, it cureth Ulcers and wounds, whether by stroak or gun-shot, it re∣solveth all Tumour both inward and out∣ward; it restores the Matrix to its place, i penetrates the Lungs, asswageth the Cough cureth the Asthmatick, great difficulty o Breathing, Wheasing; correcteth the stink∣ing mouth, helpeth concoction, it strength∣ens the Head, kills Worms, retaineth the fruit in the womb, and preventeth abortion▪
Oyl of Roses. TAke the most fragrant Roses, Damask or others, take the leaves with the whole Knots yellow in the middle of the Roses. To every pound of these put Sugar-candy and decrepitated Salt of each two ℥, grinde and beat them well in a marble Mor∣tar, then put them into a Body, and pour thereon a good quantity of good sweet Rose-water, cover it very close, and set it to pu∣trifie in some warm place for the space of three moneths, then put them into the Di∣stilling-vessel, and distil it according to Art, and you have Oyl and Water, separate them, and keep them close stopt. Its Vertues. It prevaileth against all pains in the Head, by anointing the Temples therewith; it mitigates violent Feavers by the same way: likewise using it about the region of the Heart, and a few drops drank, but if it be mixed with the Tincture of Gold, it is yet more excellent, for it purges the blood wonderfully, and roots out the Leprosie.
Oyl of Fennel-seed. THis Oyl may be made as that of Cala∣mus Aromaticus. Its Vertues. It comforts the Brain, helps the Weak-sighted, it helps the Memory, increaseth milk in Nurses, cuts Flegm, diminisheth the Stone, resisteth poison, cures the Falling-sickness, pains in the Eyes, insomuch that if a man were almost blinde, it would recover him, dropping one drop or two in the eyes morning or evening; helpeth the Dropsie, Jaundice, provoketh Urine and the Terms, comforts the Stomach, breaketh wind. To make Oyl of Anni-seeds, or Caraway-seeds. TAke Anni-seeds, what quantity you please, put them in a Long-body, be∣ing grosly beaten, pour thereon so much strong Wine as will cover the Seeds in a Long-body, put on a Blinde-head, and set it eight days in digestion, then take off the Blinde, and put on an Alembick head, lute it fast, and likewise to the Receiver, distil in
moist Sand, as in the Oyl of Bay-berries, and there will come over Oyl and Water. Oyl of Anni-seeds, or Caraway-seeds. Their Vertues. THese Oyls have one and the same ver∣tue, they are good against the Vertigo, helps Catarrhs distilling upon the breast, Indigestion, Winde in the Stomach, the Dropsie, Flux of the Womb, the Hearing, not above three years standing, if one drop of either of these Oyls be mixed with one drop of Oyl of bitter Almonds, and put in the Ears every morning. It helpeth the want of Appetite, by taking two drops mor∣ning and evening in Broath for some time; It helpeth difficulty of breathing, it opens Obstructions of the Liver, comforts the In∣wards, preserves from the Apoplexy, and Palsie; It preserveth children from Convul∣sions, or Falling-sickness, by giving two drops in Capon-water, or with Oyl of sweet Almonds, every morning; It is good for women that have not their Courses in due order, or for the vapour or windiness in the Womb. It comforts the Matrix, and bringeth forth the Birth. It stayeth yexing
and belching. In Plague time it is good to take two or three drops every morning, it expels fears and sadness, it prevents poiso∣ning; it is good for those that cannot sleep quietly, helps difficulty of Urine; it pre∣vents the Dropsie, by taking dayly four drops in the Water of Juniper-berries; It causeth a sweet Breath, it helps Venery, helps Bloody-flux, the Piles; it driveth forth poi∣son by sweat, 'tis good in the Stone; Chests or places anointed with this Oyl, no Moth will come near. Oyl of Dill. THis is made as aforesaid. Its Vertues. It expels winde in the Bowels, helpeth Gripes in the Belly, increaseth Milk, stayeth Vomiting, Lasks, provokes Urine, helpeth suffocation of the Matrix, the Fumes con∣veyed into the body; it stayeth yex or bel∣ching, it digests, resolves, and asswageth pains; it ripens Humors, helpeth hollow moist Ulcers, if it be used much inwardly, diminisheth the Seed, and hurts the sight.
Oyl of Cummin-seed. THis Oyl is made as the former. Its Vertues. It expels Winde out of the body, is good for griping pains in the Guts, used inward∣ly by mouth, and by Clister, and to be laid outwardly with Barley-meal. It helpeth bi∣ting of venemous Beasts, being made up in Lozenges is good for Coughs, opens Ob∣structions, and causes a lively colour being often used. Oyl of Parsley-seed. THis Oyl is made as the former. Its Vertues. It opens Obstructions of the Liver and Kidneys, being drank. It helpeth the Dropsie, maketh a good Digestion, drives out Gravel, provokes Urine, expels winde, and is good in the Stone. To make Oyl of Rosemary Flowers. TAke Rosemary Flowers what you please stamp them, and put them into a Glass,
and pour good wine thereon, and stopping it very close, set it in a warm place ten days, and then distil it in ashes in a soft fire, and so thou shalt have Oyl and Water, which separate; keep the Oyl close stopt. Oyl of Rosemary Flowers. Its Vertues. IT helps the Vertigo and trembling of the Arteries, if they proceed of Cold; it expels pestilential Feavers, provoketh Sweat, drives out Poyson, helps the yel∣low Jaundice, the pains of the head though of many years standing: It stoppeth the Whites in women constantly and preser∣veth Health, comforts the Brain, increaseth the Memory, fortifieth the Sinews and Veins, resisteth all troubles of Spirit, help∣eth defluxions of Humours, the Apoplexy, Palsey, Epelepsy, Convulsions; It helpeth Coughs and Hoarsness of the Throat, and soarness of the Breast, the Consumption and all diseases of the Breast and Lungs, it is most excellent for Palpitrations, or pains at the heart, restores and strengthens the Vitals, it cures Agues, being taken before the Fit, and the Stomach, Spleen, and Back-bone
first anoynted with the same, and then laid to sweat: It helpeth Digestion, Flux, loosness, recovers al Pains and Griefs in the Kidneys, Uretters, or Bladder, and is a most strong remedy against the Gravel in Kidneys or Bladder, taken in Renish-wine. It helpeth the Collick, it strengthens the Optick Nerves, helpeth the dazeling of the Eyes, strengthens the Sight, by drinking every morning two or three drops, and putting one drop into the Eyes, causeth pleasant sleep and driveth away all vain imaginations; It comforts the Heart, cleans∣eth the Blood, and thereby cureth Itch, Scabs; It maketh merry and causeth good Colours and a cheerful Countenance, it freeth Children from the Wormes by ap∣plying it to the Navel and Belly. It taketh away all causes that hinder Conception, provoketh womens Courses, helpeth all diseases of the Matrix, the Green Sickness, it helpeth all Defluxions, Feebleness, Weariness, debility of Members, Gouts of the Joynts, helpeth the Tooth-ach, Deaf∣ness, causeth Hair to grow, and hinders the falling off. It is an assured Remedy for any Sore or Ulcer in the Nostrils, Noli-me-tan∣gere, Pollipus, &c. It helpeth all diseases co∣ming of cold and moist Humours, though
never so evil; helpeth the Cancer, and Fi∣stula and such like, a dead Body inbalmed with this will not corrupt in many years, tis approved a most excellent Medicine, and of a grateful taste. Oyl of Rue. THis is made as the former. Its Vertues. It resists Poyson, helpeth the biting of venemous Beasts, it helpeth all diseases of the Eyes, one drop or two used in its own Water; it helpeth the Gout, Dropsie co∣ming of a cold cause; It restoreth benum'd Members taken with the Palsie. Oyl of Ive IS made as the former. Its Vertues. Made into Lozenges, it cureth Consump¦tion of the Lungs, Coughs, Catarrhs, short¦ness of Breath, Wheasing, the Collick, tw or three drops drank helpeth the Cramp▪ and shrinking of the Sinews, the Falling-Sickness, Dropsie, Gout, Ulcers, Scabs▪
Itch; It provoketh Urine, stayeth Vomi∣ting, breaketh the Stone, killeth Worms, helpeth chaps in the Hands, 'tis good a∣gainst the Pestilence; those that drink often of it, it expels the Poyson. It strengthens the inward Parts, stops womens Terms, it being anoynted from the Navel of a wo∣man to the Priveties, and the reins of the Back, it strengthens the Matrix, dryeth up the superfluous Moisture, and prepareth it for Conception. Oyl of Wilde Time. THis is made as the former. Its Vertues. It cureth Poysons, bitings of venemous Beasts, Stinging: if applyed to the Forehead & Temples, with Oyl of Roses and Vineger, t taketh away the Head-ach and Ravening Frenzie, it bringeth down womens Cour∣ses, helpeth Gripings of the bowels and Cramps. Oyl of Garden Time. THis is made as the former. Its Vertues. If three or four drops be drank in conve¦nient Liquor, it cureth the painful Cough,
shortness of Breath, provoketh Urine, i expelleth Birth, and After-Birth dead o alive, provoketh Terms, dissolveth con∣gealed Blood. Helpeth the Sciatica, wind in the Sides or any part of the Body, cureth the Gout, taken with Oximel: it ripens Flegm. Oyl of sweet Marjerom. IT is made as the former. Its Vertues. If drank in White-wine hinders the co∣ming of the Dropsie, helpeth such as can∣not piss but by Drops, helpeth the Gripes, Convulsion, Epelepsie, provoketh women Terms; If a little of this Oyl with Oyl o bitter Almonds snuft up the Nostrils, pur∣ges the head, helpeth those that have lost their Smelling, the Apoplexy; It helpeth the stinging of Scorpions. Oyl of Sage. IT is made as the former. Its Vertues. It helpeth congealed Blood in the Body,
provoketh Urine, comforts the Heart, eas∣h the Stone, the Head-ach, bloody Flux, ting of venemous Beasts, women with hilde, useing a little in drink; It hinders bortion or Miscarriage, and causeth the ruit to be retained; It maketh women uitful, it helpeth the Palsie, Apoplexy, d Obstructions of the Liver. Oyl of Penerial. THis is made as the former. Its Vertues. It bringeth down womens Courses, ngeth forth both Birth and After-Birth, ovoketh Urine, breaketh the Stone in  Kidneys, used in Honey or made up in zenges; easeth the Lungs and Breast m tough Flegm and gross Humours, it peth the Cramp and the Contracture of ews, if it be drank with raw Vineger stayeth Vomiting, and the gnawing ns of the Stomach; drank with wine and plyed likewise, helpeth the biting of ve∣mous Beasts; It is good against the Fal∣g-Sickness, the Temples and Nostrils a∣ynted with the same; It taketh away ming Pains and Giddiness of the Head,
'tis good for those whose Brains exceed i Moisture. It easeth the Pain of the Gou the Fumes helps the Windiness and hard¦ness of the Mother. Oyl of Mints. THis is made as the former. Its Vertues. It warmeth and strengthneth the Sto¦mach, dryeth up superfluous Moistur helpeth Vomiting, and helpeth those th Vomit Blood, being drank with Rose Vin¦ger, helpeth the Gripes, Collick, stoppe over flowing of the Menstruums, 'tis go against Gravel, Disury and Strangury. The Oyl of Peony-Seeds. THis Oyl is made as the former. Its Vertues. It is singular good in the Falling-Si¦ness, not onely for those of younger ye but for the more aged, taken in a conve¦ent Vehecle, for forty dayes fasting in  morning.
Oyl of Spike, or Lavender. IT is made as the former. Its Vertues. It is used in Griefs and Pains of the Head coming of cold Cause, as the Apoplexy, Falling-sickness, drousie or sluggish Mala∣dy Cramps, Convulsions, Palsies, Fainting, provoketh womens Courses, expelleth the dead Childe and After-Birth, helpeth the Collick, and difficulty in making of Water, Tooth-ach, smelt unto and applied to the Nostril and Temples, helpeth Fainting and Swoonings. Oyl of Worm-Wood. IT is made as the former. Its Vertues. It provoketh Urine, helpeth Surfets, swel∣ling of the Belly, causeth Appetite, preser∣veth health; 'tis good in the Quinsie, biting and sting by venemous Beasts, hardness of the Spleen, windy obstruction of the whole body, stinking Breath, dull Brain.
Oyl of Tobacco. IT may be made by it self, or by the Ad∣dition of Water. Its Vertues. This Oyl is rarely used inwardly by rea∣son of the noysomness outwardly, it helpeth the Megrim, Head-ach, pains in the Bow∣els, and Mother-fits, Tooth-ach, Kings-evil, biting of venemous Beasts, Worms in Children, Cramps, Aches, Sciatica, Itch, Scabs, Ulcers, Cankers, foul Sores, Wound, and old Ulcers, Impostumes, hard Swellings, Lice, Wounds with venemous Darts, biting of venemous Creatures. The last remaining in the Ashes, being Clarified and Inbibed with its own Oyl, and made up in some fit Troches, the quantity of half a Grain in each, and one taken every mor∣ning will help the Body soluble. Oyl of Clary. IT is made as the former. Its Vertues. It cleareth the Eyes and strengthen
them, strengthens the Back, pulls out Thorns or Splinters, allays Swellings, provoketh Lust, brings down womens Courses. It doth allay Fellons, Boyls, bringeth forth Birth and After-Birth, excicates Flegm. Particular ways of making the Oyls of Gums and Rozins, &c. To make Oyl of Mastick. TAke good Mastick, grinde it into a most subtile powder, put it in a Bolt-head, or Long-body, and pour thereon so much Spi∣rit of Wine as will overtop it six fingers breadth, lute it close and digest it in a horse belly, or St. Maries Bath, for eight and forty hours, or until the Spirit be singed, which then decant and filter. Pour upon the Fe∣cies more Spirit of Wine, and set again in digestion, and repeat this work of Infusion, Digestion, and Separation, until all be dis∣solved. Put all the tinged Spirits together, and stop the Glass close they are in, then take forth the Fecies, if any be, and mix therewith fine white Sand, put it into a Re∣tort, and pour thereon all the tinged Spi∣rits, place it in Sand, lute a Receiver, and by a very gentle heat distil off the Spirits,
and then increase the fire by degrees, until all be come off, then separate the Oyl from the Spirit, then apply to the Receiver again, well lute, and by a most strong fire distil off a red Oyl. To make Oyl of Mastick another way. TAke of Mastick one lb, of white Sand one lb, decrepitated Salt one handful, mix them well, put them in a Retort, where∣unto lute a Receiver which hath in it one pint of fair water, then distil it first with a moderate heat until the white fumes be come over, and they begin to come red. Change the Receiver, and apply another Receiver, making a strong fire, and distil from them a red Oyl like a Ruby, and at last a blackish Balsam to be used outwardly; the Oyl and Water rectifie per B. M. and se∣parate the Oyl from the flegm; keep it close stopt. To make Oyl of Mastick another way. TAke powder'd Mastick, fill the half part of a Retort with the same; pour upon the
same so much Spirit of Salt as will over-top the same, then place it in Sand, give fire by degrees, and there will come over first some flegm, and after a clear transparent Oyl, together with the Spirit of Salt, which keep by it self; after this a certain yellow Oyl, which receive by it self; and after a red Oyl. The Vertue of the Oyl of Mastick. THis Oyl is good against a hot doting brain, and also a cold brain; restoreth the Memory, helpeth a cold Stomachs stuf∣fing and choaking with Flegm, Catarrhs; it comforteth the Liver and all the Intrals; it helpeth against vomiting Blood, it con∣sumes and helpeth all inward Sores, Brui∣ses, Imposthumations, stoppeth Fluxes and Womens Terms, by drinking and often a∣nointing the belly; helpeth the pain of the back, Pushes, Chaps, Piles, Swellings of the Fundament, and against the falling down of the Womb, Matrix, it being anointed therewith, and also the bottom of the belly, and after putting it up; it helpeth the su∣perfluous and preternatural redness in the Face, and all other parts. It amends Deaf∣ness, and Weakness of Sight, restoreth lost
Smelling; it opens the obstructions and passages of the Nostrils and the Brain, the Scurvy and putrefaction of the Gums, and the exulceration of the tongue. It prevent∣eth Womens Breasts from growing over great; 'tis good for the Bursten, by anoint∣ing the place, and after wearing a Truss. It helpeth fresh Wounds. Oyl of Myrrh. THis Oyl is made as the first Oyl of Mastick. Its Vertues. It corroborates the Brain and cold Sto∣mach, expels winde in the body, and cau∣seth to go to stool; It expels tough Flegm, helpeth difficulty of breathing, the Lethar∣gy, Forgetfulness, and sleepy Disease; It expelleth Worms, and stoppeth too much flowing of Womens Courses. It preserveth the sight of the Eyes; two or three drops put therein, helpeth pains of the Ears. It maketh a sweet Breath, cleareth the Voice, stoppeth the Flux of the belly, comforts the Gums and Teeth, stayeth the Hair from fal∣ling. Oyl of liquid Storax is made the same way, and the vertues are the same.
Oyl of Storax Calamite. THis is made as the Oyl of Mastick. Its Vertues. It comforts the Breasts, Lungs, and in∣ward parts, three or four drop drank, and the place anointed with the same; It stops Catarrhs that fall upon the Breast & Lungs; It maketh a man merry, addeth courage; It taketh away singing of the Ears. To make Oyl of Benjamin. DIssolve Benjamin in Spirit of Wine, and then distil it as in the second Oyl of Mastick, or pour upon the Solution Spi∣rit of Salt, and distil it as in the third way of Oyl of Mastick; 'tis chiefly used in Per∣fumes. To make Oyl of Galbanum. TAke good Albanum, put it into a Bolt-head, pour upon the same some Spirit of Wine, stop it close, let it be resolved in
B. M. pour it then in a Retort with fine white Sand, and distil the same with a Sand-kettle, and distil off the Spirit with a fair yellow Oyl, which reserve. Its Vertues. 'Tis good against old Coughs, Short-windedness, or difficult breathing; it is good for such as are bruis'd within, Cramps and shrinking of Sinews, if it be drank with Oyl of Myrrh; It helpeth against poison, or venome drank, or Shots with venemous Darts, or the biting of Adders or Snakes; It provoketh Womens Courses, bringeth forth the dead Childe, Birth, and After-birth, applyed to the Navel bringeth the Matrix to his natural place. It moistens and softens, and draweth forth Thorns and Splints in the flesh; it helpeth the hardness of the Milt, or Spleen. The Perfume of this Oyl driveth away Serpents, no Beast will have power to seize him that is anointed all over with this Oyl. Oyl of Sagapenum. THis dissolved in Wine, or Spirit of Wine, is made as the Oyl of Gal∣banum
Its Vertues. This Oyl is good for the Stitch in the side, it helpeth the Cough, Cramps, Hip-pains of cold; being drank in Wine is good against Poison, and is also good against the biting of the Adder: Women with childe ought not to use it. Oyl of Opopanax. IT is made as that of Galbanum. Its Vertues. This helpeth Coughs, Stiches in the side, helpeth winde in the Matrix, and causeth a speedy Delivery to women. Oyl of Euphorbium. THis Oyl is made as aforesaid. Its Vertues. This Oyl is too hot to be used inwardly, outwardly mixed with some Honey, and applyed to the Navel, purges the Belly; It draweth out thorns out of the flesh, it help∣eth stiffness in the Joynts coming of cold, and the stinging of Adders.
To make Oyl of Amber. YOu may distil this Oyl of Amber as the Oyl of Mastick; Or, take one lb. of Amber grosly powdered, and three parts of fine white Sand, mix them well, and put them in a coated Retort of Glass, and ap∣plying a large Receiver well luted, being set in an open fire, distil it with a very small fire for the first eight hours, then let it be increased for six hours more, and after make the fire as strong as possible you may, until all be come over, or the Receiver be clear. The work being ended, take off the Recei∣ver, and pour the Oyl with the volatile Salt into a Retort, wherein put calcined Tartar about half the weight, place it in Sand and lute it to a Receiver. Make a small fire under, and first will come over a white Spirit, or Flegm, and next to it the true Oyl of Amber of a yellow colour: but when it begins to come red, take off the Receiver, apply another, and receive the red Balsam by it self. This red Balsam is used onely in Cataplasms, or Balsams; or in the Fits of the Mother, one drop drank is good.
The Vertue of the true Oyl of Amber. If this Oyl be rectified from calcin'd Tar∣tar four or five times, it is of a most admi∣rable vertue; three or four drops given in a morning, it profits against the Apoplexy, or Swooning-fits; but in time of the Fit rub the tongue of the Diseased, anoint the Pul∣ses, the Nostrils, and let them drink some down into the body. It helpeth the Cramp, Epelepsie, and Suffocations of the Matrix anointed outwardly, and taken inwardly in Betony-water, or Lozenges may be made with some of this Oyl in them. If you an∣oint the Nape of the Neck and Nostrils, it stayeth Catarrhs of the Head, it correcteth the malignant Air, especially in the Plague, if you take of this Oyl and Oyl of Cloves alike, mix them and dip some Cotten into them, and use to smell to the same often. It sendeth forth both Birth and After-birth, alive or dead, if from ten gr. to one ℈ be given at a time in Varvain or Mugwort wa∣ter, or Mamsie. It prohibiteth and driveth away Mother-fits, and the Suffocation of the Matrix, or Strangling of the Womb, if a few drops be used to the Nostrils, and about the Region of the Heart, Breast, and Navel, and by taking of it six gr. of Oyl of Cum∣min-seed, as much in Fennel-water. It hel∣peth
grief or pains in the Arteries, Veins, or Sinews, the Cramp or such like Contra∣ctures, or Weakness, by mixing it with some proper Balsam, and using it warm. It clean∣seth the Bladder, Reins, provoketh Urine, if it be drank in Rhenish Wine, or Parsley-water. It is good in the Plague, or those that have drank poison, if from 1 ℈ to 2 ℈ be drank in a Cardus-posset, and so sweated in a bed; and thus it cureth any other Fea∣vers, either Quotidian, Tertian, or Quar∣tan, &c. It helpeth Fainting, Swooning, Palpitrations of the Heart, Swimming of the Head, by drinking three or four drops in Piony-water. It strengthens the Heart, fortifies the Li∣ver, and dryeth up Rheums in the body, if it be drunk in Balm-water. It cureth the yellow Jaundice, if taken in Endive-water, or Succory, or Celendine. It helpeth the Chollick, one ℈ taken and some applyed to the grieved part. It brin∣geth down Womens Courses, seven or eight drops taken often in Balm-water. It cureth the Vertigo, and Dimness of Sight. It removeth the dulness of the Brain, and pricking in the Side, by drinking seven or eight drops in Wine. It cureth the pains in the Teeth, coming of Rheums, if it be mixt
with Plantine Water, and therewith garga∣rize the Teeth and Gums. If it be taken about twenty drops, with fifteen drops of Oyl of Cinnamon in a proper Vehicle, and the party lye still in the bed, it taketh all symptoms of the After-pains in women: the general Dose is from three drops to thirty drops. Oyl of Amoniac. OYl of Gum Amoniac is made as that of Galbanum. Its Vertues. It helpeth the Cough coming of moisture, it purgeth the Breast, and helpeth Ulcers there, it dissolveth hardness and swellings, taketh away the pains of the Gout, and used with Oyl of Wormwood upon the Navel, killeth the Worms. Oyl of Sarcocolla. THis Oyl is made as the former. Its Vertues. It is an excellent Balsamick Oyl in all Wounds, it filleth them with flesh, and pur¦ges
all old Sores without pain, breaketh hard Imposthumes; it helpeth those that abound with flegmatick humours. To make Oyl of Castor. TAke the fattest, cut it very small and thin, put it into a Bolt-head, pour thereto rectified Aqua Vitae so much as will cover the same, lute it close, and set it in B. M. two days, or till it be resolved, then pour it into a Long-body, and fasten on a Head close, set it in B. M. and lute a Recei∣ver, distil off the Spirit of Wine, and the Oyl remaineth, in which Oyl put three times its weight of fine Sand, and par-Re∣tort in Sand, distil off all the Oyl, which rectifie and keep for use. Its Vertues. This Oyl is good against all cold Cramps, Palsies, being mixed with Vineger and put up the Nostrils comforteth the Brain, ta∣keth away the pains of the Head, the Fal∣ling-sickness, it provoketh Womens Cour∣ses; 'tis excellent in the Apoplexy, it mo∣veth Venery, it cureth the Cholick, streng∣thens the natural parts, helpeth the Suffo∣cation of the Matrix, and helpeth Convul∣sions.
Of making Oyl of Frankincense. THis may be made with Spirit of Salt, or thus: Take of Incense one lb. and two lb. of purified Sand, let them be well mixt, put it into a Retort, set it in Sand, and apply a Receiver close luted, making a gentle fire under until all the substance be come forth, separate the Oyl for your use, and likewise the Water. Its Vertues. The Water of it self, if drunk, cureth the Winde in the Stomach, it helpeth Chaps in the Hands and Feet, if they be washed there∣with, and after applying the Oyl warm be∣fore the fire at night going to bed, then put on a pair of Gloves, and keep them on all night. It certainly helpeth simple Wounds, it preserveth flesh from putrifying, taketh away all Pains, helpeth all Bruises. To make Oyl of Turpentine. TAke good Turpentine one part, and three parts of good clean Sand, mix
them well in a Retort, or other Distilling-vessel, lute the Joynt very close, place it in Sand, and fasten on a Receiver; make first a small fire, and after increasing the fire to the height, until all the substance be come forth, and the Receiver be clear; take away the Receiver, and pour the matter in a Re∣tort upon calcin'd Tartar. Set it in Sand, and apply a Receiver luted, make a small fire, and there will come over a pure, clear, white, christaline Spirit, and after it a yel∣lowish Oyl, which being all come, which you may know by the colour, which at last will come red, change the Receiver, make a fire to the height, and draw off the Bal∣samick Oyl; reserve each by it self. The Vertue of the Oyls of Turpentine. The yellowish Oyl of Turpentine help∣eth obstructions and stoppings of the Urine, 'tis good against all Pains or Griefs in the Back and Loins, proceeding of Cold. It helpeth the Stone, pissing of Blood, and a∣gainst cold Catarrhs, breaketh winde, dis∣solveth the Plurisie, helpeth Appetite, the Stomach anointed, helpeth stinking breath. The red Oyl is good outwardly against waiting, pining Members, Contractures of Sinews, and also against wandering, run∣ning
Paines and Aches of the Joynts; it helpeth fresh Wounds in four and twenty hours. Oyl of the Philosophers, Or the blessed Oyl. TAke new Bricks never toucht with wa∣ter, break them into pieces a little big∣ger than a Walnut, burn each piece in the fire until it be almost red hot, then quench them in Oyl-Olive, and this putting in of hot Brick use until all your Oyl be inbibed with the pieces of Bricks; put these pieces of Bricks in a coated Retort, set it over a naked fire, and apply a large Receiver close luted, and distil it according to Art, in sixteen or twenty hours you obtain a white Flegm, a yellow Oyl, and red Oyl, which you may rectifie from calcin'd Tartar four or five times. Oleum Sanctum, or Oyl of Bricks. TAke new pieces of Bricks, and break them in little pieces, and put them into a large Crucible, and heat them almost red hot, and quench them in a Wooden Bole
almost full of old Oyl-Olive, and therein let them lye until they be cold, then take them out and quench more therein, and this do till all the Oyl is inbibed in the pie∣ces of Bricks, after powder them and put them into a coated Retort, and pour into the Retort so much more Oyl-Olive as may surmount the powder of Bricks a finger in thickness, and then put into the same Ca∣storum, of Spikenard, of Rose-seeds, anna one eight part (after they are well pounded and bruised) mix them well with the Pow∣der and Oyl, and set it in a warm place for forty days; which ended, set them over a naked fire, and lute thereto a large Recei∣ver, after make a fire under, which must be very soft and gentle at first, and by degrees increase the fire, at last force over all by a strong fire; at first will come over a water white, when it begins to come yellow then change your Receiver and lute fast another, and there will come a yellow Oyl; when it begins to come red, change the Receiver again, and reserve it by it self; rectifie the yellow Oyl from calcin'd Tartar four or five times. Its Vertues. The yellow Oyl well rectified, helpeth all cold Distempers whatsoever, the Falling-sickness,
the Palsie, Vertigo, Lethargy, and Forgetfulness. It provoketh Urine, break∣eth the Stone, and killeth Worms; It help∣eth singing of the Ears, proceeding of gross winde, the Sciatica, or Aches in the Hanch-bone, the Gout in the Hand, Knees, or Feet, weak Back, hardness of the Spleen, being drank fasting, and the place anointed very warm by a fire. It heateth the Brain, help∣eth Memory, asswageth the Tooth-ache, brings down Womens Courses, cause safe delivery to them, brings forth the Childe alive or dead. It dissolveth congealed blood, and purges the Lungs, and helpeth them that draw their breath painfully, by drinking a few drops with Syrup of Roses. It resisteth cold poison, as the sting of Scor∣pions, Adders, &c. cureth them that have taken black Poppies, or Henbane, into the body. To make Oyl of Wax. TAke the best yellow Wax, melt the same in an Earthen Glasen Pan, and put in∣to it three parts of Vitriol calcin'd white, mix it well and put it into a coated Retort, set it over a naked fire and lute fast a Re∣ceiver,
make a small fire, and raise it by de∣grees until all the Oyl be come forth, which will be yellow and very clear, which rectifie from calcin'd Tartar two or three times. Its Vertues. This Oyl cureth all wounds by annoyn∣ting and applying a cloath wet in the same in few days mollifieth and pacifieth Ulcers, it penetrateth and resolveth them, it mitti∣gates to admiration all pains in the Gout, and Joynt-Aches, it helpeth Ulcers, Chaps in womens Nipples, instantly it asswages all Swellings, it restoreth crooked and contracted Members, it cureth womens Breasts that swell and are Ulcerated. By applying this Oyl with Oyl of sweet Al∣monds, cureth the Bursten, applyed warm morning and evening, and then a Truss used. It stayeth the Hair from falling, and causeth it to grow, it provoketh Urine, cureth the Collick, helpeth the Sciatica, Stitches, and all other griefs of Cold. The Quintessence of Honey. TAke of good Honey one part, and three parts of pure clean Sand, mix them
well, and pour upon the same good Spirit of Wine, that it overtop it three fingers. Put upon it a Blinde-head, stop it very close, and digest it seven days, then take off the Blinde-head, put on an Alimbeck-head, and lute it fast to the Body and to the Receiver, place it in sand, and distil by a small fire all the spirit of Wine, and when the white Fumes arise, change the Receivers, and wet the head of the Alim∣beck with a cloath, and there will come over a white Water and a red Oyl, and keep it thus distilling until all the red Oyl be come off, the Recever cold, then put it in a Retort, and rectifie it for six or seven imes, and 'twill be of the colour of Gold, aving a grateful Taste, and pleasing Smell. Its Vertues. This is of such Vertue that if any drink thereof, he will recover presently, let his isease be what it will; If you wash any Wound therewith, 'twill heal quickly, it is good against Coughs, Catarrhs, and pains f the Spleen, and many other Diseases; n short it is a Medecine whereby the Physi∣an will get both honor and credit.
Quintessence of Mans Blood. TAke of the Blood of a yong sound Man, of which there is enough to be got at Spring and Fall, from such as let Blood for recreation, or as they say, for prevention of diseases; of this four pound, let it stand a while, and separate the Water and put to the blood of decripitated Salt, Spermaceti, of the marrow of an Ox, anna one pound, chafe and mix them very well, put them in a glass Long-body, with a Blind-head close luted, set it in a Horse-belly or B.M. for forty days, then take it out and distil the same in ashes, (applying a Still-head and Receiver close luted) to seven, times every time returning what is distilled upon the Fecies, and there will issue out first a white Water, next a pale, and the third a yel∣low, and lastly a red Oyl somewhat thick, put them all together in a Vessel close co∣vered with a Blind-head, circulate it a∣gain forty days in a Horse-bell or B.M. and they will become most grateful and of sweet savor. Its Vertues. If you give about three or four drops to a
sick man with a little Wine, although he was almost deprived of all his strength, and speechless, yet would he become strong, and speak again; If a man every day shall drink one drop of this Oyl with Wine, he shall become well in Minde, and sound in Body throughout all his Members, and shall prorogue and put off Age very long, he cannot be hurt with Poyson; It healeth the Leprosie, Morphew, Palsie, and such like Diseases; If one drop be drank every day in Wine, 'tis admirably profitable in the Hectick Feavor, if taken in some appro∣picated Julip, or Medecine for that pur∣pose; it preserveth the Body from all Sick∣nesses, by using thereof dayly, and help∣eth not onely some but every inward Dis∣ease; It cureth the Epelepsie or Falling-Sickness by drinking one ℈ every day in Piony Water for thirty days, if they begin at the new of the Moon. It cureth old Ul∣cers, Fistulaes, Bruises, being used both in∣ward and outward. Oyl of the Blood of a Stag. TAke new fresh Blood, put it into a Re∣tort, put to it calcind Tartar, and ap∣ply
a large Receiver close luted, make a gentle fire, that first the Flegm may come over, which being come off, apply another Receiver, and urge the fire a little more until the Oyl and volatile Salt be come off in the neck of the Retort, which mix with the Oyl, and seven times rectifie it from calcin'd Tartar, keeping the Oyl for your use. Its Vertues. It expelleth the very matter of the Gout fundamentally by stool, by taking some few drops in its appropriated Liquor. Oyl of Lignum Vitae, or Guaiacum. THis may be made parsee, or by the ge∣neral process of Oyls, by help of com∣mon Water, decripitated Salt, and Tartar: Its Vertues. Your Oyl must be made without addi∣tion, if you intend to have the Salt pure. The water that cometh over first with the Oyl may be drank in Wine, the Oyl is to annoynt Sores or Aches, and the Salt is to purge the Blood, and the Order to use it is thus; In the Gout, Pox, or Palsie, take one ℈ of the Salt, and twenty three of Ve∣nice
Treacle, and mix them well, and give of it to sweat, for it driveth out all Vene∣mous and gross Humors; if any Sores be in the Body, mundifie them first with the Salt, and after apply to it the Oyl, also give them every morning in the bed, two spoonful of the Water with Renish-wine, and sweat thereon, and thus you may help the Pox, Gout, &c. Oyl of Camphire. TAke Salt of Wormwood, and of Cam∣phire, of each ℥ 1 lb of sweet Almonds three ℥, mix them well and put them into a Glass close stopt, in a moderate heat for two days. Then distill them par retort in Sand, and when all is come off, to the re∣mainder in the retort put one ℥ more of the Salt of Wormwood, and pour in the Oyl hat was distilled, and mix them again, and hen distil it; this do five or seven times, the Joynts always well stopt, and you obtain a pure clear and effectual Oyl. Its Vertues. It freeth and delivereth the infected with he Plague, by drinking four or five drops n Cardus Water, or other Proper Liquors,
It helpeth Pains and Griefs of the Head, Swounding, or Trance. It helpeth the Collick, Vertigo, and Falling-Sickness, or Convulsions in Children, by drinking three or four drops in a proper Vehicle; 'tis good against all inflamations of any Part or Mem∣ber being anoynted. It happily cureth Wounds, otherwise incurable. To make Oyl of Moss and Whites of Eggs. TAke a quantity of Eggs, boyl them ve∣ry hard, and take the Youlks from the Whites, stamp them in a Mortar, then put them into a Frying-pan, and set them over the fire upon a Trevet, and make a good fire under, keeping continually stirring them until it be turned to an Oyl blackish, pour this matter separated from its Fecies into a pot, and keep it for your use, or re∣ctifie it par retort in Sand; It will come over as yellow as Gold. This Oyl helpeth Wounds speedily, maketh Hair black, it taketh away the Pains of the Hemrhoids, it is most excellent for burnings with fire, o scalding with water. The White being beaten, and by help o a Bolus distilled, yield a White Water some∣what
ponderous, which cohobated upon, addeth to the fixation and giveth a coral-line colour. Elixir Proprietatis. TAke clear Aloes, of the best Mirrh, and of the best Saffron, of each one ℥, let the two former be exactly beaten, and let the Saffron be made into a round figure by pounsing, let them be put up in a large ca∣patious Long-body, seal it up by melting the neck of the Glass, and setting it in Sand making a moderate heat under, that the Glass burst not, until you see the whole lump grow together in the bottom, and a clear Oyl with Water circulated on the sides of the Glass, which will begin in three days, then let the Glass be opened, and pour in∣to it one pint of highly rectified spirit of Cinamon without Flegm, lute it up again and set it in B. till all be resolved; then put therein three ℥ of Spirit of Sulphur, and close the Joynts well again, and digest it until the Elixir swim on the top of the Spi∣rit of wine, which separate by a Separating-Glass, and keep close stopt as a precicus Medicine.
Its Vertues. This Elixir preserveth Bodies from Cor∣ruption, preserveth the same from future Diseases; It cureth every Disease incident to the Body of Man, neither is there any vegetable Medicine that doth exceed it. It most certainly cureth all Agues, the Quar∣tain, continual, or any other Feavor, Asth∣ma, Falling-sickness, Palsie, Atrophia, Scabs, or Consumption of the Lungs. Rozin of Jallap. TAke Jallap well cleansed, dryed, and powdered, put it into a Bolt-head, pour upon it very good Spirit of Wine, that it overtop the same a hands bredth, close up the head, set it in B. M. until your Tincture is coloured as red as Claret, in eight or ten hours pour off that and put on more, and about the same time it will again extract the Tincture, which pour off to the other, and if you please you may extract once a∣gain; put all your Tinctures filtrated into a Cucurbit, and by B. M. draw off more than the half of spirit of Wine, which may serve for the same work again. Take your Glass out of Balnum and pour into it fair clear
Water, and the Jallap will precipitate to the bottom. Set it in B. M. again, and draw off the remaining Spirit of Wine, and the Water and Jallap will be onely left, which pour out in an earthen glased Pan, and wash it three or four times with fair water; dry it gently before the fire or in hot embers. By the same rule is Scamony prepared, which may be made in Pills with Oyl of Cloves, or ground to a very subtil powder with three parts of Cream of Tartar, and so may be dissolved in Water, Broath, or any Liquors, or mixed with Conserves of it self. Its Vertues. Its use is to evacuate superfluous Seriosi∣ties from all parts of the body, as the head and other parts; the dose is to gr. 20. Rozin of Scamony. TAke good Scamony, dissolve it in well rectified Spirit of Wine, and separate the Solution from Fecies. In B. M. abstract the half part of the Spirit of Wine, and to the remainder put cold fair water, and the Scamony will precipitate and become most white, the black matter will remain on the top, which separate and wash away. Then
take the Gum, and wash it well, and dry it and keep it for your use. Its Vertues. This Powder is a most noble, pleasant, and gentle Purge, having neither taste nor smell, purging the body without offence; It purgeth all manner of humours, and therefore good in all Diseases requiring purging Medicines. Its Dose inward is to twenty grains, either in Powder or made up with some distilled Oyls, or mixed with a like weight of Cream of Tartar in Powder, and half its weight of Antimony Diaphoretick, it is called Pulver Come∣kinne, and purges very safely all noxious humours; the dose is for twenty grains to fifty grains. A Cordial Stomachical Purgative Tincture. ALoes ℥ 3, Myrrh, Saffron, of each one ounce; Mastick, red Rose-leaves ℥ 3. Extract the Tinctures with rectified Spirit of Wine, which decant from fecies, and in B. M. separate the Spirit of Wine to thick Juyce, which whilest hot put up in a pot for your use.
Its Vertues. This is very effectual in cleansing the Stomach, helpeth Concoction, and suffer∣eth no putrefaction of Meat in the Stomach, preserveth the humours of the body from corruption, and gently purgeth the body. They may be used in Pills before meat, or at any time; the Dose is from twenty to forty Grains, and the Tincture before se∣paration of the Spirits, may be used for the like occasions, from one to three spoonfuls. Extract of Radij. TAke Coloquintida ʒ 6. Agrick, Sca∣mony, the Roots of black Helebore, and Turbith, ana ℥ ss. Aloes ℥ 1. Diarrho∣don Abatis ℥ ss. let them (the Diarrhodon Abatis excepted) be grosly bruised and in∣fused eight days, in the very best Spirit of Wine, in a vessel close stopt in the Sun, or B. M. let there be so much Spirit as may swim above it six fingers, then infuse your Diarrhadon Abatis in the same manner four days in Spirit of Wine, mix these, solution being first strain'd and prest hard, cast away the Fecies, put them in a Long-body of Glass with an Alembick-head, and draw off
the Spirit to the thickness of Honey, which keep for your use. Its Vertues. This Extract is of a very quick, search∣ing Pill, the terrene part being separated and onely the Tincture used, whereby it leaves no gnawing quality in the bowels. It cleanseth both Head and Body of Choler, Flegm, and Melancholly. It may be taken from one scruple to a dram, although the general Dose of these Pills be half a dram, taken in the morning, and keeping in a warm chamber all day. Laudanum Paracelsi. TAke the best Opium two ℥ with good Spirit of Wine, extract its tincture, Gum-henbane one ℥, extract his tincture; Diamber ℥ two, draw away all his tincture, Momia ℥ ss, and draw away its tincture, of the best Saffron ʒ 3. extract his tincture, mix all these tinctures except the tincture of Diambra, and let them stand in a warm place fourteen days close luted, then open it and add a little tincture of Diambra, stop it up again and let it stand six weeks, or thereabouts, till the smell of the Liquor be
almost vanished, then open the Glass and add tincture of Coral, clear yellow Amber, of each ʒ 1. of Magisteri Perlarum 1 ℈ Ossi de Corde Cerui 10 gr. Aurum Potabili, or its Tincture 30 gr. These with the Spirit of Diamber put to the other Tinctures, and stir it several days one after another, at last in B. M. draw off the Spirit of Wine, and when 'tis almost dry, add of Ol. Succini, Ol. Maci, and Ol. Cinnamoni, of each 1 ℈. put it out whilst hot, take one half part and reserve for women; to the other part add 10 gr. of the Extract of Muk, and set in a warm place that it may dry. Its Vertues. It may be given in liquor, or made up into Pills, the Dose is to six grains. It help∣eth the Cholick, Frensie, Hot Feavers, the weakness of the Stomach, the Yex, Vomi∣ting, causeth quiet sleep, stops Fluxes. If it be mixed and taken with the former Oyl of Cumphior, it cureth the Falling-sickness and Convulsions. Preparation of Opium, or Laudanum. TAke of Opium 6 ℥ of powdered Cream of Tartar, one ounce of Spirit of Salt,
two ℥, put them in a Bolt-head, close the mouth of the Glass, set it in B. M. for twen∣ty four hours; open the Glass and put in one pint of the best Spirit of Wine, close it up and set it in B. M. to extract, and after extraction decan the Spirit, and put on more Spirits, and extract further the Tin∣cture: These tinged Spirits put together in a Glass Gourd, and add of Oyl of Saf∣fron twenty gr. of Oyl of Clove one ʒ. of Oyl of Rosemary one ʒ. draw off the Spi∣rit of Wine to a thickness, which take out and put in a clean vessel. Its Vertues. The Dose is for one, ten, five, or six gr. to men; it may be used in all hot Distem∣pers, causeth quiet sleep, mitigates pains outward or inward; causeth sweat, and hel∣peth the Epilepsie in children. Corrector of Vegetables, or the Preparation of Salt of Tartar. TAke of powder'd Tartar and Peeter, of each one pound, mix them well put it into a earthen pipkin, and give fire from a∣bove and the Peeter will take fire and cal∣cine all the Tartar, pour upon the Salt
warm Water, and extract the Salt with Water, after all the Salt is extracted, pour into a Long-body and draw off all the Wa∣ter to a dryness, which Salt put into a Cru∣cible, and lute it strongly into a blew mass; which ended, whilst it is yet warm, beat it in a warm Mortar to powder, and put it in∣to a new earthen Pan, and pour upon it so much Oyl of Turpentine as will just cover the Salt, stir it well with a stick and cover it with a thin cloath that no dust come in, and set it so that it may attract air, and yet no Water by any means may come to it; stir it three or four times a day, and when the Oyl is wholly inbibed, add so much more Oyl, stirring it continually, and keep inbi∣bing the said Salt until it has drank up three times its weight of Oyl; which finished, your Salt is prepared for your use. If this matter dissolve in fair water and shew no Oyleness, it is then well prepared, let it be well dryed, and to it add three parts of good Potters-earth, put it into a cted Retort, apply a Receiver, and by force of fire drive over all the Salt which will rise white and clear. Its Vertues. This is the true Corrector of Vegetables whereby poysonous matters are reduced in∣to
good and wholsom Medicines; this be∣ing put upon any Matter, either Vegetable, Mineral, or Mettal, it so altereth it and o∣pens the body, that the pure may be sepa∣rated from the impure. It radically dissol∣veth Pearls, Coral, or any other Stones, it maketh of Gold Potable Gold, and of Silver Potable Silver, and being joyned with the Tincture of Gold, and both brought over the helm, 'tis a most general Medecine far exceeding any other that can be made by the art of man, but will without heat or any trouble be prepared in six months, but in a shoer time by Art. If it be circulated with graduated Spirit of Wine they will unite. Mathews, Or rather Starkies Pill. TAke two pound of prepared Salt of Tar∣tar, and one lb of powder of black Hel∣lebore, and one pound of Opium, dissolved in Spirit of Wine, the Wine again extracted to a thick substance, which mix with the Salt of Tartar and Hellebore until they be all well incorporated, which then let it be continually fed with Oyl of Turpentine that
it may be kept moist, and the Salt made more volatile and fit for Medicine. Its Vertues. It is a most excellent Diaphoretick, Diu∣retick, Anodine Medicine; It cureth all pains of the Head, a Pill taken at night and a little applyed to the Temples, the Me∣grim, Vertigo, Frensie, Lethargy, helpeth the Memory, cause quiet rest, 'tis good in the Falling-sickness, Convulsions, Cramps, Stiches, Aches. It cureth the pains of the Teeth, a little applyed to the Tooth, it help∣eth the Cough, Asthma, Plurisie, Inflama∣tion of the Lungs, palpitrations of the Heart, weakness of the Stomach, Yeking, Vomiting, pain in the Stomach, windiness of the Stomach, the Flux, Diarrhea, Dycen∣teria, the Chollick, Iliac Passion, Worms, obstructions of the Liver, and Spleen, the Dropsie, Anasara, Ascites, and Tympanites, Inflammation of the Reins, Ulcers there, Gonnorhea, obstruction of the Urine, dif∣ficulty of Pissing, the Disury and Strangury; It bringeth down womens Courses, and helpeth the overflowing of them, the infla∣mation of the Womb; It hindereth aborti∣on, cureth windiness or exuleration of the Womb, taketh away Barrenness, cureth the Gout, it helpeth all manner of Feavers,
as the Synochus, continual or burning Fea∣vor, the Tertian, Quartain, or Quotidain; It bringeth forth the Small-pox, Measels, 'tis a very general remedy, curing most Dis∣eases and not hurtful to any; the dose is twenty Grains. Dulcified Salt of Tartar. TAke Salt of Tartar that hath bin dis∣solved, filter'd and congealed into a Body until it be easily fusible and melt like Wax: which sign being known beat it to powder, and pour upon it so much Spirit of Wine as will cover it, which stir well for four days, six times every day and night, and at the fourth day place it in Sand, and draw off the insipid moisture, which being done put on more and proceed as before to five times. Its Vertues. It is good for Ulcerated Lungs, and of the Bladder, and freeth the Stomack from sower belching, one ℥ made up in a Lo∣zenge and taken at a time.
Spirit of Tartar. IT is impossible to obtain this Spirit by the common way par Retort, but if Re∣torts be made of good Earth (not poreous) with a pipe at the top, and so placed over a naked fire, with a Receiver luted very fast that a man may cast in the Material by a spoonful at a time, and when the first Spirit is setled cast in more, and by this means you will obtain a Flegm Spirit, Veneger, and red Oyl, in the Retort will remain the Salt, which calcine in a Crucible and put half of the Salt in a Glass Retort, and pour upon the same all the matters that were distilled; place it in Sand, and apply a large Receiver luted, and make first a small fire and the Spirit will come off, and after the Flegm, mix the Veneger with the red Oyl. You may save each by it self by changing your Receivers, and rectifie your Spirit once or twice more from calcin'd Tartar; this may be distil'd in a common Retort putting in all at a time. If there be fitted a pipe of Tin, so that it may pass through a Tub of cold water, and one end of the Pipe fastned to the Retort, the other end
fastened to the Receiver, which likewise may be placed in cold water. The Vertues of the Spirit and Oyl. This is a most powerful Medicine against all obstruction of the whole Body, cureth the Scurvy, Colick, Cramps, Contractures, brings forth the Small-pox, Meazles, pur∣ges the Blood, helpeth malign Feavors, the Epelepsie, Convulsions, and many other Diseases proceeding from corruption of Blood. Likewise 'tis of excellent use for the extracting the Tincture of Metals and Mi∣nerals. The Oyl rectified from calcined Tartar will become clear, and is good to disperse kernels or knobs risen up in the skin, allay∣eth all swelling pains, the Gout, Sciatica, Stiches, Aches, Cramps, or Wind-Gout. The Caput Mort being calcin'd again to a white or blew Mass, may be extracted with fair water filtred and congealed into a white Salt, called the Salt of Tartar. And if it be put upon a Marble and a dish set under, it will resolve it self into an Oyl, which is used by women to take away Sun-burnt, Morphew, and Freckles in the Face; if Oyl of Vitriol be poured upon this Salt suffici∣ently, 'tis called Tartarium Vitriolatum.
Spirit and Oyl of Cranium Humanum. TAke of it as much as you please, break it into small peices, which put into a Re∣tort of Earth, or Glass coated, set it in an open fire and lute fast a large Receivor, and make your fire by degrees, and so increasing your fire to the highest degree, and there will come over a yellow Spirit, with a red Oyl and volatile Salt, which rectifie from calcind Tartar, and they will become fair and clear, only when all the spirits are come, change the Receiver for the red Oyl. Its Vertues. The Spirit opens obstructions of the whole Body, and strengthens the feeble Parts, cureth Falling-sickness, the Dropsie, and cureth the Gout; the Dose from three Grains to twenty Grains. Oyl and Spirit of Harts-Horn. THis is put in and distilled, as that of Cranium Humanis, viz. being cut or broke in small pieces, and there will come over a Spirit and red Oyl, with the vola∣tile
Salt, which rectifie from calcined Tar∣tar. Its Vertues. The Spirit rectified is very penetrating, and therefore opens all obstructions of the whole body, purging by sweat and urine all noxious humors, very useful in the Plague, Pox, Gout, Leprosie, Scurvy, Small-pox, Measels, Surfers, Pluresie, malign Feavers, the Melancholly, Hypocondraick, or any other Disease requiring sweat. The red Oyl rectified, cureth the Quartane, and all pains in the body coming of cold, Wounds, Brui∣ses, or Hurts. The Dose of the Spirit is ʒ ss at most, and the Oyl to thirty drops. Spirit of Mans Hair. FIll a Glass Retort with Hair cut small, set it in Sand, and apply a Receiver lu∣ted, and make your fire to it, and there wi l come over a Spirit and Oyl, rectifie them from calcined Tartar, and they will be clear, the Spirit smelling like urine. Its Vertues. This Spirit applyed to any part of the body outwardly, cureth the Scab and Itch▪
It is unpleasant to take, and therefore rare∣ly used inwardly. It dissolveth common Sulphur, reducing it into a milk, which with further ripening will turn into a blood-like colour. Spirit of Ʋrine. TAke Urine of men drinking Wine, put it into an Earthen Vessel, boyl away one third part, put the remainder in a very high Long-body, and place on a Still-head, lute fast the Joynts, and apply a Receiver, make a strong fire that the matter boyl, and there will come over the Spirit, together with the volatile Salt; distil this Spirit four or five times over, and after rectifie it from calcined Tartar three or four times, every time calcining the Tartar, and keep it in a good strong Glass close stopt. Its Vertues. The strong Spirit or Salt used causeth strong Sweats, and purges by urine likewise. It purifieth the blood, opening the obstru∣ction of the Spleen, cureth Feavers, Tertian and Quartane; It disperses all tough, gross, venemous humours; it bringeth down wo∣mens Courses, helpeth the suffocation of the
Matrix; the Salt perfectly cureth the Jaun∣dice. The Dose is to fifteen grains. Externally applyed it cooleth all inflam∣mations, curing the Erysipilas and Gan∣greene, easeth the pain of the Gout, laid to the Pulse is good in ardent Feavers, cureth the Tooth-ache. If it be applyed Clyster-wise it killeth Worms. Spirit of Wine. TAke as much French Brandy as you please, put it into an Alembick-still, and hang in the Still a great Spunge, and lute fast your Receiver, distil it with a small heat until all the burning spirits be come, then take off the Receiver, and pour the spirit in the Long-body upon salt of Tartar well calcined, and distil it in sand (the Joynts well luted) until you see the Veins in the head of the Still spread abroad and vanish, then cease. Calcine the Tartar a∣gain, and return the spirit upon it again, and this do for five times, and your spirit will be pure and of great strength. Its Vertue. This Spirit of it self is very cordial, pe∣netrating every part of the body being
drank, and 'tis good in all cold defluxions, ortifies the Optick Nerves; 'tis of great use or extracting of Tinctures of Herbs, Roots, Gums, &c. Animal Mercury. TAke one part of the best spirit of Urine, or rather its salt, and four parts of pure artarized spirit of Wine, put the salt in a reat thick Glass Bottle, and pour upon it he spirit of Wine tartarized, and presently op the Bottle, 'twill be full of fumes, shake t well, and the spirit will both be united nd congealed into a salt and dry, if no egm were in the spirits, otherwise there ill be some water, which separate from he salt, which will be white and strong like alarmoniack spirit; Divide this salt into our parts, of which take one, and four parts f spirit of wine rectified to the height, let  be hermetical, seal'd up in a strong Bolt-ead, and digest it in B. for fourteen days, r till unition, then open the Glass and put n another part and digest it again, and this o till the spirit hath inbibed all the salt, which after rectifie par Retort. This serv∣th to extract the Tincture from Mineral nd Mettals.
Spirit of Vineger. TO make spirit of Vineger, you must fill your Glass with what quantity you please in sand, evaporate by a gentle heat about two third parts, the remainder urge by a stronger fire, and keep for your use. Its use is to cool Inflammations, helpeth Scaldings, Burnings, if mixt with Sacco∣rum Saturni. Spirit of Vineger. TAke distilled Vineger eight parts, and one part of Salarmoniack sublimed, di∣gest them fourteen days, and put it into a Retort and lute to a Receiver, urge it in sand until all be come over. Spirit of Vineger. TAke twelve pound of good Vineger, tw pound of Honey, two ℥ white Pepper▪ Mustard-seed bruised six ℥, set it in the su or a hot place fourteen days, and then ev¦porate
the half part gently, the remainder ring over by a strong fire. Spirit of Vineger. TAke Honey, Salt decrepitated, of each one pound, of the best Spirit of Vine∣ger two pounds, let them stand one moneth n the sun, and distil them in sand, and co∣obate the spirit four times upon fecies. Its Vertues. It serveth to dissolve Corals, Pearls, Fish-ells, Minerals, Mettals, and to make their Magisteries and Salts. A Water for the Falling-sickness. TAke of Swallows cut in pieces without separating any thing from them, six nces; of Castorium cut small one ounce, ix them well, and infuse them all night in anary-wine, then put them in a Retort, nd distil them in sand until all be dry; co∣bate the liquor three times. Its Vertues. This Water being drank to the quantity  two spoonfuls every morning, cures them t have the Falling-sickness.
Tincture of Coral. TAke Salt of Tartar that has been strong∣ly fused in a Crucible, dissolve it in fair water, to one part of Coral let be three or four parts of Tartar, put the Coral Pow∣der into the Tartar and Water in a long Glass, set it in sand, make a strong fire, and the Tartar will dissolve the Coral. The Coral being dissolved, filter the solution, and deduct all the moisture in B. M. and there will remain a pleasant honey, thick Liquor; Let it be dried perfectly in a sand, and extract the Tincture with well rectified spirit of Wine, which being well coloured decant the same, and separate the half part of the spirit of Wine, and keep the Tincture for your use. Its Ʋse. Its use is to fortifie the Vitals, to help Melancholy, and to stop Fluxes. It helpeth the Convulsions and Falling-sickness; but the Spirit is far more effectual.
Magistery of Coral. DIssolve Coral in good distilled Vine∣ger, and when all is dissolved, put in∣o the same a good quantity of fair water, nd the Precipitate or Magistery will fall to he bottom, which edulcorate with fresh ad∣itions of water until it be sweet, and keep t for your use. It hath the same vertue as he Tincture. Spirit of Coral. TAke four ounces of Coral, one pound of Cream of Tartar powdered, and s much water as will dissolve the Tartar, put them into an Earthen Pipkin, boyl them until the water be coloured with the Coral, and it be dissolved, continually supplying the evaporated water, and when solution is made, evarate the water to a thick juice, which distil par retort in a naked fire, until all the spirit be come off.
Spirit and Tincture of Pearls. TAke one part of Pearls powdered, four parts of Cream of Tartar, and as much water as will dissolve the Tartar, put them into an Earthen Pipkin, and set them upon the fire and boyl the same, still supplying the evaporated water until the Pearls be dissolved, then evaporate the water to a matter as thick as Honey, which par Retort in a naked fire distil into a Spirit; or with spirit of Wine before distillation you may extract the Liquor or Tincture; the Ma∣gistery is drawn as Coral. Its Vertues. This Spirit is more powerful than the Liquor or Tincture, it is a real Cordial, strengthening the Vitals, and powerfull purifying the blood by sweat and urine; It cureth the diseases of the Spleen, helpeth Consumptive persons, driveth out Small-pox, Meazles, cureth Surfets, helpeth to restore decaying nature; The Dose is to twelve Grains.
The Essence of Coral and Pearl. DIssolve Coral or Pearl in good spirit of Salt, and upon the dissolved matter pour well rectified spirit of Wine, let the Glass be closed up most perfectly, and set it in B. M. and in few days will be extracted the Essence, which decant and separate the Wine from the Essence, keep close stopt for your use. These Essences have the same vertue as their Spirits. Magisterie of Egg-shells. DIssolve Egg-shells in good distilled Vineger, and after solution precipi∣tate the Calx with fair water, let it settle, the Calx will precipitate in a white pow∣der, which is Magisterie; which sweetned several times and dryed in the shade, put up for your use. Its Ʋse. It is approved for cleansing the passages of the urine, to dry up old and watry sores, but most excellent for a Fucus to beautifie women, being mixt with other Unguents,
and applyed to the face and hands, it pro∣duceth a rare white skin. Preparation of Burnt Alume. TAke Alume, put it into an earthen Ves∣sel, set it over the fire till all the moi∣sture be gone, then make it red hot, and af∣ter a while put it into another pot, and pour so much Vineger as will cover the same, set it on the fire and evaporate the Vineger, and let it stand till 'tis red hot, and as white as snow, then keep it for your use. Its Vertues. This is very excellent to dry up old Sores, and take away dead and proud flesh. Calcination of Punex Stone. TAke Punex-stone, heat it red hot, and quench it four or five times in Wine vi∣neger, the last time onely heat it without wetting it again, which reduce into a very fine Powder. Its Vertues. It is used for the Calcination of Mettals.
A certain Remedy for the Scrofula. TAke Sea-spunge calcin'd to a coal 3 ℥, bones of the Fish  burnt to ashes, Long Pepper, Ginger, Pelitory of Spain, Gauls, Salgem, calcin'd Egg-shells, of each one ℥, mix them with distilled Water of Spunge, and let it be dryed by degrees; of this Powder may be taken half a dram, with half an ounce of Sugar, let it lye in the mouth and melt there, and after swal∣low it down as it melteth. It may be made up in Lozenges or Troches, and so melted in the mouth. Ʋse. This Medicine perfectly cureth the Dis∣ease commonly called, The Kings Evil. Oyl, or Ointment for the same. TAke Oyl of Bayes eight ℥, Olibanum, Mastick, Gum-Arabick, Rozin, of each three ℥, put them in a Retort in sand, and distil them, and rectifie them from Pot-ashes.
Elixir of Salt of Tartar. TAke three parts of Salt of Tartar, fuse it in a Crucible, and then powder it yet warm, put it in an earthen glased Pan, then take Oyl of Cinnamon, Oyl of Cloves, and Oyl of Spike, of each one ounce, pour some of these Oyls upon the Salt and stir it well, inbibing it until it hath drank up all the Salt. This cureth Heart-beating, Apo∣plexy, Vertigo. Compound Spirit of Tartar. TAke salt of Urine clarified, sublimed Salarmoniack, salt of Tartar, of each one part, powder and mix them well, an pour upon them good distilled Vineger lute them close, set them in B. M. for forty days, then draw off all the moisture tha will come off in B. M. and mix the remain¦ing matter with three parts of good whit dry sand, urge them by Retort in a nake fire, and you may obtain a most powerfu Spirit for the making the Mercury of Met¦tals.
A most general Chymical Salve, curing all Wounds, Ʋlcers, Fistulaes, Cancers. TAke of the best Oyl of Wax purified, calcined, rubified Vitriol, of each alike proportion, incorporate them well, after take of pure Venice Turpentine washt with Rose-water, as much as either of the former, put them in a Glased Pan, and let them stand over a small fire, until it has attain'd he substance of Salve, or thick unguent, put it then into a Glass and keep it for your use. A general Water for the Compleating the Cure of Cancers, Fistulaes, Ʋlcers, &c. TAke 1 lb. of Roch Alume, 1 lb. of Roch Borax, 1 lb. of Verdigreece, and 1 lb. of rubified Vitriol, and 1 lb. of good Peeter, all pulverized, mix them and distil them like common Aqua-fortis; Rectifie this wa∣ter four or five times, and to it put 1 lb. of Spirit of Verdigreece, and 1 lb. of Spirit of Sulphur; this being done, in a Long-body put in 1 lb. of yellow Bees Wax, and pour all these Spirits upon the same, put on a
Still-head, let it stand four days, and draw off the spirits in sand, the Wax wil be black; take the Wax out and put in more Wax, and pour the spirits upon it again, and di∣stil the same, and this do so often until the Wax be no more coloured by the Wax, but remain of its own colour, then the Water is prepared. Its Ʋse. Mingle this Water with its weight of Spirit of Wine, and keep it in a Glass close stopt for your use, then dip a feather in the same, and touch a Serpigo, Noli-me-tan∣gere, Cancer, Wolf, or any feted Wound o Ulcer whatsoever, with one drop or two o this Water, it heals it from the bottom dries up superfluous moisture, consumet the venemous Humors, raiseth up flesh from the bottom, by the super-position of the a¦foresaid Plaister. A Rare Cordial. THe Extract of the Roots of Contra-yer¦va, black Tips of Crabs claws powder¦ed, of each two ounces; of rugged Pear, re and white Coral, Crabs Eyes, of each on ounce, these must be finely ground and dis∣solved
in Juice of Lemmons, and the Juice again abstracted; let it be made up in lit∣tle round balls, White Amber and Christals ground into fine Powder with Rose-water, made into little balls, anna 1 ℥, Harts-horn calcined white 1 ℥, ground with Syrup of Citrons and Gilliflowers, made sharp with spirit of Sulphur, and made in Cakes. Bezor occident in powder, Terra Lunni anna ℥ ss. Antimony Diaphoretick ℥ ij. Cochonillea powdered ℥ ss. Ambergreece 1 ʒ ss make half a dram, and let them be made up with this following Jelly. Take Harts-horn shavings, the skin of twenty four Snakes and boyl them in a pot, covered with Water of Cardus, till it come to a perfect Jelly, unto which add Oyl of Cloves, Cinnamon, Saffron, and Rosema∣ry, of each 2 ʒ. Its Vertues. It is a most excellent Cordial, curing swooning, fainting Melancholy, putrefa∣ction of Blood, small Pox, Measels, the spot∣ted Feaver, Plague, and all Infections, where there is occasion to drive out the humours by sweat, or to preserve the heart; the Dose is from ten to thirty grains in Cardus, or any other Cordial water.
A very excellent Plaister, or Seer-cloth. TAke Oyl of Bricks 2 lb. Lead calcined red, and Lead calcined white, of each 1 lb. beat them, and fist them, and incor∣porate them with the Oyls, then put in Spanish Soap 12 ounces, incorporate these well all in an Earthen pan, put them upon the fire, making it very slow for an hour and a half, continually stirring it with a stick, till the matter turn from red to grey, and so continue stirring till the matter turn of the colour of Oyl, and somewhat dark, try it upon a Trencher when this sign ap∣pears; for if a drop be let fall upon a Tren∣cher and it cleave not, 'tis enough for Seer-cloth, dip them in the Salve before 'tis ta∣ken off the fire, and smooth them on a board. Its Vertues. It mightily strengthens weak backs, and helpeth the Gonorrhea, laid to the belly, easeth the Cholick; to the stomach causeth a good appetite. It serveth in all Sores, Cuts, Wounds, Ulcers, &c. A most rare Chymical Balsam. TAke Oyl of Bricks 4 pounds, pure Bees Wax, Rozin, Turpentine, of each two
pounds, of black Pitch 8 ounces, in an Ear∣then glased pan, melt first the Pitch and put in the rest of the materials, keep them con∣tinually stirring until all be very well dissol∣ved, then take it off from the fire, and add by a little at a time Oyl of Spike 4 ounces, and after that Oyl of Turpentine, Oyl of Wax, of each 4 ounces; Galbanum dissol∣ved in White-wine 4 ounces, Storax liquid 4 ounces, stir them all well together, and pour them out whilest hot, and keep them for your use. Its Vertues. It cureth all diseases coming of cold or winde, as Head-aches, Stitches, Indigestion, the place afflicted first well chafed with a warm cloth, & after with this Balsam warm chafed in with your fingers. It helpeth all Bruises, Aches, Pains, the Gout, Palsie, Scia∣tica, Cramps, Cholick, the Gravel, the Ric∣kets, defects of the Spleen, Deafness, and most effectually cureth all Wounds, Cuts, Hurts, &c. Tartarus Vitriolatus. TAke pure salt of Tartar, put it in a gla∣sed Dish, pour upon the same drop by drop Oyl of Vitriol, so long until it ceaseth
to make a noise, which you may dry and keep for your use. Its Vertues. It availeth against the gnawing pains of the Stomach, and to ease all pains of the Cholick. Christals of Tartar. IF you take equal parts of crude Tartar and salt of Tartar, and dissolve it in fai water, and then evaporate the water, still skimming it until no more skim do arise and then let it cool, there will shoot white Chrystals, which may be used in stead o Tartarus Vitriolatrus for purging; they cause gentle Stools, and expel urine and th Stone: the Dose from 1 scruple to a dram▪ Spirit of Manna. TAke Manna what quantity you please put it in a glass Cucurbit, with its hea and Receiver close luted, set it in ashes o sand, make a small fire and there will com over a spirit almost tasteless, yet of grea vertue, being a great Sudorifick. Its Vertues. It helpeth putrid Feavers of all sorts, o any other distemper requiring sweat: th
Dose is from ʒ iiij. to ℥. This Spirit pour∣ed upon the flowers of Sulphur, extracteth a red Tincture good for the Lungs. Syrup of Vineger. TAke of good White-wine Vineger, and par B. M. evaporate the half part, of the remainder take lb 1. put it into a Glass-body, set it in B. M. & add of fine white Su∣gar lb 2. then keep stirring it with a Spa∣tula, until all the Sugar be dissolved. Its Vertues. This Syrup is good to dissolve, attenuate, open, and mundifie gross, clammy, or fleg∣matick Humours in the Breast or Lungs; It refrigerates and mitigates the Heat, resisteth Corruption and Putrefaction, cleanseth the Urinary passages, appeases Inflammations. Syrup of Lemond-Rinde. TAke lb ss of the outward Rindes of new Lemons separated from the inward whiteness, put it in a Glass Cucurbit, and put to it lb 1 ss of good Spanish wine, set it in B. M. with its recipient close luted, with a small heat draw off ℥ 12 of the spiritous
water, being very subtil and odoriferous, which may be without any additions for women by reason of the Mother; but for men or women not subject to Hesterick pas∣sions, you may put into the nose of the Lim∣beck tyed up, ℥ ss of the grains of Alkernes, gr. 8 of Ambergreece, and gr. 4 of Musk; This done to this distilled spiritous water, put ℥ 3 more of the thin Rindes, and digest it close stopt in the same. Run without ex∣pression this maceration through a Linnen-cloth, and preserve it in a Viol close stopt; the remaining Rindes after distillation boyl in lb ij. of clear water, to the consumption of half, which then strain and clarifie, and with one pound of white sugar boyl up to a Syrup. Its Ʋse. It may be used in sickness or in health, giving a grateful taste to any Liquor, ma∣king it more acceptable; it opens obstru∣ction, it cuts flegm, and causeth a good di∣gestion, is good in the Cholick. Vineger of the Philosopher. TAke Verdigreece, pour on the same very strong distil'd vineger, dissolve therein a good quantity of Verdigreece, filter the so∣lution
till it be clear, then evaporate the humidity in a fire of the first degree, until a green Gum remain, which put into a Re∣tort, and distil out of the same all the humi∣dity, which rectifie seven times in a clean Retort, till no Fecies settle, and a pure chry∣staline Vineger remaineth. The Second BOOK. Of Salts and Minerals. Of Sea Salt. SEa Salt is the true Radical Balm, or Balsam of Nature, by which every thing in the course of Nature is pre∣erved, and all other Salts whatsoever have heir beginnings, and by which they are reserved, are nourished, and have power f giving life to their respective matters. Therefore may it be termed Animal, Vege∣able, and Mineral; It is Animal and Vege∣able as it hath a lively growing faculty in , as being the first moving thing in Na∣ure, causing increase, the beginning and ontinuance of Generation, without which
nothing can be dureable. Its faculty o Multiplying and Increasing you may see by the vast multitude of Fish bred and nourish¦ed in the Sea; also the generation of pre¦cious Stones, Pearls, Shel-fish and Cora growing in great Branches, springing fro most hard Rocks and Stones, and nourish¦ed by Sea-Salt, which is a sufficient argu¦ment to prove it Animal, and Vegetabl Salt is also Mineral for passing through th Pores of the Earth. It begets many and v various other Salts, as Salt-Peeter, Vitrio Allum, Salt, Gum, and others of a Miner Nature, or participating much of Mineral▪ It is likewise of Mineral or Metalick N¦ture, by reason it may Metal-like be me¦ted by a strong fire as other Mettals be;  all which it plainly appeareth that Salt Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral, and lik¦wise Sea Salt was of much esteem by the A¦tient Physitians, although they had litt skill in it's preparation, they using no oth way than drying and calcining, and th say was then of force to help all obstructio of the Body, taking away all manner of p¦trifactions and corruptions of the Body, a putteth away the original of all Disease doth it not preserve Flesh or Fish a lo time from putrifaction, being applyed o
it's gross Body, and by vertue of it pre∣pared? nay not onely Flesh, Fish, but all orts of Fruits, and other green things of Rarity be kept a very long time, and brought even from the East-India without loosing Form, Taste, or Vertue. Metal, Mineral, Stones may be dissolved by it, corrected and amended, and made good Medicine, and many other necessary things may be performed with it. Preparation of Common-Salt. TAke Isle of Mayo, Cap de Verd, or Indian Salt, dissolve it in fair water, & filter it through a sevenfold Strainer, after pour it into a earthen or copper Vessel, boyl it up to a dryness, and when 'tis almost dry stir it about with a wooden stick until it be very dry, which Salt put into one or more Crucibles, and set it in a Furnace so that the fire may come round about it, and let it stand so until it be throughout red hot, and do no more crackle, for then it is decripi∣tated or prepared. Its Vertues. It serveth for to mix with other Physick to prepare the Body, open Obstructions, and
make a free passage for the operation of other Physick. Spirit of Salt. TAke one part of fine white Salt, and three parts of fine white sand, grind and mix them well, put them in a coated Glass Retort, set it in an open fire and apply a large Receiver well luted, make a fire un∣der it by degrees for sixteen hours, let the last eight hours fire be very strong until your Receiver grow close and all the spirit be come off; which put into a Glass Re∣tort, and in B. M. evaporate the Flegm un∣til it begin to taste sharp, which then re∣move into sand, and force all over, and you have a pure spirit well rectified. Its Vertues. This is a most excellent and safe Medicine to be used internally, or externally apply∣ed, it extinguisheth the preternatural thirst in hot Diseases, it consumeth flegmatick humours in the stomach, helpeth the Appe∣tite, consumeth the stone, purges the Reins, and is good in the Gout. 'Tis very good to use in Julips for those possest with ma∣lign Feavers, it whitens the Teeth being mingled with a little water, and the Teeth
rub'd with the same; outwardly it taketh away proud or superfluous Flesh from Wounds, Ulcers, or any other parts, it ta∣keth away Warts, it cleanseth old sores and prepares them for healing, it helpeth the red Face, taketh away Pimples, or any outward Inflamation. Spirit of Salt. DIssolve Common-salt in fair water▪ then quench burning Coals in this water that they may be impregnated with the salt, and put in so many till all the salt-water is inbibed; which after put into your coated Retort, and distil according to art, & you obtain a most grateful pleasant spirit. Spirit of Salt. MIx two parts of Vitriol or Allum with one part of salt, grinde and mix them very well, put them into a coated Retort, and distil them by degrees of fire, as before. Spirit, or Oyl of Salt. TAke of the best white Christaline sea-salt, as much as you please, dissolve it
in fair clear Rain-water if you can get it, and when 'tis all dissolved filter it through a new cotten strainer, and then pour it into a earthen Pan Glased, and boyl it away un∣til it is almost dry, then keep it continually stirring until it is perfectly dry, beat it very fine and put it into one or more Crucibles, place it in a Furnace, so that they may be throughout red hot, then take them out, let them cool, take out the salt and beat it to fine Powder and put it into the Crucibles, and set it to glo until 'tis read hot, this do se∣ven times; then dissolve it in fair water, strain it through a clean strainer, and boyl away the water again to a dryness, which put it into a Crucible and let it glo red hot, then take it out and powder the salt, put it in the Pot and let it glo again to seven times, this dissolving filtering, evaporating the water and gloing the salt in the fire seven times, must be used until the said salt will melt upon a red hot plate of Iron like Wax, a little being tryed; and you must be very careful that it melt not in your Operation, for then your labor is lost, but when you find by a little that 'twill melt easily, put to it three parts of pure white sand, put it in a Glass coated Retort, apply a large Receiv∣er, by a violent strong fire drive over the Oyl to spirits.
Of Salt-Petre. SAlt-Petre is by art drawn forth of the earth, its Mother, and by often solution, filtration, coagulation is made pure, white and Christaline, in which work you will find the three principals, or beginnings are ex∣tracted out of the earth, that is after the eva∣poration of the water to a skim, the pure Virgin Earth setling in the Liquor, but the true Salt-Petre, or fiery and ayrie Part or Mercury, and sulphur congealed to the sides of the Glass or Pan in pure white Christals, in which separation we may see three prin∣ciples or distinct Natures, which neverthe∣less do subsist or have a being from one and the same Essence, that which remaineth in the water is a true fixed Salt of the nature of Salt Marine, the other two that Christali∣zed to the sides of the Vessel are Volatile Salt, yet of two distinct Natures joyned in one, and of different qualities, the one being truly Mercurial, of a sower acid and ponde∣rous Nature, and a dissolver of Metals, Mi∣neral, and the most hardest Stones, the o∣ther a pure sweet Etherial Sulphur, or the soul and spirit are here united together, cal∣led Salt-Petre, which is a special key to the
Alchimist, for it openeth the most hardes Bodies, as well Stones as Minerals, and Me∣tals, and hath power to make Volatile, an also to fix and incorporate spirits, and therefore is of a most wonderful Nature, well known to few, for although this Petre well prepared, doth outwardly appea white which is the Mercury, and as Com∣mon Mercury doth, yet in it, as I said befor is a most pure redness, the like is observed in Common Mercury. This is the true Mer∣cury of the world, as may appear, for if this Body of Petre be put into a Glass and set i Sand, over a fixatory fire without any ad∣dition, you will then in some time see in i contained all manner of Colours, which b many will hardly be believed, but a few hours will discover the truth of this mat∣ter. This Sulphur being the true fire o Nature, Spirit of the world, or Soul of the Universe; this Oyl without any other addi∣tion may be made a true Balsamick Medi∣cine, curing almost uncurable Diseases. Spirit of Salt-Petre. TAke three parts of pure white sand and one part of Petre, grinde and mix them well, put them in a coated Retort, and
set it over a naked fire, lute fast your Re∣ceiver, and let it be very large, make but a very small fire, and in few hours will come over the volatile Spirit, of a very deep red∣ness, keep your fire but small as long as this redness appeareth, and when it begins to vanish, and your Receiver to clear, increase your fire and more red Spirit will arise dif∣fering from the former, and not of so deep a red; after these Spirits have appeared a while, increase your fire at last to the height, and when your Receiver cleareth and grow cold, although a violent fire, the Spirits are then all come over. If these Spirits be put into a glass Retort, and placed in B. M. with a Receiver luted, make first a small fire, and the volatile Spirit will come over, which is known by its colour, next will come over the flegm, and next the true Spirit, which are all known by their colours; for when the first volatile Spirit cometh, 'tis of a deep red, when the flegm cometh 'tis of no co∣lour, and when the true acid and corrosive Spirits come, the Retort is red and fiery a∣gain; you must catch these Spirits apart. Their Vertues and Ʋse. This volatile Spirit, which if freed from flegm is always red, it cureth the Cholick, asswageth the pains of the Gout, taketh
away all Tumours and Inflammations; It healeth Scabs, Tetters, and Ring-worms, Cancers, Fistulaes, Wolves: It extinguish∣eth all Inflammations, Scaldings, the Gan∣greene; It dissipateth and consumeth con∣gealed Blood in the body, being applyed outwardly in some convenient waters, and used inwardly. As for the acid corrosive Spirit, its use is of little worth in Physick, but in dealing in Mettals and Minerals 'tis of special use. Aqua-fortis. TAke three pounds of Vitriol, and two pounds of Petre, let them be well ground and mixed, and distilled as spirit of Niter, or Salt-petre, and you will have the same signs appear as did there, until all the spi∣rits be came off. Its Vertue. It is not used at all in Physick, but for Met∣tals, Minerals, and Stones, to reduce them into Vitriol, Calx, Flowers, and Crocates. To make a sulphurous Aqua-fortis. TAke of Salt-petre 1 lb. of Dansick Vi∣triol 24 ounces, of powdered Sulphur
four ounces, grinde them well together, put them into a coated Retort, and distilled as Spirit of Niter. Aqua Regis. IN one pound of Aquafortis, put four oun∣ces of white decrepitated common Salt, rectifie it by a strong fire two or three times, till all the Salt come over with the spirit, and nothing remain. In six ounces of this dissolve two ounces of Salarmoniack that is three times sublimed, and it will be very strong. Water and Spirit of Salarmoniack. TAke of Salarmoniack one part, and of Salt of Tartar two parts, mix them in∣to a Paste, by addition of common water, and put them into a Retort, place it in an open fire, apply a large Receiver close lu∣ted, and distil it first with a small fire, and then increasing it according to Art, the spirit will come over into the Receiver, which you must pour into a Glass and seal it up with hard wax. In the neck of the Re∣tort will rise a sublimate, which taken out and placed upon a stone, will resolve it self
into a water, and is called Water of Sal∣armoniack. The Vertue of the Spirit. The Spirit rectified is sharp and pene∣trating, for eight or twelve drops taken in a convenient Vehecle, doth penetrate the whole body, causing sudden sweat, opening the obstructions of the Spleen, cures Quar∣tans, the Cholick, Suffocation of the Ma∣trix, driving out malign humours by sweat It cureth outwardly the Erysipilas, Gan∣greene, allayeth the pain of the Gout, al¦layeth swellings, discusseth congeal'd blood helpeth benummed members. Purified Niter, or Lapis Prunello: TAke a Crucible, place it in the fire, fi it full of Petre, even up to the brin the Salt-petre will melt, when it is melte cast in one spoonful of pure sulphur in pow¦der, which immediately will take fire an be consumed, the flame ceasing cast in mor and this continue until all the fire of th Niter be perfectly precipitated to the bo¦tom of the pot, and it become so clear  melting that you may see the bottom of the Crucible through the Niter, which bein done, pour it out into a Copper tinn'd ve¦sel
heated, and spread it all over the bot∣tom, which immediately put into cold wa∣ter that it may not stick too fast to the bot∣tom of the Kettle, and your Petre will in its coagulation look pure white, and very clear. Its Virtues. This purifying of the Nitre causeth it to be less corrosive, more airy and penetrating, it cools much, and resists corruption, and is Diuretick, therefore very good in Inflam∣mations, or Ulcerations of the Reins; the Dose is from 1 scruple to a dram inwardly Spirit of Salt-Petre. TAke three or four pound of Niter, put it in a large Glass Retort, and place it in a Sand kettle, so that you may be able to make a great fire under; make a small fire first, and that continue for four hours, then make your fire somewhat bigger for four hours more, after that increase it for six or eight hours to the very height, as if you were distilling Aquafortis, and you will finde the Spirit cleaving to the out-side of the Glass, which sweep off with a feather, and keep for your use. Its Vertues. This pure sulphurous Niter and penetra∣ting
Spirit is most wonderful; a few grains penetrateth the whole body, openeth all ob∣structions, consumeth those things amiss in the body, even as fire; It expelleth the Epi∣lepsie, Convulsions, cureth the Fits of the Mother, the Hypocondraick Melancholy, the Tertian and Quartan, and all diseases pro∣ceeding from obstructions, or corruption of Blood, the Cholick, outwardly the Gout Fistulaes, Ulcers, Cancers, &c. Of Vitriol. VItriol (as saith Paracelsus) is a very no¦ble and excellent Mineral, and wa always held in great esteem by the Father of this Art, by reason of its great endow¦ments, and is called The Philosophers Eart wherein is contained the true Salt, Sulphu and Mercury of the Philosopher, which an to be separated by a peculiar manner, pr¦scribed by Nature it self, and not by any v¦olent Calcination, or Distillation; for b this way the true Greenness being the sou separateth it self from the body, and leave it dead, it being converted into a red vola¦tile Sulphur. Now Vitriol containeth in self many vicious imperfections, and ther¦fore before you attempt to obtain this A¦canum,
you must separate those imperfe∣ctions, of which the manner followeth. Purifying of Vitriol, of Sympathetical Powder. TAke very good Roman, Hungarian, or Cyprus Vitriol, powder it, put it into a glased Vessel, and pour upon it so much water as will dissolve the same, stir it well about, and when 'tis settled, pour the co∣loured water through a Strainer of Cotton into a copper Kettle, and if all the Vitriol be not dissolved, put on more water, stirring it well, and after the filtering it well pour it to the rest; which being done, and all the Vitriol extracted, cast away the yellow sed∣diments, being nothing but common Sul∣phur and other impurities; set the Kettle upon the fire and boyl away about one third or more, until the sign appeareth with a skin on the top, then take it off, pour it in∣to an Earthen glased Pan, set it in a cold place chrystal will shoot, which take out, the remaining water boyl up again till the sign appear, and pour it off into the earthen Vessel, set it to chrystalize as before, which Chrystals take out and pur to the other, and dry them by the sun, or before the fire
gently, and after powder them, dissolving, filtering, and coagulating them as at first, till the five times, or until no settlements be at the bottom of the Solution, but all re∣main pure, and of a blewish colour; which work of purification being ended, let be put in an earthen Pan and covered, that no de∣filement come to it, and let it be set in a ve∣ry small heat until it be converted into a white powder, which is called The Sympa∣thetical Powder; which Powder, if good, you may cast it into a Bason of water, it will colour it blew, and if it do not 'tis good for nothing. Calcination of Vitriol. TAke Dansick Vitriol (which is the bes to draw a spirit from) put it into Earthen Glasen Pan, and set it over the fire and 'twill in a small time melt, stir it with stick and let it be upon the fire until it ha lost his Greenness, and is turned somewha yellowish, break the Pan (for otherwise will not come out) and take the Vitrio Powder and sift it for your further use,  distil the Spirit and Oyl, and for the suble¦mation of Mercury. But if you will calcine it red for the use
Chyrurgions, its then called Colcother of Vitriol, and is made thus; Take an Iron Kettle very clean, and put as much of the calcined Vitriol in Powder as you please, spread it thin upon the bottom of the Kettle, make a fire under and at last your Vitriol will begin to fume, keep your fire prety big, and stirring it with an Iron Rod, titl at last it be as red as blood; then let the fire cease, let this be three or four times washed with fair water, and keep for your use after 'tis dryed. Its Ʋse. Its use is to make the Chymical Plaister before mentioned, or to put in other Plai∣sters according to the will of the Chyrurgi∣on, or if it be mixed with any unguent, and be laid on an ill Ulcer, it maketh a Skar which you need not endeavor to take off, but continually lay more on, and leave the Skar in the Sore; for the vertue of this Vitriol is so great, that it causeth the flesh to grow under Skars; and when the flesh is enough grown, it will fall off, and then you need nothing but to skin it. The preparing of Vitriol, and the making Ens Veneris. TAke the Colcother of Vitriol, or rather the Caput Mort of Aquasortis that is
made of Vitriol & Salt-petre, being burnt to a sad redness, let the Salt be all drawn away with fair water, and after dryed and powdered, pour upon this matter the Spirit of Salarmoniack or Urine, stir it well, and let it dry again before the fire, and do this moistening and drying seven times, at last powder it, and mix with it two parts of Sal∣armoniack purified, grinde and mix them very well, put them in a Glass Retort, and place it in sand, and by degrees of fire sub∣lime for twelve or fourteen hours, stopping the mouth of the Retort with a little Cot∣ton, and the Ens Veneris will be in the neck of the Retort of a yellow colour, put it to its weight of Colcother, mix them well, and sublime them again, and once more if you please by its self. Its Vertues. 'Tis a famous Anodine, suppressing all noxious humours, causing rest; the Dose is three or four grains. Spirit and Oyl of Vitriol. FIll a Retort almost full of Vitriol pow∣dered and calcined white, as before, place it in a Winde-Furnace, and apply a large Receiver well and close luted, make a small fire for forty eight hours, and after
increasing your fire to the highnst, till your Receiver groweth clear and cool, which which then take off and put it into a Glass Retort, place it in sand and apply a Recei∣ver, distil off the Spirit and the heavy Oyl will remain pure and clear. A Rare Spirit of Vitriol. TAke Vitriol calcined onely to a white∣ness powdered, put it into a Retort well coated, place it in your Wind-Furnace and apply a large capacious Receiver, whose body let lye in moist sand, and let it be fast luted to the Receiver, and let a very small fire be made under it for forty eight hours, then you may increase your fire greater for twenty four hours more, and to the highest degree you may, or possible you can for twenty four hours more, or until the furnes cease, and the Receiver grow cold; before the Receiver be cold take it off, and pour it into a Glass, stop it close. The Caput Mort, or Colcother, take out, powder it, and mix it with its weight of Sulphur, put it in a strong fire, and calcine it throughly. Pow∣der it and put it in a Long-body, and pour upon the same as much of the distilled Spi∣rit as may moisten it, then place it in sand
and abstract the flegm, and the Spirit will remain inbibed by the Colcother, then put on more, and do this six or seven times, till at last it will inbibe no more, which you may know by its standing coloured red on the top; dry this matter well, put it in a Retort, and let it be distilled by a violent fire until all be perfectly come over, and of a yellow colour, and a most pleasant smell; take away the Receiver whilest hot, & pour the spirits in a glass, which keep close stopt. Its Vertues. It most certainly cureth the Epilepsie, Convulsion, in all obstructions of the body, purifieth the blood from every disease; cu∣reth Pox, Gonorrhea, the Gout, Dropsie, Scurvy, Hypocondraick Melancholy, the Apoplexy, Palsie, Coma, Lethargy, the Cholick, &c. Red Oyl of Vitriol. TAke Colcother of Vitriol powdered out part, and two parts of Powder of Flints, mix and grinde them well by themselves, and after grinde them into a Paste with spi∣rit of wine, put this matter into a Glass or Earthen Retort, in a reverberatory fire, with its Receiver distil it according to Art, and
you obtain a heavy ponderous Oyl, to be used with Mettals. Spirit and red Oyl of Vitriol. DIssolve Vitriol in common water, fil∣ter it from residence pour upon the green water some Spirit of Urine or Salar∣moniac, and the green will settle and the water clear up; pour off the clear water, and coagulate it into a white mass, which powdered and put to two parts of fine white sand, in a Retort place it in sand, and distil from thence the Spirit, or else you may re∣serve the Salt, and 'tis a good purge; about 24 grains take. The Earth remaining, you may dry well and mix it with powdered Flints, and distil it into a blood red Oyl. Its Vertues. This Oyl perfectly cureth the Falling-sickness. Ens Veneris. TAke purified Roman Vitriol, dissolve it in fair water and filter it, pour upon it so much Spirit of Urine or Salarmoi as will precipitate the green or blew Sul∣phur, let it settle and pour off the waters,
and wash it very well from salt, and bedew it again with Spirit of Salarmoniac, and gently dry it; this dewing and exicating by the sun, or before a fire, do seven times, and 'twill be a most fine subtile Powder. Take half of it, and add to it twice its weight of Salarmoniac purified, grinde and mix them very well, put them in a small Retort in a Sand-kettle, but so that the fire may come round it, make fire by degrees, and at last a very strong fire, and the Sublimate will ris green, and partly yellow, leaving a Regula behinde whitish; grinde this Sublimate and add it to the other half part, mix it well, pu it in another Retort, sublime it again, cast∣ing away the Fecies, grinde this Sublimat again by its self, and sublime it until it b fixed and will rise no more. Arcanum of Vitriol. VItriol being purified, as in the descrip∣tion of the Sympathetical Powder, mus be digested in several Glasses close shut, fo so long until various colours appeareth, and at last the highest redness, which being brought to this pass, powder it, put it in a Glass Long-body, pour upon it distille Rain-water a little warm, stir it well, let i
tand twenty four hours, and then decant t, and put on more warm distil'd Rain-wa∣er, which work reiterate so long as any aci∣lity or sharpness may be attracted from the Earth: the Waters put together, and after lteration put it in a Long-body, place it n Sand and draw off about two thirds of the Water, which done set the Glass in a cold place, Christal will shoot, which with a wooden spoon take out, the remaining wa∣er evaporate again, and let it shoot as be∣ore, and this Evaporating and Christali∣ing must be used so often until all the Salt s converted into Christals, which you may out altogether and dry them by the fire or he sun, and if they be not pure and white you must dissolve, filter, and coagulate them again, as in the making of Salt-Petre out of the Earth, for the process is the very same. This pure Salt put inro a Glass Retort, set in Sand with a Receiver well luted, make fire by degrees, and you obtain your Ace∣tum, which rectifie from all defilements, and 'tis prepared; take now your Earth very well dryed, pour upon it this Spirit that it overtop it three fingers bredth, set it in di∣gestion and the Spirit will be tinged of a yellow colour, somewhat redish, which spi∣rit decant and put on more, and extract all
the tincture, put all the tincture together ab∣stract the Spirit so often in a gentle fire per Retort in Sand, until all the tincture come over in a golden coloured Oyl, sweet, fra∣grant and pleasant, which is the Arcanum of Vitriol, the Earth remaining white. Its Vertues. It cureth perfectly the Falling-sickness, and Convulsion in young or old, the Blood in the whole Body is hereby renewed, and the Gonorrhea, Pox, Gout, Leprosie, and other such like Diseases perfectly cured, Sur∣fet, Pluresies, Feavers and Agues of all sorts, and is counted for a Panacea in all Diseases Of Antimony. ANtimony or Stibium is of kin to com¦mon Lead, and like an abortive thrown out from him before his perfection by reason of his too much Sulphur, neithe could he arrive to the perfection of a Metal for it overmuch abounding with Sulphu doth overcome the Mercurial part, that i cannot attract Salt sufficient for his coagu∣lation into a fufile or Maluable Body, and therefore remaineth a Mineral, and that meerly Volatile poysonous in its crude Na∣ture, and hurtful to the body of man, which
has made it be condemned and thrown aside by many men, yet it is a most certain truth that by experience is found, that one Poison may attract and expel another by its attra∣ctive quality; that is, the attractive Poison must first be prepared, that its medicinal fa∣culty may be transmuted into such a Medi∣cine sufficiently able to destroy the other Poison by its attractive Power. As for ex∣ample, a Toad in its self is meer Poison, yet if first dryed in the Sun, after put into a pot with a cover close luted, and to burn to ash∣es, if these ashes be laid upon a place stung or venemously bit, or the like, you shall see one venom attract the other, and the place freed from venome; the reason hereof, be∣cause the vertue of the Toad by his prepa∣ration is opened and rendred effectually powerful to attract its like Poison; as Oyl, or Fat will stain, or defile Cloath, but be∣ing prepared into Soap, it atttacts its like, and then no more able to stain or defile, but has power to attract or take away such de∣filements; so Antimony, though full of veno∣mous Arsnical qualities, after his Poison is taken away, may be transmuted into Medi∣cine, which never more for the future re∣taineth Poison, but be so able and effecati∣ous as to attract the Poison of Diseases to it
self, and expel it out of the Body, with it self. Now by reason every one that is wil∣ling to operate in Antimony, know not how to distinguish the good from the bad, know that the best being broak is of a yellowish or golden Cast, with broad streight veins, shi∣ning like silver, and is of a Golden Nature, abounding with Mercury; the other looketh pale and dull, has no yellow Cast, neither are the veins broad or streight, and this abounds with more Sulphur. Vitrium, or Glass of Antimony. TAke Antimony finely powdered, lay it very thin in a Earthen or Iron Pan, set it over the fire, and when it begins to fume stir it with an Iron Rod until it cease to sume; but if it chance to grow too hot that it run into a lump, let it then cool, take it off and beat it fine again, and lay it very thin as before; calcine it until it be white, this white Powder put in a Crucible, place it in a most violent fire, that the Antimony may flow like water, then put in an Iron Wire that it may stick to the same, which hold up against the light, and if it be transparent 'tis sufficient, then pour it out into a Copper Pan by little and little, and you obtain a yel∣low transparent Glass.
Its Ʋse. It is used powdered about eight or ten gr. teept in Sack all night, the next morning strained and the Wine drank, in such Disea∣ses requiring Vomiting, it likewise purges by stool also. Regulus of Antimony. TAke Antimony one part, and calcined Tartar two parts, powder or grinde them well together, and fuse them strongly n a Crucible for one hour, pour it out into a heated Cone, the Regulus will settle, which when 'tis cold, separate the Fecies about the Regulus containing, the Sulphur of Antimony reserve for further use. Its Ʋse. It purges both by Stool and Vomit, yet much more milder than the Vitrium. Diaphoretick Antimony. OF Regulus one part powdered, and three parts of pure Niter, grinde and mix them well, put them in a Crucible, and let them fuse for half an hour, and then emp∣ty it in a Cone, 'tis a white Mass, wash a∣way the Salt by often pouring on of warm
water, and dry the Powder by the Sun or the Fire, the Water evaporated leaves a Salt called Sal Prunella, and far better than that made by Sulphur. Its Vertues. This Dose is from a Scruple to a Dram, given in any Disease requiring Sweat, its Dose is for Children, to 12 gr. to elder Folk from 30 gr. to a dram. Tincture of Sulphur of Antimony. TAke the Fecies of the Rugulus before, powder it, make a Lixivium, pour up∣on it Spirit of Urine or Salarmoniac, distil it by a gentle heat in sand, and there will come over a fair Tincture. Whilest it is yet dry pour upon it the spirit of Urine, and it will extract the Tincture of the Sulphur, decant the same and put it into another glass, draw off the spirit of Urine and there will remain a blood red Liquor, which ex∣tract with spirit of Wine, and the Tincture will be yet fairer, and if it stand in the sun two moneths it will be very pleasant. The fecies of the Regulus before, if water be ad∣ded and a Lixivium made, it cures all Sabs. If you pour Vineger, or any other acid Spirit, there will precipitate a red Powder,
which edulcorate and dry the same. It is called Auratum Diaphorecum, or the Golden Diaphoretick, but causeth strong Vomits, and therefore falsly so named; for from 10 to 20 gr. worketh both by Vomit and Stool. Regulus Martis. TAke Antimony two parts, filing of Steel one part, burnt Tartar four parts, beat them finely and mix them well, and fuse them in a strong fire and set it to cool, the Regulus will settle, break the pot, take out the Regulus, and add to it twice its weight, melt it as before, and let the Regulus settle, and do this three times and it will be pure white and shining like the finest silver, and is called The Star of Antimony. If this Re∣gulus be often stilled by fire with the Salt of Tartar, it will at last be consumed, which then resolved in the air it turns to an Oyl, and by often calcination and resolution, it will at last come over the helm. This Re∣gulus may be made with Petre and Tartar, but 'tis far more excellent if it were made of Petre alone: this after it is fixed, if it be made volatile, dissolveth all bodies, both Mettal, Minerals, or Stones:
Crocus Metallorum, or Liver of Antimony. MIngle one pound of Antimony finely beaten and fifted, to one pound of Salt-petre, then set a Crucible in the fire, and heat it red hot, put in one spoonful of the matter after another until the Crucible be full, cover it with a tyle, and make it fuse, and pour it into a Mortar heated, which being cold is like a Liver, and beaten to Powder called Crocus Metallorum. Its Ʋse. This both vomiteth and purgeth; the Dose is from 10 to 20 grains, or else may be used by Infusion, viz. about half a dram infused in one ounce of Wine all night; or put one ounce of this Liver to one pound of Wine, whereof you may drink to two ounces. Fixed Powder of Antimony. TAke very fine fifted Antimony, pour up∣on it a Lixivium of Petre, let it overtop the Antimony four or six fingers in breadth set it in sand, and make a strong fire for ten or twelve hours and then cease, decant the water, and then boyl it away till it is per∣fectly dry, fuse it in a Crucible, and pour
t out in a Cone, after bray it whilest hot, nd pour upon it Spirit of Urine, and ex∣ract all the Tincture, abstract the Spirit of Urine, and abstract it again with Spirit of Wine, abstract the Spirit of Wine, and a ed Powder remaineth. Its Vertues. It driveth forth coagulated Blood, and pens all Obstructions of the whole Body, reaketh Imposthumes, radically cureth the ues Veneria; the Dose is 30 gr. and may e taken two or three times a day. Balsam of Antimony. TAke one part of Antimony, half apart of fine common Salt, and six parts of ne Sand, grinde and mix them well, and istil them by a most violent fire, and a red Oyl will flow, from which abstract the moi∣ture to a dryness, grinde it and place it pon a Marble, and a pelucid Balsam will ow. Excellent in all Wounds, Ulcers, istulaes. Oyl of Antimony. TAke Mercury sublimate finely searsed, and Antimony searsed, of each equal
parts, put them in a coated Retort, and set them over a Reverbatory fire, make a small fire until the thick Oyl, like Butter, be all come over, and if it chance to stick in the neck of the Retort, hold a little fire under and 'twill melt and run down into the Re∣ceiver. This Butrium let stand in the Air, and it will attract a moisture to make i more thinner. Its Ʋse. This Oyl is used by Chyrurgeons in such wounds as are desperate and almost incure∣able, by dipping a feather in it, and touch∣ing the part, so to separate the impurity, &c as in the Cancer, Wolf, Noli-me-tangere, & Cinaber of Antimony. AFter the Butrium is all come over make a strong fire by degrees, an there will rise in the neck of the Retort th Cinaber of Antimony. Its Vertue. 'Tis a good Diaphoretick in the Pox, Go¦norrhea, and the Dose is to 20 grains. Mercurius Vitae. TAke of your Butrium as much as yo please, upon which in a Glass pour
reat quantity of water, and the white flow∣rs will settle, decant off that water, and ash it ten times more, or until it be sweet, hen dry it by the sun, or the fire, and put t up for your use. Its Ʋse. This is not fit to be given to Children, eak people, or such as are not used to vo∣it, but in strong bodies, 'tis a good Medi∣ine for the Pox, Gout, Scurvy, Dropsie, eavers, &c. It is good for those that are corbutical, or possest with the Hypocon∣raick Melancholy; the Dose is from five o eight Grains. Bezoardicum Minerali. TAke what quantity of Butrium you please, put it into a Gallon Receiver f Glass, pour upon the same drop by drop, ntil the ebullition end; put on so much hore as will make it the weight of the Bu∣rium, as soon as it is done, pour a great uantity of cold well-salted water, and the recipitate will settle white, let it settle for o or 12 hours, after wash it with fair water. Its Ʋse. It is a good Sudorifick against all Diseases equiring sweat, as the Plague, Pox, Feavers, corbute, Leprosie, used from 8 to 30 gr, in a roper Vehicle.
Flowers of Antimony. TAke one part of Antimony finely pow∣dered and searced, two parts of whit Salt, & four parts of Dansick Vitriol, grind and mix them very well, put them in a earthen Jugg, commonly call'd a Long-neck place it over the fire, apply a Receiver lute having one pound of water in it, make fire by degrees, and at last as strong as pos¦sible you can make, for the Flower wil com over both yellow and white. If you dra off the flegm and set them in the air, or in cold and moist place, they will resolve int Butter. If you onely wash them with fai water often, and dry them, they are of th same nature of Mercurius Vitae, and th Dose is the same. If the Flowers be dissol¦ved in Spirit of Petre, the Spirit again ab¦stracted from thence, it leaves behinde it fixt Powder, which is Bezoardicum Mineral Tincture of Antimony. TAke one part of Regulus Martis, and fou parts of purified Niter, mix them wel and in a Crucible fuse them into a blew Mas which pour out whilst hot, bray it and mi
with it one part of the pure calx of Gold, that has been seven times extracted with A∣qua Regis, and after reverberated with Sul∣phur, put it into the Crucible again, and fuse it into a clear transparent Rube or Co∣lour; which pour out into a heated Cone, and bray it whilst hot, and pour upon the same of the best rectified spirit of Wine, and extract the Tincture, leaving only a white Body behinde; the tinged spirit of Wine put in a small Retort, and draw off the half part, and keep the remainder as a Panasea. Its Vertues. It is a most pleasant and general remedy in all Diseases, and cures those that are hurt by Mineral Vapours, or hurt by Arsnick or Mercury. Sulphur of Antimony. TAke six ounces of Antimony, 12 ounces of purified Petre, 2 ounces of Common Salt, one ounce of powdered Char-coal, mix them well and cast them in a red hot Crucible one spoonful after another, until the Crucible be full, or all your Materials in then, let melt or flow one quarter of an hour and then pour it out in a heated Cone, when 'tis cold, pour hot or warm water upon it,
and this do ten or twelve times till 'tis wel dulcified, and you have a yellow Sulphur, which dry and put up for your use. Salt of Antimony. TAke the Regulus of Antimony made pe¦se, powder and searce it, put it in Long-body, put it in Sand, and by a mode¦rate fire the Antimony will sublime, but eve¦ry day brush down what is sublimed to th botttom, which do until it all remain fixed then take it out and grinde it most subtill leave it in a Cellar upon a Marble, and i half a year it will resolve into a Liquor, som Fecies remaining, for the Salt only melt filter this Liquor, abstract the Flegm in  to a thick Liquor, set it in a moist Cella Chrstial will shoot of a redish white, whic pure until they be white; Salt of Antimon may be obtained in half the time anothe way. Vineger of Antimony. TAke the Es. or Mineral out of whi Antimony is melted, beat or grinde to very fine powder, put it into a Long-b¦dy, pour into it distilled Rain-water, that t
Glass may be half full, lute it about, putrifie it in B.M. or Horse-dung, until the Es. be∣gin to form or froth, put this digested mat∣ter in a Crucible, lute on a head and to it a Receiver, and abstract the water which will be a little acid, which being drawn off, in∣crease the fire somewhat sublimer, which mix again with the Fecies, moisten it again with the Water, that was extracted from it, and distil as before, which labour you must reiterate until it be so strong as distil∣led Vineger. Every time putting down the sublime to the Fecies, pour this Vineger up∣on new easily, set in a small heat for twelve days, it will have extracted a redness; this Vineger separate so that no Feceies come with it, and again separate the Vineger from the red Tincture, the Tincture again ex∣tract with spirit, and reserve it as a supream Medicine; rectifie your Vineger in B. M. that the Flegm may be separated, then to one pound of Vineger put four ounces of the Salt, distil it in Sand strongly, so the Vine∣ger will be more fortified. Its Ʋse. This Vineger allayeth Gangreens, help∣eth Scalding or Burnings, and if it be ground with the Sulphur of Lead, so thick as an Ointment, then mixt and ground with Sal
Prunella and the Water of Endive, it divi∣deth and cures the Squinancy, and extinguish all preternatural heat. Mercury of Antimony. TO the powdered Regulus put the Spirit of Tartar, close stopt digest it two months then abstract the Vineger to the remaining matter, add four times its weight of filing of Steel, put it in a Retort, applying a Re∣ceiver close luted, and half full of water urge it by a strong fire, the Mercury comes in fumes, and turns to true Quick-silver. Sulphur of Antimony. TAke Antimony as it comes out of th Mine, of the best, and Petre purified,  each equal parts, grinde and mix them wel set fire from above, and a dark matter will be left, the Alcali being separated, make Glass as before, which Glass powder and scarce, and with the Vineger of Antimony Extract all the Tincture, the Tinctures pu in a Glass by themselves, drive off all th Vineger in B. M. and a powder remains which again extract with highly purified Spirit of Wine, separate it from the Fecie
and thou hast a most red Extraction profita∣ble in Medicine. In Ʋse. It purgeth the Blood, cureth the Asthma∣tick, P'tisick, it allayeth the Cough, and cu∣reth the diseases of the Lungs, and most vi∣olent Diseases. Acid Oyl of Antimony. TAke Antimony, Sulphur, Petre, of each a like quantity, put them under a Cam∣pane, and distil them according to art, and there wil come an Oyl resembling the com∣mon Oyl of Sulphur, but much more stron∣ger by reason of the addition, but if you add two parts of Salt-Petre, you will have more Oyl, by reason it will be more free in bur∣ning. Its Vertues. It has all the Vertues of the common Oyl of Sulphur, and operates more potently, it inwardly doth help the defect of the Lungs, and outwardly to all old Sores, or Ulcers. Purge of Antimony. TAke Flower of Antimony, and grinde them with their weight of decripitated
Salt, put them in a gentle Body in Sand, and let them stand 16 hours in a good strong fire, the which let cool and separate the Salt, and dry for your use. These Flowers onely purge downward, for the Vomitive quality of the Flowers lying in a Volatile Salt is hereby separated, and therefore ren∣dered wholly purgative. Of Arsnick. An easie Way of purifying Arsnick from its venemous qualities. TAke Arsnick what quantity you please, put it in a glased Pot finely ground, mix therewith the best and sweetest Oyl-Olive, so that it may be all like an Oint∣ment, and after put so much more of the said Oyl that it may overtop the whole two fingers breadth, make it hot at a gentle fire for one hour, and then the Oyl will be very black, which decant and add more Oyl, and do as before until the Oyl at last comes off as clear as it was put on, after wash the As∣nick with a Lixivium of Petre that the un∣ctuousness of the Oyl may be taken away, and after cleanse it from its fixed Salt, for it is prepared.
Its Vertues. It is used and approved by some to be a good Diaphoretick indangerous Pestilential Diseases. To Sublime Arsnick. TAke Arsnick one part calcined, Vitriol two parts, grinde and mix them well put them into a Retort, set it in a sand ket∣tle, make a gentle fire under for six hours, after increase it according to art, and it will rise in the neck of the Retort, part Christa∣line, and part in fine Flower; the Christa∣line part you must resolve and keep for your use, casting away the light powder; this must be two or three times sublimed from fresh Vitriol, and afterward sublimed with its weight of Flowers of Sulphur Vive. Its Vertues. It is used to move Sweat, and in Diseases of the Lungs, the dose is 8 gr. it cureth out∣wardly Cancers, and malign Ulcers.. Fixing of Arsnick. TAke of Arsnick and Petre of each equal parts powdered, put them in a Crucible and fuse them for ten or twelve hours, and
Of Flints. Powder of Flints. TAke Flints what quantity you please, heat them glowing hot, & quench them in cold water, and they will crack and look whitish, which after you may pulverize, searce, and keep for your use. Its Ʋse. This Powder is used and approved by many in the Disease of the Stone. Oyl of Flints. TAke Flints prepared as before, mix them with half so much of purified Salarmo∣niack most subtilly ground together, put them in a Retort, sublime them by a strong fire in sand, this sublimation use seven times from its fecies, and there will rise a fair Sul∣phur, which in a cold and moist place will resolve into an Oyl. Its Vertues. This Oyl consumeth the Stone, and ex∣pelleth the same, mightily increaseth mans natural strength, being given in any liquor, it dissolveth calcined Gold, and carrieth it over the helm. This Oyl may be made by dissolving the Flints, or more properly ex∣tracting
this Sulphur with graduated Spi∣rit of Salt, the flegm extracted in B. the remainder will upon a stone resolve into an Oyl of the same nature, as before. Artificial Precious Stones. OF Flints may be made Artificial Ru∣bies, Emeralds, Amethists, Saphires, &c. seeming very much like Natural, for which purpose you must have Flint that are not coloured, which you may know, for which they are quenched in cold water, if any Mettal be in the stone 'twill shew it in veins, of red or other colour; or you may use the pure, clear chrystaline Pebles gathe∣red by the sea side, or of Chrystals of Flints, &c. prepared into Powder, and of pure Salt of Tartar, of each alike, and of the colour you intend, so much as is necessary, fuse them so long till the Salt of Tartar be eva∣porated, and the Flint and colour be like fusible Glass, which is known by putting in Iron-wyer. Salt of Chrystals. TAke of Chrystals prepared in Powder as the Flint, put them into a Crucible with
two parts of Niter, fuse them for some hours and then separate the alcali with often ab∣lution with water. Its Ʋse. The Chrystal thus prepared, are good Diuereticks and Stone-breakers. Of Talck. REduce English Talck, or Venice Talck into fine powder, wash it well with water, until it come off clear, and dry it, then dissolve it in Aquafortis, and when the solution is made, precipitate the matter with Spirit of Wine or Urine, and it will preci∣pitate, which wash well with water, and keep it for your use. Its Ʋse. It is a very good Fucus, and is used in the deformities of the skin, as the Freckles and Sun-burnt. Calination of Talck. TAke one part of Talck, and four parts of Salt-petre, grind and mix them well, and artificially distil them in a Vessel con∣taining burning coals, let a large Receiver be applyed, and you obtain in the Receiver Flower and Spirits, and in your Distilling-vessel will remain a white mass, and some∣times
a little reddish, which take cut and dissolve it in fair water, and a white pow∣der will precipitate, which wash well and dry, and keep for your use: but if it preci∣pitate not well, then a little Spirit of Vine∣ger, or Salt, and 't will all precipitate; dry this powder and keep it for your former use, the Flower may also be dulcified, and keep for the same use. Spirit Flores, of Zinck or Spelter. IF two parts of Spelter be mixed with one part of Salt-petre, and distilled as that of Talck, you obtain a great many Flowers, with a Spirit and Oyl. Its Vertues. They provoke Sweat abundantly, and sometimes Stools and Vomits, the Dose is two Grains, outwardly they consolidate fresh Wounds, old Sores, such as alwayes drop water, they are great dryers, they may be strewed by themselves, or made up with some unguent, and in plaisters, or in deep wounds, let a Suppository be made with Honey and these Flowers boyled together to a hardness, and so put in the wound, and over it a same plaister. If strewed upon the place healeth the galding of children, or others.
Preparation of Lapis Calaminaris. TAke one part of Lapis Calaminaris, and three parts of Petre, let all be powder∣ed, and well mixt, and put in a very clean Iron-kettle, and a fire made under until it melt; keep it thus fusing until the mass be f a deep green colour, which sign appear∣ing take it off, and before 'tis cold put in a good quantity of fair water, and all the greenness wil be extracted out of the fecies, which immediately decant in a Glass-body, let it stand a little, the green will precipitate in a red powder, which edulcorate and dry for your use. Or if you take the water be∣fore the green be precipitated, and coagu∣late into a green mass, you may extract the Tincture with the Spirit of Wine, the most part of the Spirit again extracted, you have a Tincture of the Nature of Gold of ex∣cellent use. The Vertue of the Powder and Tincture. It hath the same vertues of the Flowers of Antimony, but more effectual and far more safe, it causeth gentle Stools and Vomits, purging forth choler, and evacuating fleg∣matick humours from the stomach, and such other tough humours as will yield to no
other Catharticks; they open Obstructions, resist the putrefaction of the blood, helps Agues, Feavers, Hppocondraick Melancho∣ly, Scorbutick Distempers, and such as are infected with the Lues Veneria. The Tincture being continually used, is good for all the aforesaid Diseases inward∣ly, outwardly it cureth all sorts of Ulcers of the body. Those of the Mouth, the Can∣cer, Fistula, Wolf, Noli-me-tangere, or any kinde of eating Serpentine Ulcers, such as continually run, or drop water, or the like. Of Sulphur. Flower of Sulphur. SUlphur may be distilled by it self, but if to one part of Sulphur you adde two parts of Colcother of Vitriol, or common Salt, both powdered a part and then mixt, may be sublimed Flower far more excellent in Medicine. Its Vertues. It is a great Dryer, and is used in Disea∣es of the Lungs, &c. and for Wormes in Children, for Distillations or Catarrhs, for Scabs and Itch, &c.
To purifie the Flower of Brimstone. TAke one part of Flowers prepared, as before, two parts of common Salt, grinde and mix them well upon a stone, and add to them in grinding some Spirit o Salt, so that it may be like Paste, which end∣ed put it into a glased Pipkin, and pour to it so much fair water as will cover it six in∣ches, boyl it (keeping it stirring with a stick) until two hours be over or more, then take it off and let it cool, and decant th water, and the white matter will settle, which if it be not white enough, put mor Water, and Salt and Vineger, and Alume, and boyl it again until no Tincture ris from the Brimstone, but it remain pure and white, which after dry and keep for you use. Its Ʋse▪ This is more purer than the Flower, b reason of its preparation, 'tis a great Dis¦ficature used in all kinde of Scabs, Itch Boyls, Sores, old Ulcers, Ulcers of th Lungs, dryeth up defluxion that falleth up∣on the Brest and Lungs, expels Flegm, kill Worms; for the Lungs or inward Diseases it may be given in any Syrup, or made int a Balsam, with Oyl of Turpentine. Out
wardly, it may be mixed with any Oint∣ment Oyl proper, and so used, or with some Pomatum, or with Butter; The Dose in∣wardly, is from a scruple to a dram. Balsam of Sulphur. TAke one part of Flowers of Brimstone, and two parts of Oyl of Turpentine, put them in a Long Body, set it in Sand, make a fire under that is not very big, con∣tinue this for eight or nine hours, and then let it cool and decant your Balsam, keeping it in a Glass for your use. Tincture of Sulphur. TAke Balsam of Sulphur put in a Long-body, and put into it some Salt of Tar∣tar calcined until it looks blew, and after for two hours melte in the fire, separate all the Oyl of Turpentine by distillation to a dry Mass, out of which in B. M. with Spirit of Wine extract a Tincture. I Vertues. This Tincture is a good Diaphoretick, and likewise purgeth by Urine, it driveth out Surfets, the Small pox, Meazels, help∣eth Coughs, Catarrhs, Apetite lost, dri∣veth
out Gravel in the Reins, helpeth the Consumptive, Ulcers in the Lungs; outward∣ly it cureth Itch, new Sores or old Ulcers; the Dose inwardly to be taken daily is to six drops, but to sweat upon it, to one dram. Tincture of Sulphur. TAke one pound of Flowers of Sulphur, put it in a Long-body, place it in Sand, make a good fire under for ten or twelve hours 'twill extract a red Tincture, after coagulate the same Tincture into a red dry Mass, which extract wich Spirit of Urine; extract the Spirit of Urine again from the Tincture, par B. M. to blood red Liquor, which extract again with Spirit of Wine, and 'twill be of a fair redness, and of a yel∣lowish cast poured into any Liquors, and not unpleasant. Oyl of Sulphur par Campane. THis Oyl of Sulphur is made in Glass, which opens at the Top in this Form following.
glass for making oil of sulphur A The top of the Bell, or Campane, that the Flowers may pass, and to give a free-passage for the fume to ascend and carry the spirits upward B A Ring about the Glass, whereby it may the more facily be hand∣led when hot. C Represents the body of the Bell, which the Brimstone in burning must keep always very hot, else little Spirits will come. D The Bason placed under to receive the Oyl, with some water in it, that the Spirits may not corode the Bason. E The Earthen Vessel set in the Bason of wa∣ter, containing the Brimstone to be burnt. FF are square pieces of Glass, or Glass Bot∣tles set upon the Brim of the Bason, upon which the Campane must stand, there must be three at least. To put this in use, you must take the
Vessel E, fill it full of powdered Brimstone, set it in the Bason D, then let the square piece F F, viz. three of them at equal di∣stance upon the brim of the Bason, so that the Bell may handsomly stand upon them, then with a red hot Iron thrust into the Brimstone, set it well a fire, and clap over your Bell C, taking of it off the Ring B, and stir it well with a red hot Iron, and when the Brimstone is decayed or burnt, supply i with more; your Oyl will distil down th sides of the bell into the Bason, which whe the distillation is ended, pour out in a glas and keep for your use. Its Vertue. It is good in such Diseases as are accom¦panied with winde or putrified humours or Melancholy; it giveth help to Feaver Agues, quenches the preternatural thirst relieveth the stomach, dissipateth toug Flegm, it cleanseth the Reins, bringet forth Gravel; It helpeth all Inflammation internal or external. It helpeth Wound Ulcers, Cancers, Noli-me-tangere, or an stinking, nasty, putrid Sores, and ma other Diseases.
The Third BOOK. Of the Preparation of Metals. Mercury Sublimate. TAke of Mercury, of Vitriol calcined yellow, of decrepitated Salt, of each one pound, of Salt Petre 4 ℥ grinde and mix them well upon a stone, put them into a Retort, apply a Receiver luted, di∣stil it with a small fire until all the Spirit be come forth, and the neck begin to look white take away the Receiver, stop the mouth with Cotten, and increase your fire for eight or ten hours more or till all be sublimed, if it be well done, 'twill be the same weight 'twas before or heavier, you may reiterate the su∣blimations as often as you please. Red Precipitate. TAke three parts of Spirit of Salt-Petre, and Vitriol or Aquafortis, and Spirit of Quicksilver, set it in Sand till it is dissol∣ved; then urge the fire that all the Spirits
be evaporated dry, then pour upon it so much more Aquafortis, dissolve it and do as before; do this a third time, a fair red Preci∣pitate remaineth, put this in a Glased ear∣then Vessel that will hold no more, lute on a lid, and set it in a Sand Kettle for 24 hours with a strong fire under, and then edulce∣rate and dry the same. Its Ʋse. It is excellent for all old Sores which can∣not be helped with other Medicines, it clen∣seth and healeth them; It eateth away all dead and proud Flesh. Turbith Mineral. TAke two parts Spirit of Niter, six parts Oyl of Vitriol, and one part of Quick∣silver, set it in Sand four hours, abstract the Spirits, and the Mercury looketh somewhat yellow, do this three times with fresh Spirit and it will be at the highest, always making a strong fire, at last dulcifie it with warm water until 'tis sweet. Its Ʋse. It purges strongly, and often provoketh to Vomit, it is used in the Pox, and the ver∣rulent Gonorrhea. This Turbith may be made by Spirit of Sulphur, adding two parts of Oyl of Sulphur to one of Mercury.
White Precipitate. DIssolve one pound of Mercury in two pounds of Aquafortis, and by additi∣on of salt water precipitate it into a white Powder, pour the water by inclination, and that Precipitate wash with fair water until the Acrimony be lost, then dry it. Its Vertues. Its inward Dose is from six to twelve gr. it is especially used in venerial Diseases, it purges downward, and being mixt with Oyntment is used outwardly, by friction cu∣reth the Itch. Mercurius Diphoreticus. TAke purified Sol. in thin Lamens one part, the mineral Eagle purified twelve parts, mix them acccording to Art into an Amalgama, put them into a retort of Glass, put upon the same twice the weight of the Amalgama of the sweet red Lyon, digest it twenty four hours and then distil it off until all the moisture be separated, make a strong fire at last, this done put as much more of the red Lyon, do this three times, and eve∣ry time making the fire very strong, at the
end take your Retort out, pour fresh-wa∣ter into it a great quantity, set it in Sand, and boyl the water, then decant it, and wash it with more fresh water many times, and dry the same, pour upon it the spirit of Wine, stop it close and set it in B. twenty four hours, then decant it and put on more, this do three times and 'tis prepared; If this be again put to its weight of the red Oyl, and three parts of good spirit of Wine dige∣sted in B. it resolveth into a red Oyl. Its Ʋse. It is a most excellent Medicine, the Dose from 5 to 8 gr. use morning and evening, sweating two hours upon it, in the Pox if a∣ny pustles arise use the red Oyl of Calcothar, it cureth likewise the Gout, Dropsie, Plurisie. Purging Mercury. IF from Mercury the Oyl of Salt be once abstracted, it leaves a white Precipitate, which only purges downward. Its Ʋse. It cureth the Pox, Gonorrhea, heals the Ulcers of the Bladder, and Throat, and ra∣dically cureth the Gout, and all Feavors, the dose is 8 gr. if the Liquor of the whites o Eggs be three times abstracted, and will be red and called Arcanem Corallinem.
Mercurius Dulcis. TAke Quick-silver twelve ounces, of Mercury sublimate one pound, grinde them together, adding by little and little the Quick-silver, and if you please add a little distilled Vineger, mix it so that no live Mercury appear, and it look blackish, then put it to sublime in sand in a Retort, for eight or ten hours, let it cool, cut off the Glass, and separate the matter sublimed from the fecies, and sublime it once again by it self. Its Vertues. This Medicine is much used in the French Pox, Gonorrhea; the Dose from 15 to 30 grains in any proper Pill. To make Mercury of Mettals. TAke Saturn, Jupiter, or Luna, in thin Lamens, pour upon them distilled Vi∣neger, and twice their weight of purified Salarmoniack and Salt of Tartar, let them stand ten or twelve days until they be dissolved, and then distil them into a Re∣ceiver, holding fair water: but the best way is as the Mercury of Antimony.
Oyl, or Water of Mercury. MElt Tin, and when 'tis almost coagu∣lated add to it equal weight of Mer∣cury or Quicksilver, which incorporate un∣til they become a Paste, which finely grind on a stone, and add to it of sublimate so much as it weigheth, work them together, and i a moist place they will resolve into water which distil par Retort, and keep the wate for your use. Its Vertues. It cureth Cancer, Noli-me-tangere, eat∣ing Ulcers, and the like. Arcanem Corallinem. TAke of the red Precipitate one part, pou upon it fair warm water, stir it and wast often until it be sweet, put this sweet Pre∣cipitate into a Retort, decrepitated com∣mon Salt half a part, and two parts of Spi∣rit of Salt, set it in Sand, draw off the Spi∣rit of Salt, and at last make the strongest fir you can in Sand, for the Spirit of Salt wil fix the Mercury, so as to be fit for Medicine, sweeten the Precipitate with much warm water, and after reverberate it by it self.
Its Vertues. It purges and cureth the Pox, and verru∣leth the Gonorrhea, the dose is to 8 gr. Of Lead and Tin. To calcine Lead. MElt Lead in an Earthen Crucible, add to it thus melted its weight of Quck∣silver, and then stir it till it become a Pow∣der, which wash with Salt and Vineger and after with water till the blackness be ex∣tinct, and it become fair and sweet, then calcine it with Salt in a Reverberatory, and edulcerate the matter for 'tis prepared to make the Mercury. To calcine Lead. or Tin. MElt it in an Iron kettle and purge it well, and cast into the same a little Salarmoniack, increase the fire that the pan be red hot, then add one quarter part of prepared Salt, and one eight part of the calx of Vitriol and Petre, and keep it in a strong fire till it be rubified then dulcifie it.
Its Vertues. This Calx is used in good success in Plai∣sters and Unguents for new and old Sores, and for Burns and Scalding. To Calcine ♄ parse. MElt Lead in a Leaden kettle, cleanse it from the Scoria or Dross, increase the fire that the Matter be red hot, continually stirring it with an Iron Spatula until 'tis re∣duced into a Calx, which searce and rever∣berate into Minium. To sublime Lead or Tin. TAke one part of Calx of Lead, and one part of pure Salt-Petre, distil them ac∣cording to Art, and you get pure white Flowers. Its Vertues. They are used in Unguents and Plaisters, to dry and heal, and appease all outward In∣flamations, or where places are gal'd.
Lacca Virginis. IF equal parts of Salt or Sugar of Lead, and salt Gem be dissolved in Plantain-water, and afterwards mixt together makes a Milk that taketh away redness in the Face, Sun-burn, Morphew, Freckles, Pimples, Pushes, or any Inflamations. Salt, Spirit, and Oyl of Lead, or Tin. TAke Letharge, pour upon the same good distilled Vineger in a Pipkin, boyl it o∣ver a fire for six or eight hours, that done put on more distilled Vineger, and boyl it again with the Fecies eight or ten hours, and then decant it to the other Vineger; these tin∣ged Vinegers put into a Pipkin and evapo∣rate the Vineger to a Skim or the half part, and set it in a cold place Christal will shoot, and with a wooden spoon take them out; then boyl the remaining Liquor to a Skim, set it in a cold place Christal will shoot, put these Christals together, dry them and keep them for your use: but if you will make an Oyl then dissolve these Christals in fresh Vi∣neger,
and procceed with boyling, and af∣ter chrystalizing, until they are sufficiently impregnated with the Salarmoniack of the Vineger, then digest them in B. M. until they be resolved into a water, or liquor, which distil par Retort in sand, and there will come over an Oyl of most fragrant smell, and a yellow Oyl at the top, and red Oyl at the bottom. Its Vertues. The Salt dissolved in Rose-water and dropt in the eyes, cureth Inflammations. If upon the Saccarum Saturni, or Chry∣stals, you digest Oyl of Turpentine, you extract a blood red Tincture, which is cal∣led Balsam of Saturn. To make Glass of all colours, for the In∣amelling of Rings, &c. TAke one part of Minium, & three parts of Chrystals, or Powder of Flints, set them in a Potters Furnace, and fuse them into a Glass, which will be green or yellow; of this Glass, Venice Glass, ashes of Jupiter, and the proper colours mixt may be made Glass diversly, and such as the Goldsmiths use, but the best Glass is mentioned before: as for the colouring of Glasses you may finde in another place.
Spirit and Oyl of Saturn. IF Vineger of the Philosophers be so of∣ten poured upon Letarge of Saturn, dry∣ing it every time, and so continuing inbi∣bing and drying the same, until it will no more dry by a small heat, which then put into a Retort, and distil a sweet Spirit, and red Oyl, or Balsam. Of Iron, or Steel. Crocus Martis. TAke of the Filings of Steel and Sulphur, of each equal parts, grinde or mix them well, and put them in a Crucible, set them in a Furnace in a naked fire, until the Sul∣phur be all burnt, which being ended, ex∣tract the Tincture with distilled Vineger, the Vineger again abstracted leaves a red Crocus, which calcine in a Furnace for two hours, and wash away the Acrimony with warm water. Its Ʋse. The use of Crocus Martis is usual to stop Fluxes of the Belly, Diarrhea, and Decen∣tery. Externally used in Ointments and
Plaisters, for the drying up Wounds or Ul∣cers. Note that if the Salt be not well clea∣red from the Crocus, then 'tis rather open∣ing than binding; and Steel unprepared is better than that in the body. Oyl, and Crocus Martis. Dissolving the Filing of Steel in Aqua∣fortis, or distilled Vineger, and the Solution pour off from Fecies, and draw off the acid Spirit and the Crocus remaineth, which lay upon a stone in a cold and moist place, will resolve it self into a Balsam, or Oyl. Its Vertues. It helpeth all coroding Ulcers, Fistulaes, Cancers, &c. Crocus Martis. TAke fresh Calx-vive as much as you need, and moisten it with Urine until it be like Pap, take a Crucible at the bottom, make a lay of this lime, and upon it a lay o Steel-dust, and so to the filling of the pot and then firmly lute and set it in a Potter Furnace for 24 hours, then let it be beater very fine and searsed, and after wash awa the Lime.
Oyl, or Tincture of Mars. TAke one part of Crocus Martis, and three parts of Nitre, fuse them very strongly for four hours, which pour out in a Cone, and whilst hot bray it, and extract the Tincture with Spirit of Urine, and after with Spirit of Wine; the half of the Spirit of Wine separated leaves a good Tincture, safely to be taken in Fluxes of the Belly, without any danger. Ens Mars, and Oyl of Mars. TAke Crocus Mars, inbibe it with the water of Salarmoniack, two or three imes a day before the fire, stirring it until it as inbibed its weight of Salarmoniac, then ry the same, put it in a Sublimetory, and y degrees of fire, yet at last very strong, you may sublime the Tincture, or Ens Mar∣is, which you may extract with Spirit of Wine, and then the half part of the Spirit gain abstracted, leaves the true Tincture r Oyl of Mars, and a most excellent Me∣icine.
Salt, or Vitriol of Mars. TAke one part of the Oyl of Vitriol, and two parts of common water, put it in∣to a Long-body of Glass, and put therein your Powder of Steel, set it in a sand-kettle, let it boyl till the Oyl will dissolve no more, pour away that liquor, filter it through a Brown Paper, and put it into a short Glass, set it in sand, and make the flegm to evapo∣rate to skin appearing, then let it cool, set it in a cold place green Chrystal will shoot, take them out and dry them upon a filtering paper, the remaining liquor which did not shoot, you must evaporate again to a skin, and more Chrystal will shoot, and do this till all the liquor be turned into Vitriol. Its Vertues. It is operative or opening very much, it opens the obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, cureth the Green-sickness, bring∣eth down Womens Courses, helpeth th Jaundice; the Dose is from one scruple t one dram. Oyl, and Flower of Mars. TAke of the Crocus Mars made with A quafortis (but the Spirit must not b
drawn off too dry) and pure Salt-petre, of each equal weight, mix them well and di∣stil them, and there will come over flower very useful for Chyrurgeons, as you may read of the Crocus; but these flowers, the body being more opened by sublimation, are the more excellent for use. If the flowers of Mars, or any other Metal be dissolved in Aquafortis, and a like weight of Salt of Wine even fificated, dissolved in the same menstruum, these joyned together and di∣stilled, the Mettal will come over in an Oyl. Of Silver. To calcine Luna with Mercury. MAke Luna in very thin Plates or La∣mens, then take off Mercury six parts make the Luna very hot in a Crucible, then take it off and pour into it the Mercury, stir it together until it be brought to a Powder, then add to it of common Salt that is decre∣pitated, set it to the fire again until the Mer∣cury vanish, then edulcorate the Matter, and 'tis calcined.
To calcine Luna with Aquafortis. DIssolve Luna in Aquafortis, to one part of Luna take three of the water, set it to dissolve in ashes by a very small heat, which pour off in a Glass or Glased Pan, and upon this solution put a great quantity of Salt water, and your Silver will turn in∣to white Curds, which will precipitate and fall to the bottom; which wash well with fair water and a white Calx remains, which put up in a bottle close stopt for your use. Its Vertues. It is used by Ladies and Gentlewomen as a most excellent Fucus to give an ornament to the Face. Purging Chrystals of Silver. TAke one part of Luna and half a part of Mercury, with three times its weight of water made out of the cold Earthen-Salt, set them in Sand, let the Matter dissolve in in a gentle heat, then separate the solution and draw off the Spirits to a skim, and chry∣stal will shoot like Allum-stones. Its Vertues. These are used from six to five grains in
Pills for to purge the head, and to cure the Venerial Diseases. Chrystals, or Vitriol of Luna. TAke the water of Niter, dissolve in the same your Luna, separate it from Fe∣cies if any, abstract the one third part to a skim, set it in a cold place and Chrystal will shoot, which is the true Vitriol of Luna. Its Vertues. It may be very safely used inwardly for purging the Body in Diseases of the Brain: but it is very bitter and therefore not tooth∣some; its dose is to twelve grains, it may be put to a little water of Walnuts, and it will dy the Hair black; If it were made with Aquafortis made of Vitriol, and the Luna pure without mixture of other. Of Venus. Crocus Veneris. TAke thin plates of Copper and Sulphur a like proportion, lay them stratum super straetum in a melting Pot, cover it close and set it in an open fire until the Brimstone be all burnt, then take it out, the Plates will
grow thick and like a black Crust, powde them in a Mortar, and wash them well with warm water ten or twelve times, and then dry them, and with distill'd Vineger ex∣tract a blew colour; from whence abstract all the Vineger, and a Crocus remains, which reverberate by it self in a Crucible, and sweeten it with warm water. Crocus Veneris. TAke thin Plates of Copper, and in a ear∣then unglased Pot lay them stratum super stratum with decrepitated Salt, let the Salt be first and last, set it in an open fire by little and little, till at last it be red hot, cast them then out in a Vessel of cold water, and clense the Plates from their blackness, and salt and dry them, and with Salt again calcine them and cast them in cold water, then let the wa∣ter wherein the Plates were quenched be mixed with hot water, wash them from blackness, and the Crocus will be left at the bottom very red; which wash very well, and grinde to a most subtile Powder.
Crocus Veneris, and Verdigreece. TAke good Calx Vive as much as you need, and moisten them with Urine until it be like Pap, put some of the Pap at the bottom of your Pot, and then your Cop∣per Plates, and after your Lime till the Pot be full, let the Lime be uppermost, Iute on a head and set it in the Potters Furnace for twenty four hours; then take out the Mat∣ter and beat it to most subtil Powder, and wash away the Calx Vive with warm wa∣ter, and dry the remaining Matter and keep for your use. Its Vertues. This Crocuses are used by Chyrurgions to make their Stiptick Plaisters, and to mix with Unguents, in venerial Sores. Amalgama, Honey, Salt, Vineger and Lamens of Venus, and calcine the same, and all the Venus will be converted in Verdi∣greece. Corrosive Oyl of Venus. TAke Plates of Copper or Crocus Vene∣ris pour upon the same good Spirit of Salt, and extract the greenness; if any Fe∣cies
remain separate them, and from the dissolved Body draw off in B. the Spirit of Spirit, and a green mass remaineth, which placed upon a stone will resolve in a cold and moist place into green Oyl▪ Its Vertues. It cureth all old Ulcers, Fistulaes, Can∣cers, Noli-me-tangere, or stincking putrifi∣ed Ulcers, and any venomous Sores. Ens Veneris. TAke reverberated Crocus, make it moist in a earthen dish with Spirit of Wine, and let it dry before the fire, do this ten times and then mix them with equal weight of Sa∣larmoniack, which after sublime three or four times by it self, and you obtain a yel∣low golden Powder, of the same use as the former Ens Veneris. Flowers of Venus, or Copper. TAke Venus that has been dissolved in A∣quaforttis, and it again separated almost to a dryness in B. grinde them with equal weight of Salt Petre, and distil them accor∣ding to Art, and you obtain a great many Flowers.
Its Vertues. These Flowers are used in the same man∣ner as the Crocus, in Plaisters and Un∣guents, but more effectual. Salt, or Vitriol of Venus. TAke Verdigreece powdered (beware of the fumes) pour upon the same distil'd Vineger, and extract the Tincture, sepa∣rate the coloured Vineger, and put on more Vineger, extract the Tincture as long as any will arise; these coloured Spirits pour to∣gether, and draw off the Acitum to a skin arising on the top; then set it in a cold place Chrystal will shoot, which take out and eva∣porate the Vineger as before to skin, more Chrystal will shoot; take them out and proceed as before until all the Tincture be converted into Vitriol, this Vitriol eight or ten times extracted with fresh Vineger, and then ditilled, it yields a red Oyl, which turn Mars into Vitriol. Its Vertues. They are used inwardly in Gonorrhea, outwardly used for the Itch or Scabs.
Of Gold. To Calcine Gold with Mercury. TAke eight parts of Mercury, set it in a fire in a Crucible till it begin to smoak, then take it off and add one part of thin pie∣ces of Gold, stir it until you see no more Gold, then set it to the fire again, and stir it so long until all the Mercury evaporate, take out the Powder of Gold and grinde it with its weight of decrepitated Salt, put it in a Crucible, and set it to calcine again for a few hours, then take it out and wash away the Salt, and a yellow Calx remains, keep for your use. To purge and calcine Gold by Aqua Regis. PUt one ounce of Gold, and one dram of Gold, into three parts of Aqua Re∣gis, dissolve it in warm sand, the Luna will descend in a black Calx, and lye at the bot∣tom of the Glass, decant the Aqua Regis containing the Gold, and precipitate it with Oyl of Tartar, or Spirit of Salarmoniac, or put in so much Mercury as will dissolve that water, and the acid Spirits will forsake the
Gold and dissolve the Mercury, the Gold falling to the bottom in a yellow Calx; but if that water is not sufficient to dissolve all the Mercury you put in, you must add more. This yellow Calx thus purely purged, wash well with Rain-water, and after dry in the sun, or before a small heat of fire. Purging and exalting Gold by Cementation. TAke of Gold, of Copper, of each one ounce, melt them together, and cast them in an Ingote, beat them in thin La∣mens, put them in strong distilled Vineger, for 24 hours, then take Tyles powdered, Salt purified, and decrepitated, Vitriol ru∣bified and dissolved in distilled Vineger, which coagulate and calcine it again. Of Verdigreece dissolved in Vineger and coa∣gulated, and Salarmoniack purified and dissolved in distilled Vineger, as much as there is of the other Powders, make these Powders moist with the Armoniack Vine∣ger, and make a lay of this Paste in the pot, then a lay of your Gold and Copper, and again a lay of Paste, until the pot be full, let the uppermost be the Powder; Lute on a Lead with a hole in the middle, set it in a Potters Furnace for 24 hours, and then take
it out, separate the matter from the plates, and do this seven times with new powder, melting the Gold with new Copper, and your Gold will be so much augmented in Colour or Tincture, that if it were melted down with its weight of Silver, yet it would be at the height of Gold in colour, and like fine Gold. If Gold be heated red hot, and quenched several times in the water where new melt∣ed Lead has before been often quenched, it will be augmented in its weight. Tincture of Gold. TAke of Gold purged as before, one part, and six parts of Mercury, make it into an Amalgama, and to it adde two parts of common Sulphur, put it into a broad pan over a fire, and let it evaporate, conti∣nually stirring it, and let it be a small fire, 'twill at last be brought into a Calx, which you must reverberate strongly, and then powder it; to this Powder add three parts of Aqua Regis, set it to dissolve in sand for three or four hours, and the Solution de∣cant and put on more water, and extract the remainder, which decant and put to the other; set these Solutions in a Long-body,
with a Still-head luted set it in B. M. with a Receiver fast luted, make a small heat for 24 hours, and then draw off the Spirits, co∣hobate them seven times, then let it stand in digestion nine days, and again draw off the Spirits to an Olitie, then add fresh Spi∣rits, digest them 24 hours, separate the Fe∣cies, if any be, and abstract the Spirits to a specitude, set them in a cold and moist place, Chrystal will shoot, take them out and abstract more Spirit, more Chrystal will shoot; do thus till all the Gold is con∣verted into Chrystals, dissolve these Chry∣stals in distilled Rain-water, and add to it three parts of Mercury purged, shake it a∣bout many colours will appear, and the A∣malgama fall to the bottom, and the Water will clear up; take the Amalgama, wash it well with water and dry it, put it in an ear∣then Vessel, evaporate the Mercury, stirring it continually, and a purple coloured pow∣der will remain, which extract with the A∣nimal Mercury, and there will arise a blood red Tincture, which decant from the Fe∣cies, after the Tincture is extracted, put them in digestion close stopt for eight or ten days, then draw off the Spirits two or three times in B. M. the Calx remains as red as blood; which extract once again with well
rectified Spirit of Wine, and you have the true Tincture of Gold, not to be paralel'd by any other Medicine. Its Vertues. The vertues of this Medicine is great, and generally to be used in all Diseases of what rank soever; It preserveth health & strength of the body, keeping it free from Diseases, until old age, and not that onely, but the most violent and malign Diseases, as the Leprosie, Gout, Dropsie, Apoplexy, Epi∣lepsie, Hypocondraick Melancholy, the Lues Venerea, the Asthma, Ptissick, Inward Imposthumes, and all other Diseases either Cronick or Accute. The Dose is to seven or eight drops in some convenient Spirit, and so sweated upon the same in bed. Oyl of Talck. TAke English Talck commonly called Spade, beat and searce it into most sub∣til Powder; take thereof twelve pounds, pour upon the same good distilled Vineger, let it overtop it a hands breadth, set it in B. M. stir it with a stick three or four times a day, and let it stand so about eight days, and the Vineger will be tinged yellowish, decant the same and put on more, and set
it again in digestion until it hath again got a Tincture, this do three times, and then put the tinged Spirits together, and draw away the Vineger in a small heat of B. M. until it drop no more, until the remainder be dry and of a white Mass; which put into a Retort, and in Sand make fire by degrees for forty eight hours, distil off a white wa∣ter and red Oyl reserve each by it self; the Fecies calcine for eight days, and then with distil'd Vineger extract the Salt, which fil∣ter and congeal so often until it be pure white, and Chrystaline you may know when the Fecies will yield no more Salt by the whiteness of the Vineger; if this Salt be ground upon a stone, and be put into a ear∣then dish and inbibed with the white Oyl, stirring it with a stick three or four times a day, and covering it with a cloath, and this inbibing be continued until it hath drawn the double or tripple weight of the white Oyl, in such wise that being cast upon a red hot Plate of Venus, it disparses it self in fumes; then sublime the same, and you at∣tain a foliated white Earth, which will have a great brightness, and perspecuity, than can be seen in the most rich oriential Pearls, which hath admirable faculties and proper∣ties; this close luted set in B. M. will re∣solve
it self in a most clear transparent white Oyl, or in a cold and moist place. Its Vertue. This above all others is the most excel∣lent Fucus in the world, for without doing the least prejudice to nature, it maketh the old age look young and lively, it taketh a∣way all Wrinckles, Morphey, Sun-burn, Spots, or other such like defects at once or twice using at most, by onely anointing the Face. Of the colouring of Glass. FOr a Sea green take from four to six gr. of the red calcin'd Venus, with one ounce of Glass; the Iron in the same pro∣portion or to ten grains, maketh a yellow, or Jacinth colour. Silver calcin'd and precipitated as before from Aquafortis, edulcorated and dryed, whereof to six grains added to one ounce of Glass, make a mixt colour. Gold precipitated with Liquor of Flints edulcorated and dryed, whereof from grains four to thirty grains in one ounce of Glass, maketh a most elegant Saphire; from three to six grains of the Rube mentioned in the treatise of Antimony, be added to one ounce
of Glass, it giveth a most perfect Rube co∣our, Magnesia Parlaerized from six to four∣een grains maketh an Amathist; The Tin∣ture of Lapis Calaminaris giveth a yellow olour. The best way for the calcining of Metals, for the colouring Glass, and for painting. TAke the filings of thin Lamens, or filings of Copper, add to it twice as much Mercury, and grinde them upon a Marble, ith some distil'd Vineger, and some Salt, nd they will come into a Mass, then wash way the Salt and Vineger with common water till the Mass be bright as silver, but oft; then set it in a gentle heat all night, t will be hard, then grinde it with a little Quicksilver more, (and not too much that it ay be very liquid) and set it in a gentle eat again until it be very hard, and this ork reiterate till it will drink up no more Quicksilver; then are the Filings burst in ttomes; then evaporate the Quicksilver n a Crucible with a gentle heat first, and fter make it red hot, so will the Copper be n a red Powder; this red Powder must be amped in a Marble Mortar, with warm ater, and ever as the warm water is co∣loured
red, it must be poured into a J Glass, and new water put to it, and so th work must be reiterated until it will colo the water no more, then let the water s all night till the Copper be settled at th bottom, then pour off the clear water a dry the rest in the Sun, or by a gentle he and it will be as fine as any Wheat-flower which may be ground upon a Painters Mar∣ble stone with Gum water, until a Painte may paint with it, or it will serve to mi Glass, and to give it what colour you pleas according to the nature of the Metal or Mi∣neral. Thus (courteous Reader) having finished my persent intended work, if thou bestow s much labor as to read this Book, and put i in practice, I wish thee as to my self, good success in all thy lawful and godly indea∣vors, and so commend both them and the to the Lord. FINIS.
