T237 R24099 7951714 40673
AN ANTIDOTE Against the Sinfull Palpitation of the Heart, OR Fear of Death. Humbly offered to mens serious Thoughts, because sadly occasioned by That Dreadfull PLAGUE, And those horrid Fears of Death, that have seized This present Generation in England: whom either greater Sins, or weaker Graces, or both to∣gether, have rendred more then ever, Timorous. MADE UP OF That Singular and Soveraign Scripture, Hebrews 2.15. —And deliver them, who through fear of Death, were all their life time subject to Bondage. By Robert Tatnall M. A. Sometimes Fellow of Trinity Colledge in Cambridge, and lately Minister of the Gospel at St. John Evangelist's LONDON. Isa. 9.14, 15, 16, 17.—For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. Rev. 1.17, 18. I am the first and the last. I am he that liveth and was dead; and be∣hold I am alive for evermore, Amen; and have the keyes of Hell and of Death. Psal. 68.20. He that is our God, is the God of salvation; and unto God the Lord be∣long the issues from Death. London, Printed by J. Hayes, and are to be sold by S. Gellibrand at the gilded Ball, and S. Thomson at the Bishops Head in St. Pauls Church-yard. 1665.
Perlegi hunc Libellum cui Titulus (An Anti∣dote against the fears of Death) in quo nihil reperio Doctrinae Disciplinaeve Ecclesiae An∣glicanae aut bonis Moribus contrarium. Joh. Hall, R. P. D. Episc. Lond. à Sac. Domest. July 6. 1665.
TO THE TRULY CHRISTIAN READER. IT is not a time now (if ever) to comple∣ment with dying men and women that poor aid which any serious Christian can endeavour to give, in such a publick Calamity, as we all now do, or should deeply lament. The unworthy Labou∣rer in this small Piece of Service must acknowledge so much concerning himself, only for his Apology: That having been some time, till of late im∣ployed in London, as a Minister, He cannot but weep over it, in some Conformity to his Great President's weep∣ing over Jerusalem; And lisp that tender Affection, which he cannot express to so great a City. For it is be∣lov'd of all, and a City once much in, and ('tis hop't) not now out of God's favour: To be sure not left out of the
hearts of some few, who as formerly, do still most affectio∣nately pray for her, though they can do little else. The Plague rages amongst us. Good men as well, though I hope not as much as bad men, are obnoxious to this visita∣tion. The latter understand little of the Duty or Comforts manifested in Scripture, Spiritually knowing nothing at all. Such if they will may hear the sounding of Gods Bowels and tender Mercies to them, as in some other in∣stances, so not least of all in those Comprehensive, though SHORT INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE SICK, with some other; very lately made publick by an Eminent Labou∣rer in the Gospel, which, with his leave, may be stil'd His repeated [Call to the Unconverted] in Epitome, or their (Now or Never) indeed. The Lord make those Instru∣ctions as effectual, as they are most opportune and im∣portunate too with mens souls. Surely the endeavouring of sinners conversion, especially at the brink of the Grave, must needs be a work of Sage Prudence, and an Apostolick Spirit. But who is sufficient as for that, so for the rest of the Labour? viz. The Edification and Building up of Souls in their most holy Faith, when their bodies are near ruine? Truly, be that now questions (who is?) must answer for himself, that he of all men, is not: Who yet counts it his great Duty to deplore it, as well as to confess it: And whilst he laments his own evident insufficiency; to rely upon that sufficiency which is of God; both to Di∣rect, Assist, and Bless the meanest of all his Labourers. As for good men and women, who are so, though they can scarce themselves think so, yet they are Christs flock; And the Sheep and Shepherds too, cannot but chiefly tender their good. Now 'tis clear that Death is near them as well as others; Yea some of Gods most pre∣tious Children have been sick of the Plague, none that
I know do much doubt it to be King Hezekiahs sickness unto death; Nay, some have dy'd of it, as a most Eminent Minister of this City not long ago. And 'tis not que∣stion'd by some considerable Divines, but that many of the converted Corinthians dyed of the Plague, as well as others of them were much visited with it, so that many were sick, and many weak. Whereupon some may say, there may be no peremptorily asserted ground for a good mans looking on himself as unconcern'd, and exem∣pted in a common danger and calamity. But however it must be remembred, that a good man hath no reason to fear the fear of the wicked, whilst he hopes not their hope: He having more reason then any wicked persons have, to wait upon God for a special Protection; if the ninty first Psalm be a part of his Charter, as no doubt it is. Yet notwithstanding I find a great Terrour upon this Plague even possessing Good as well as Bad men. Which I am the more troubled at; because as good people have less cause to sink and faint away; so Christ by their dispon∣dency hath the less Honour. Which two inconvenien∣cies much sadder then a Plague, O that I could, as a poor Instrument, if not remove, yet abate, at least in some: O let Saints bear up, and stand in the Gap, or Breach: Aaron you know ran into the midst of the visited Con∣gregation, and stood between the Dead and the Living making atonement for them, till the Plague was stayed, Numb. 16.47, 48. Hath Christ made his people a Royal Priesthood to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices acceptable by Jesus Christ? and shall such run from the Congregation? I mean from their Duty, their Calling, their Charge, their own people, yea God and all, in vain? O let Christ be ho∣noured for the increase of whose Kingdom, by the conscien∣cious labours of Gods Children in their places, The world
both doth and shall stand through Gods mercy remembred in all his Judgments, even till the great and general day of the Lords Tribunal. There are indeed no greater Motives to any good Action, or endeavour, then the advance of Christs Honour, and of the Holiness and Happiness of poor souls, who may, if they be wise, become with Abraham strong in Faith, and so rewarded with strong Consolation, that believing so, with him, they might rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory, not only after, but also before their death. All which is plainly intended in the Subject, or Scripture here presented to such as would be serious and safe. Which Design of God, and interest of man, if it be sincerely espoused in the ensuing Discourse: God will I hope in mercy pardon, and every good person pity his infirmities, who in pity prayes for a blessing of God upon this, and all other means to be used by such as are sick of the fears of Death before they are visited. Who therefore will not surely, when a Cordial is brought them from the God of Heaven, fling Glasse and all, in contempt at the poor Mes∣senger; who is (Christian Reader) Thine in the LORD heartily, R. T.
An Antidote against the Fears of Death. Heb. 2.15. And deliver them, who through fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage. WHen the serious thoughts of Mor∣tality and Eternity do awaken our spirits to look about us, whose Bodies, when once God is angry, are but dust and ashes under a consuming fire: When Pestilence, War, and Famine are at the doors, and look in, yea, en∣ter in at the Windows, closely following Poor men and women, as Phinehas did Zimri and Cozbi into their
very Tent to slay them: When Gods Prisoners are shut up from all comfort and Company of this life: Then, surely then, no fellowship like the fellowship of Christs sufferings; No Sanctuary like his Sepulchre, No Physi∣cian like him, whose bloud is of infinite value and vertue too; No Deliverer from the miseries and fears of death but this Jesus; this Christ that dyed. For his Death affords bread broken and ready prepared to refresh and revive both the living and dying: His bloud shed is the best Weapon salve, or Plague-water; the only Preser∣vative of all those that have received the Arrows of the Almighty, and the Messengers of Death; whether we consider Famine, Wounds, or Plague of mens own hearts, or bodies. But it is comfort against Death in general, and the fears of it, that I design for the bene∣fit of the Saints timorous souls, partakers with me of flesh and bloud, who must certainly, and may suddenly dye: And blessed Eternally be the Lord Jesus, it is his Grand and special design, who because the children did partake of flesh and bloud, and too much communicate in its fears of Death, did himself take part of the same; he lived and died: That so feeling the bitterness both of the life and death of flesh, he might as comfort his peo∣ple in all their tribulations, so especially deliver them, who through fear of death, were all their life time sub∣ject to bondage. I need not tell you a thing so obvi∣ous, How that Christ in his highest preheminence is the theame of this Epistle to the Hebrews; which after a glorious and singular manner displaies the honour and excellency of Christ before the eyes of all, both Jew and Gentile, who are too too prone to have very base and low thoughts of his Incarnation and Humanity, much more of his Death and Passion, I shall therefore
more narrowly acquaint you with the import of this Text: The which, with the preceding verse, is enough by Gods light to give us a soul animating and trans∣forming view of Christ. Where we may see him tri∣umphing with all his elect Souldiers, some worthies espe∣cially, over Death and Hell, and the Devil too. For as∣much then as the Children are partakers of flesh and bloud, he also himself likewise took part of the same, that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the Devil; and deliver them who through fear of death, were all their life time sub∣ject to bondage. Wherein you have, as in the Coherence, not only Christs and the Saints death, but also their victory over it. In the Text it self you have these two parts: 1. The Saints misery by nature, not only to dye, but before hand to labour under the fears of death; their subjection to bondage, with the continuance thereof; All their life time. 2. Their deliverance by Christ; And deliver them who through fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage. Where you see their deliverance is very com∣prehensive. And deliver them: Their persons are glori∣ously delivered; whether you respect death it self, the power and sting of Death, or the fears of Death, or that bondage upon the account of those fears, which renders their life most uncomfortable. The deliverance by Christ bates none of these. Now there are some words and passages in my Text to be opened, that I may clear my way to the Doctrines which are to be found in this bles∣sed Scripture; Being all such, as highly concern all mortal men, especially in a time of great mortality. 1. Then, what Death is this? Which is brought in
here as a King of fears, so terrible, that the Devil seems to be but its Vice-Roy; who would never be so dreaded, were it not for death, from which he receives power to Captivate and tyrannize over the poor Con∣sciences of men, that are cow'd with guilt, and enfeebled with the hand-writing against them in their own breasts; who when most carnally asleep, do notwithstanding now and then sadly dream of some sudden reckoning and dreadful execution. 2. What are these fears? Seeing fear of Death is so natural to, and common amongst the Saints. 3. What is meant by being subject to bondage? Are not all Saints more or less subject to many sad fears of death? Even those that sometimes can vaunt over it with the Apostle Paul, may sometimes also fear least at death they suffer shipwrack, and become Cast∣awaies. 4. What is meant by all their life time? What deli∣verance if all their life time so subject? 5. What is this deliverance, wrought thus for the people of God by the power of Christ, and the trans∣actions of his death? To these reasonable demands, briefly. First, What Death is this here meant? It is unque∣stionably natural death; the dissolution or departure of the soul from the body: The body one way to the dust and grave; the soul another way, even to God that gave it. This is the Death here spoken of; The more terrible for the certain judgment of all, and Eternal damnation of most, immediately consequent thereupon. Now in∣asmuch as a little before the Text, flesh and bloud is men∣tioned, which most shrinks from death, as that part of a good mans nature that suffers by death the only
damage: And in as much as Christ therefore took part of the same flesh and bloud, and so therein tasted death for every man; it is but plainly absurd to doubt that natural death is here meant. Secondly, What are the fears of Death here spoken of? Seeing fear of Death is so natural to, and common amongst the Saints. The Text will answer for me; the latter expression in the words resolves you. They are slavish fears, not natural or filial. Such fears as when in any measure in the Saints, have a certain tang of the spirit of bondage; Fears which do debase the ingenuity and confidence of children; As Saints are called just before the Text, For as much then as the children are parta∣kers of flesh and bloud: And so thereupon indeed are naturally subject to great fears, and by sin, to much bon∣dage too in their sence and apprehension of Death; therefore Christ took part of their flesh, that he might deliver those who by reason of their flesh and bloud were subject to great fears of death: That so he might reco∣ver them into the just temper, ingenuity, and liberty of the children of God. Thirdly, What is meant by being subject to bondage? Are not all Saints more or less subject to very great and slavish fears of death? Yea, such as can sometimes vauat over it with the Apostle Paul, do yet sometimes also even fear least at death they suffer shipwrack, and become Castawaies. I answer, It is not to be understood that any are so delivered, as to be quite rid of these fears, or of all proneness to, and possibility of them; that they see and hear of these enemies no more. For according to such a kind of meaning; the deliverance could not be wrought till after death; after which Saints shall neither sin, nor sorrow, nor fear, nor be in
bondage any more. If such were the sence, then the words of the Text should not run as they do thus, [Who were all their life time subject to bondage,] but who were, and still are, and shall be till death subject to bondage, yet who indeed shall after death be perfectly delivered from the fears of Death. Truly, as the Text can by no means admit or bear such a reading; so no reason can make clear sence of it. For to be freed from the fears of death, declares death not past but to come, and so notes a deliverance wrought in this life. What great pur∣chase were it, should a man undertake to deliver me from the fears of that evil, which I have already quite past through? So absurd is it to imagine, that Christs actual delivering of Saints from the fears of Death commences not, or begins not, till both Death it self, and the fears of it too, are all naturally together with it first past; and quite gone. Nay, truly the wickedest man dying in his sins, may be as properly said to be delivered from the fears of his natural death, a moment or two after he is dead; for how can he fear what he is sure is irrecovera∣bly past? Job 1.14. If a man dies, shall he live again? Nay, shall he dye again? So that if this be all Christs death doth for the Saints, that when they be dead they should not fear dying, or a past death; it then doth but actum age∣re, doth but what is done to hand by every ones death it self. Well then certainly Christs delivering Saints from the fears of death must denote death not past, but to come unto the delivered. And thereupon Subjection to bondage, cannot signifie any proneness to, or possibility of some evil fears of death, as that from which the Saints are in this life delivered; But somewhat more concerning, and indeed more miserable, plainly and Emphatically given out in that very significant
word , [.] For this word  which we find rendered in the Text subject, signifies such as are bound, held fast; some rendering it, obnoxii, some obstricti, some qui tenentur, all agree in the same no∣tion, of its importing as much as bound, held fast, ma∣nicled or fettered: Held fast as a bird taken in a snare, or a Malefactor arrested by a Serjeant, or as a condemned man manacled and fettered against the day of Executi∣on, and so held fast as to be in hourly or frequent fears of death; which whether it be the constant condition of all or any of Gods people all their daies, comes next to be considered. 4. What is meant by all their life time? What deli∣verance if all their life time so subject? I answer, it is plain, that by all their life time, must be meant all that part of their life time, before they come to enjoy the be∣nefit of this deliverance by Christ; and is equivalent to [All their former life time,] looking backwards to their first, not forwards to their last breath. That the time past of their life is only here intended as the time of this their bondage is clear in the very Text; [Who all their life time were,] not still are or shall be: But only who could never otherwise all their life time or before, get any true freedom from these fears, and this bondage but by Jesus Christ, and that upon the most serious medi∣tation and due application of the merit and designs of his Death. So then the Saints are not all their life time, enslaved, bound, and as it were manacled and fettered in prison; but coming to a right understanding of Christs death, they are wonderfully set loose and at liberty by Christ: So as not to be held fast in the clutches of Sa∣tan; although all their life time before, Conscience and the Devil held them fast by the fears of Death and
Judgment After which Liberty so obtained, none of Gods people are quite taken prisoners, held and bound hand and foot, as we say, with these fears; though alas, many times sorely assaulted. The Devil may be so bold as to arrest them with these fears, but can never altoge∣ther captivate and enslave them, much less carry them away as it were to the strong Hold, and detain them un∣der the power thereof. Where ever he finds Gods chil∣dren arresting them with these fears of death, he finds them in privtledged places, as I may say; his Arrest is against the Law of God; the Gospel Charter. And there is one, especially, if fled to, and called upon, that will take off the Arrest, even Jesus Christ, the Captain of their Salvation, and powerfully deliver them from the Devils black frightful suggestions, and all those astonishing fears; having destroyed him himself, and already put him to his fearing and trembling. That through death he might destroy him that had the Power of death, that is, the Devil, and (So) deliver them, who through fear of death, were all their life time subject to bon∣dage. Fifthly, What deliverance is this? Wrought for the people of God by the power of Christ, and the transacti∣ons of his Death. It is a deliverance so described here, (to observe the Logick of the Text,) as that it direct∣ly carries our eyes to behold, First, The Deliverer him∣self, Jesus Christ. Secondly, The misery he delivers from. First, The Deliverer himself Jesus Christ. And therefore we are to consider: 1. That it is a deliverance designed and intended by him; That he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the Devil, and (also that he might)
deliver them who through fear of death were all their life time subject to bendage. By taking unto himself flesh and bloud, By living and dying, this was his great Design to deliver poor mortal men from the fears of Death. Great Comfort surely! He, he, will not fail of his end. How great is he who disappoints the devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform their enterprize? And there is none that can controule him, or hinder him in his design, who ran down the Devil him∣self that stood in his way. He was so set on this design of delivering his children from the fears of Death, that he destroyed the Devil, who had the greatest power of death to oppose him. 2. As it is a Deliverance designed, so purchased by him, at the price of his Death. He tasted death for every man, that he might deliver, &c He purchased with his own bloud the deliverance of his people from the fears of death. 3. As designed and purchased, so really and actually vouchasafed; he destroyed the Power of the Tyrant who detained them as slaves, and set them at liberty. As it was said of Herod; He was dead that sought the Childs life; so may it be said of the Devil; He is destroyed that enslaved the poor Consciences of mortal men with the horrid fears of Death Hoeprostratus est (Diabolus) ut pro nihilo hab ndus sit, o si nullus fore. Calv. And they that are in Christ are not under his power; so it may be said of them only that they were subject to bondage, closely held to it; but now they are loose and at liberty, to serve God with∣out fear in righteousness and holiness all the daies of their life. But now, Secondly, This Actual Deliverance is further descri∣bed so as to lead us to the Consideration of the misery from which Christ delivers his people, and that
under those words; Death, Fears, Bondage. 1. From Death it self, I mean the misery or curse of it. It is true all Christs redeemed ones dye; or, are translated: But Death is not death to them; but rather a meer shadow; and whilest it is a sad reality to others, it is truly but as a sleep to the Saints. It is said therefore of the best meer men, 1 Kings 2.10. 1 Kings 11.43. they slept with their Fathers; But of the Best and Greatest God-Man Jesus Christ, that he died; He tasted of death for every man, as you have it a little before my Text, that is, for the good and ad∣vantage of all the children. He tasted for them, (it is a ,) he drank up that Cup; , id est, mortem sentiret, Meta∣phora sampta a Propinato cali∣ce, ex scripturae more, quem eti∣am servalt Christus in tri∣plici illa sua oratione, cum ad mortem properaret, Vid. Joh. 8.51. Quibusdam etiam placet, istud eò referre quod vere qui∣dem mortuus sit, Sed tamen mortem quasi degustarit duntaxat, ut qui mox resur∣rexerit: quâ ratione dicun∣tur etiam no∣nulli bonum dei donum gu∣flare, quod mox evomant, infra, 6.4. Sed hoc non placet. Beza. He tasted so as they never do, that they might not taste the bitterness of Death. He tasted it for them, they only as it were kiss the Cup. Christ dyed, they sleep. Now who will say, that sleeping is dying indeed; that it is a misery or im∣perfection to fall asleep: Unless we can think Adam to be miserable in innocency, and fallen before his wife tempted him, or was yet made of him; for he was asleep when Eve was formed of his Rib. Sleeping then is not a misery, no more is the Saints death, who fall asleep in the state of the best innocency by the righteousness of Christ. There may indeed be some similitude in the Saints death unto the imperfection, and (which sweetens the matter) unto the necessity and refreshment of sleep, taking it at the worst, after that the Fall had decayed mens Constitutions and Tempers. There may be, and often are tossings and wearisom tumblings on a death bed, and sometimes, anguish, agonies, terrible Con∣vulsions; but these are only like the difficulty, which a weary Traveller meets with in falling to sleep; whose sleep is nevertheless sweet to him: Or like the terrible dreams a healthful man may have in his sleep, which are
more disturbance to his fancy than sences: For usually the body is past sensation, or but of a very dull sence and feeling in such gasping difficulties: Such Convul∣sions frighting more the Beholder than the Patient; and are but (as I may say) the sad dreams of a dying man upon his falling to a deep sleep: when he awakes, all is well: for he did but dream it was ill with him. But however that soul is but little concerned in all this, which is delivered by Christ from the proper pains and terrours of Death. 2. Christ delivers from the sting of Death, Sin, which is remarkably signified in the word , in the Text, which with a Genitive, as it is here, is used in good Greek Authors, to signifie the Obligation of guilt to a due punishment of a broken Law: And so consequents here to Death, the wages of sin, which terrifies at distance, and enslaves the Conscience. [Subject to Bondage] that is, by the guilt of sin, to the enthralling fears of its due punishment, Death Beza there∣fore renders that part of my Text thus: Quotquot metu mortis pr totam vitam Damna∣tes erant servi∣tatis. But from this sting of Death are Christs children delivered, witness the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 15.56, 57. The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law; but thanks be to God who giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Victory by Christ, or deliverance from the sting of Death, made him sing, O Death where is thy sting? Death is but as a Serpent to be plaied with, because the sting is ta∣ken out, to be scorn'd therefore, rather than feared. So that you see, the safety and sweetness of this delive∣rance by Christ consists in his disarming this enemy, pulling out that only bitter and mortally wounding sting of Death, Sin. 3. Christ Delivers his children from the slavish fears of Death and the very sad bondage of them; This
indeed is the top and perfection of this deliverance; The very express notion of the Text, and must be made out in the sequel of the Discourse. To all which resolves may be added: That as this happy deliverance is the real portion, and really enjoyed priviledge of real Saints, (Christ tasting death for every man, who is of that blessed Fraternity, the children of Christ; as they are called by Christ himself a little before the Text, v. 13, 14.) So also must this deliverance be acknowledged upon the first enjoyment at least, to be not suddenly perfect, through the weakness of believers faith, yet notwithstanding it is sufficient through Christ to bear them out in all their encounters, even at length unto Con∣quest, yea, Triumph too. Thanks be to God who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, and makes us without fear sing, O Death where is thy sting? For as God, even so Christ gives all his benefits liberally, and upbraids not, and that without any difference or respect of persons, to all that ask in faith without any wave∣ring. His blessed will is, That his free born children should not only have life, but have it more abundantly; that is, comprehending naturally this instance, That they should be more and more abundantly freed from the servile fears of death, not only from the domineering prevalency, but the disquieting presence of them. Now the words lying open to view, you have a most fair pro∣spect of great and sweet variety; which naturally springs up, out of this most fruitful field, that if digged and searched will yield very holy meditation and discourse. Concerning this Scripture, I may say truly in the words of the Apostle Paul, when he was comforting timorous souls under their fears of Judgment, and so ve∣ry pertinently to my business in hand: Behold here,
how our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father, who hath loved us, and given us everlasting consolation and good hope through grace, do here com∣fort your hearts by the most warm breathings of the Holy Ghost the Comforter, who indeed is then a Com∣forter, when all else are but miserable ones. His Cordial here is very singular and soveraign, the Ingredients very precious and various, and not a little conspicuous in these following Doctrines; some of which are raised from the fourteenth verse immediately preceding my Text; some from both verses together; and some from the Text it self only. 1. The fourteenth verse exhibits to you these seven Doctrines. First, That the unconceivable love of the Son of God to his dear children, made him come down on earth and become man. Secondly, That Christ in his humane nature is as very man as any of the Elect, his flesh and bloud not only being like ours, but part of our substance. He also himself like∣wise took part of the same: So that he himself is of the same stock of Adam and Eve as surely and verily as any of us. Thirdly, That sinners out of Christ are under the sen∣tence of Death, such as are not Gods Children are under the Devil their fathers cruel severity, that is, under the power of Death; or, That Satan hath the power of Death over all such as are not delivered by Christ from his Power. Fourthly, That Christ hath destroyed this his power, for the sole benefit of his children, true believers. Fifthly, That the way how Christ overcame Satan, and destroyed his power, was by his own death. Or, Christ by
his own death conquered that Tyrant the Devil. Which destruction of the Devil by the Death of Christ, because alledged here by the Apostle as Christs intermediate end, in subserviency to his Grand design of delivering his children from the fears of Death, I shall only a little pause upon. The Devil was no sooner our enemy, but Christ was his. The Devil said to our first Parents, Ye shall not surely dye, but Christ only made it good. Though the Devil meant nothing less, yet Christ nothing more; see the Devil in his colours. First, he tempts to sin, with a surely thou shalt not dye, and yet presently upon the Commission of sin, he torments with a surely thou shalt dye. He speaks his own plainly when he tempts to sin, but he speaks in appearance Gods words when he tempts to despair. How much harder then is it to resist his temptations to despair of pardon, than it is to resist those his temptations by which he would bring us into a sad need of it. But he is a Lyar in both. For he spake in his first temptation to sin against his own judgment, who verily thought man by sin would most irrecovera∣bly dye, and that for ever. And when he tempts all men to despair with a surely ye shall dye, he knows he lies. For Christ in all Ages effectually deli∣vers all his Children. Whether Satan say, thou shalt not surely dye before sin committed, or thou shalt surely dye after sin committed, he knows he lyes; in the one he lyes against the truth of the Law; in the other he lyes against the true meaning of an Enacted Law; in the other he lyes against the truth of the repeale; or in the one he lyes against the truth of Gods threats, and the condemning power of the Law; in the other, against the truth of Gods promises, and of his incomparably glo∣rious
Act of Indempnity. He thought indeed seeing he could not be exalted above God, he would become a pet∣ty Tyrant (as his ambition thirsted) over poor man∣kind, and thereupon laboured to bring man by sin un∣der his power, the power of death; but wherein he dealt proudly Christ was above him; Christ in mans nature dyed for man; so that though in as much as Christ dyed the Devil bruised his heel, yet Christ by his own death defeated his design, and bruised his Serpent-head, which he will not be able to get healed for ever: whereas Christ only was dead, but is alive, and lives for evermore; as before by death to vanquish him, so eter∣nally by the power of his Life and Raign to keep him under, in chains of darkness; and also to deliver his children from his power of Death; who though they sleep, yet shall wake again Eternally. Sixthly. That Christs death conquered the Saints death; even the power of it lying much in the hand of the De∣vil, was destroyed with him. Death is our enemy, Christ encountred it for us, in our stead; verse 9. the Apostle, speaking of Jesus, saies thus; That he by the grace of God should taste death for every man; for him. He conquered our enemy death, by dying, by bearing, and so breaking off from us all its malignant force, that it cannot reach us therewith when it ruffles most. It is our last enemy, but already conquered by Christ. Christs death it is the Saints life in Death. Christ hath given death its deaths wound; and though at its last gasp it would lift up its self, and grin upon a dying Saint; yet behold all its venome-teeth are dasht out by the power of Christ; and its sting to seek. It laies only upon him a cold and feeble hand, but cannot break a bone, as I may say, not do the least hurt. It only
rocks the body asleep, and makes way for the soul to enter into its Masters Joy, unspeakable indeed and full of glory. As the Devil, whom Christ rebuked in the possessed, tare and rent the body, it is true; yet durst not but come forth and depart; and though the body was left on the ground as dead, yet it quickly appeared to be alive. So death may teare and shake a Saints bo∣dy at its dissolution, and leave it for dead on the ground, yet it hath no more to do to touch it; the very body (as the grain sown in the earth is a springing up, though at first flowly, with a new life;) I say the body shall in spight of death live again gloriously at the Resurrecti∣on, and never dye; because death is conquered and de∣stroyed for ever by Christs death, who was dead but is alive for evermore, Amen. Neither is the Saints sleep∣ing at their dissolution, a bare piece of Rhetorick, but a most real notion: Wicked mens bodies may be said in∣deed most properly to suffer death; for though they also shall rise again, yet it is to lead a life in those raised bo∣dies worse than death. But now Saints bodies are, whilst in the grave, really united to Christ; which real union of their dust to Christ, is a glorious security of their bodies blessed life, which the former bare union of their souls and bodies together before death could never give them. Seventhly, That seeing Death and Devil was thus to be destroyed by Christ, it behoved Christ to be a mortal man to dye, as well as God-man thereby to conquer Death. 2. From the verse immediately preceding, together with my Text, these two Doctrines: First, That as Christ by his Death conquered the Devil and Death: So also by the same Death of his, he deli∣vered
his children, true Believers, from the slavish fears of their own death. Secondly, That there is none but Christs children can have solid and true courage against Death. Not a free man in the world, but a true believer, all the rest are bond∣slaves, fearful, the Devils prisoners. Whatever fool∣hardiness there may be in the world, falsly called valour and contempt of death; yet it is far exceeded in the same kind, by the more sinewy strength and daring boldness of many brute beasts: And in them rather it is valour; in man madness: The Brute dares to dye, but man more void of strength and reason, dares dye and be damned too. But sure all such men in their natural condition are past feeling, or Cowards only to them∣selves; so unreasonably dastardly, as to dare rather to look death in the face than their own awakened Consci∣ences. For they that seriously meditate and know both themselves, and Death, and Devil, instead of pretending valour, must needs yield themselves Captives to the fears of Death: for stouter Creatures than sinful, wicked, unregenerate men; even the Devils themselves under guilt, do fear and Tremble. 3. From my Text alone, only these three Do∣ctrines. First, That there is a natural fear of Death as well as of the Devil, rooted in all mens hearts alwaies, whilst they are out of Christ at least. I say alwaies, Though not alwaies felt, yet easily awakened; as, by raging guilt, a tempting Devil, and sore judgments inflicted on them by an angry, yet most righteous God, visiting their Iniquities. Secondly, That this fear puts men in bondage. So that they dare not by reason of sensible and evident danger of distraction, meditate seriously upon death, Gods
judgements, or Hell, so clearly and confessedly deserved by themselves. Thirdly, That Christ is the great Deliverer of his Peo∣ple from the slavish fears of Death. I shall, God assist∣ing, as it concerns me, duly eye all along the death of Christ, by the which Death of his He doth deliver his People from the fears of their own death; yet intend∣ing to speak as briefly, and with what advantage I can from the Scriptures to this singularly comfortable Do∣ctrine, I shall take the latitude, which the absolute consi∣deration of the Text clearly gives me, according to the Doctrine already laid down in these words. Doctrine, ☞ That Christ is the Great Deliverer of his peo∣ple from their slavish fears of death. It is the will of this great King of Saints, and Prince of Peace, that all his People should live up to their pri∣viledge and his honour: Not as sins, much less as the Devils or Deaths slaves, but as Children. Christ is cal∣led, the Everlasting Father; and here before my Text he himself owns, and answers to that name; Behold, I, and the children which God hath given me. Christs great design is to make his children, children indeed, free in∣deed from the servile fears of Death. This Prince of life, as he is called, Acts 3.15. will not have his children slaves to death; no, nor to the Prince of Death the de∣vi. The Method in prosecuting this truth, shall be by the Lords concurrence, First, To prove that the Lord Christ is such a Deliverer. Secondly, To shew how he actually manages this deliverance of his Saints from their fears of Death. Thirdly, To Apply. First, Then to prove that the Lord Christ is such a Deliverer: For such a glory of our blessed Saviour is highly worth the beholding; yea, men and Angels
displaying; and therefore not a needless thing to prove. It is never sufficiently seen and admired. This conside∣rable and comfortable part of the Saints deliverance by Christ, is one of the fairest and rarest Jewels in the Dia∣dem of this King of Saints. He is the Deliverer of his people from the fears of Death. Therefore as the Apo∣stle saies a little below my Text, Consider then the Apostle, and High Priest of our Profession Christ Jesus; Consider well your great Messiah; O Saints, behold your King. See then, First, He hath power enough thus to deliver. Is he not God man? And indeed what is a Jesus, a Saviour, a Deliverer without Power? But can his power conquer his peoples Enemies, and their fears too? With Jesus all this is possible, and more too. See the power of his Scepter, Heb. 7.25. wherefore he is able to save them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him: Not only then from all enemies, but from all fears in the way. To the uttermost; As, from the misery of Death it self, so from its killing fears. Now consider a little; will deliverance from the soul-disquieting fears of death, be lookt upon and judged a proper, real, yea, great De∣liverance? And shall not Jesus be the Author and fini∣sher of it, who can save to the uttermost? This is not surely below or above his power that can deliver to the uttermost. Nothing truly deserves the name of Delive∣rance, but this expression (to the uttermost) compre∣hends it, Luke 1.74. These you see, deliverance out of the hand of enemies, and serving without fear go natu∣rally together, and will Christ separate them? Now can Christ thus deliver from the fears of death, because to the uttermost those that come unto God by him, and yet a soul that comes unto God by him, never so
delivered? How is it possible? The Philosopher will laugh at this doubt or denial, with his Frustra est poten∣tia quae non producitur in actum, That power is in vain that is never exercised. Can the Sun withhold the force of its power to heat, from any thing it shines upon? Can a Mother forget her Child? So, can the Everlasting Father forget his? Can Christ withhold or deny the effectual influence of his power to deliver to the utter∣most them that come unto God by him? When once this Sun of Righteousness is risen with healing under his wings upon any poor soul, the warmth of his con∣tinual beams, ever and anon breaking through all clouds and overcasts, cannot but dispel and work out of that soul all the chil fears of Death. Secondly, As Christ hath power to deliver his peo∣ple from the slavish fears of death, so also an indispensa∣ble obligation thereunto lying upon him as Mediator. This is an invincible argument with the former: And if you consider well in whom this power resides, you cannot have the least scruple or darkness in this Point; Who is it then? Truly, God-man, the Son of God and of man; who is what he is as a Christ, a Jesus, a Saviour, for the real and effectual good of all his people, who cannot, if they will, but sooner or later, in some measure, as really partake of every vertue and benefit of Christs death, which they stand in need of; as ever Christ did partake with them of the same flesh and bloud. For as Mediator he is obliged to save to the ut∣termost, 1 Cor. 1.30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus; who of God is made unto us (as) Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, (so) Redemption; Christ cannot and will not deny any real Saints that universal and full Redem∣ption and deliverance which. God hath made over to
them in and with his Son. The world out of Christ cannot claim a comfortable interest in Gods power, whom they have perfectly disobliged, and can by no manner of proper merit oblige him again. But now Saints may claim an interest in Christs power to save them to the uttermost, because he is made of God to them Redemption, without any exception of so consi∣derable a Redemption, as this is, from the fears of death; or indeed without possibility of any such exception. For if Christ be made to the Saints Righteousness, the Law is satisfied, the sting of Death, sin; and the strength of sin, the Law, is all quite taken away by a pardon given us through Christs satisfactory and meritorious righte∣ousness. If Christ be made Sanctification to us, the power of sin is also much subdued, so that the hearts courage is no more so weakened by sin, nor such an en∣mity against, and thereupon such a suspicion of Gods wrath maintained, as before; nor in a word, such a spi∣rit of bondage again to fear, as formerly. And then if Christ be made wisdome to us, he gives us light, whereby to discover the truth and benefit of all this grand provision for our souls peace and rest: What then can his being made Redemption to us be more, over and above, or less? Then his rescuing our hearts and consci∣ences from the slavish and foolish fears of any damage by Death, that penalty of the Law, the wages of sin, the worst that can come. Christ removing the guilt of sin as our Righteousness, and the power of sin as our Sanctification, and also removing our ignorance of deaths impotency in such a case to hurt us, as our Wis∣dom, hath left nothing to be done more, or in the next place as our Redemption, but the removing, also the im∣potency of our hearts in such unreasonable fears of
Death, which he hath so disarmed not only of weapon, but of power also to hurt us. Now all this he is obli∣ged to do for the Saints; For how is he made all this to them, if it reach not their souls? Separate not what God hath conjoyned in your Saviour, one and all in some measure is every Saints portion. They cannot ask more of each than is prepared for them in the ful∣ness of Christ: Nay, not more than they have clear title to, as much now as ever any Saints had in any for∣mer ages, because Christ is made of God to all Saints in full; Wisdom, Righteousness Sanctification, and Redem∣ption. Poor souls, power in God for your good you can hardly conceive, sith by reason of sin he that made you by his power, may refuse to save you by his power; well, yet power laid up in Christ for you, may well encourage you. God hath therefore lodged power in Christ God-man, to let poor Saints, believing in him, see their interest in it, and marriage claim to it; to let them know, he would have his power actually deliver and save them to the uttermost. Go to God by him, and he is not only able, but obliged to carry you to God without fears in the way: It being his very Office; as Gods High Chamberlain, one set over the house of God for this purpose, Heb. 10.21, 22. But to support this with another Consideration. Thirdly, As Christ is able and obliged, so willing and faithful; as willing as able, and as faithful as obliged thus to deliver. Truly this with the first, I mean his willingness, faithfulness, and his ability, (which was first mentioned,) might easily be granted by any that consider the Person, God-man, here spoken of; yet because it makes much to this present purpose I must shew you some Scripture, that commands us to consider
this in him, as Heb. 2.17. Wherefore it behoved him in all things to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful, and faithful High Priest. Merciful; He took our nature, our very flesh, that he might be more ten∣der of, and merciful to us in our danger, and fears of dying; which by reason of flesh and bloud are incident to us▪ And then faithful, that is, so sensible of every thing, tender and pitiful, as faithfully to improve his great Ability to save and deliver to the uttermost. As his power is large to the uttermost of our misery and fear, so his faithfulness is as large as his power. He must then of necessity be an actual deliverer of his people in all points, not only from their Enemies, but from their servile fear of them: As from Deaths misery, so from the fear of it, that they serve God without any such horrid fear, in righteousness and holiness all their daies. And the reason is cogent; for in him concur sufficient ability to save, and an indispensable obligation thereto from the immutable purpose and appointment, mutual agreement, and mercy, both of his father and himself, and also particularly a great obligation from the power of his Sympathy with those whose natures and flesh he took up; and then as sufficient ability, and indispensable obliga∣tion; so infallible faithfulness meet gloriously in this blessed Jesus, and speak him an Almighty Deli∣verer of his people from the fears of Death. Doth not all this appear? He dyed. Who could, who would so dye? Before his death he cryed; Let this cup pass: that so no Saint might fear its approach: He at his death cried out, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? That so no Saint might at his own death cry out fearfully, as forsaken of God. Those his cries proceeded from
mighty and meritorious pangs; Thus each peculiar pain was appointed for our particular healing; as these men∣tioned, for the curing us of the painful fears of our death; and they are also great demonstrations of Christs mercy and faithfulness unto us unto the last: Who else might easily have had more than twelve Legions of Angels to have rescued him from the rest of his Passi∣on: but he was cruel to himself, merciful and faithful to us. Fourthly, Christ is a Deliverer of his people from the fears of Death; because he cannot but be faithful as to his childrens good, so to his own glorious design. Where Power, and Resolution, and unchangeableness meet, what can hinder the accomplishment of a de∣sign? Christs power of delivering from the fears of death hath been evidently proved; His design is mani∣fest in the Text. He assumed humane nature, THAT he might deliver his Saints from the fear of Death, and whilst he bears about him that Humane Nature, how can he but be constant to his design in taking it up? He that lives for ever to make intercession for his peo∣ple, hath not in vain the Keyes of Hell and of Death. Fifthly, He hath accomplished and atchieved such things for his children that naturally bring about this their freedom from the fears of Death. To suggest the most weighty. First, He died not only in their nature, but in their stead. He tasted death for them. So that as to them it may be truly said, Mankind died in him their represen∣tative. That formidable death which men deserve, Christ hath undergone it all. What fear of death can then be reasonably yielded to; it is Christ that died.
What reason to fear that which another hath felt for us on purpose, that we to be sure should never feel any such thing. What is truly formidable in Death is past and gone; and no more to be feared than an escaped danger. Secondly, Christ hath by his death merited Saints freedom from the fears of their own. He laid down his life as the price of this Priviledge. What Saint then dares fear death, that considers the unquestionable suffi∣ciency of the value of Christs death, for the purchasing this great priviledge for him that he should not fear death? For a Saint to fear Death with a bondage servile fear, is as much as to say; Christ hath not bled enough to purchase this my freedom from these fears, but I must bleed too, to raise the price. God forbid that any Saints doubts or fears should ever be found so palpa∣bly guilty of undervaluing the bloud of Christ, and the price of their Redemption. Thirdly, Christ by his Death hath taken away the only true fundamental reason, and occasion of the fear of Death, and that is the condemning power of the Law. The sting of that Death, sales the Apostle, which men so dread, it is nothing else but sin; Sin indeed unpar∣doned: Well, but that is pardoned in the bloud of Christ: and therefore saies he; Thanks be to God who giveth us the victory, (that is, over death,) through our Lord Jesus Christ: Well, but how? The foregoing words shew it, 1 Cor. 15.56, 57. The sting of death is sin; True: But, the strength of sin is the Law; Oh! there, there is the bitterness. The Law sharpens, and strengthens the sting of Death, sin. Oh! This condemning power of a broken Law! This, this torments the sinners heart with the fears of Death. Well; but observe; The
strength of sin is the Law; but thanks be to God who giveth us the victory; that is, by weakening the strength of sin, and blunting the sharpness of that sting of Death. Christ hath satisfied every demand of the broken Law; that sin or death can say or do nothing to fright one that is by faith become Christs child. Though the Devil lye, and so labour to terrifie a Saint, saying; Come, come away; thou hast broken the Law; Its Sentence and doom is past upon thee; Come to prison: thou must surely and suddenly dye. Yet all this time the Law saies no such thing; and yet it flatters none, being most true and just; but it takes good notice that Christ died, and it is fully satis fied. I will assure you the Law will not suggest the least fear to any soul that hath the least faith in Christs bloud. The Law acknowledges such full payment by Christs most Precious Death, that it requires not the least farthing more, Rom. 15.18. As by the offence of one, judgment came upon all to Condemnati∣on; so by the righteousness of one, (saies the Apostle of Christ,) the free gift came upon all unto justification of life. The broken Law, instead of condemning a sin∣ner, that hath faith in Christ, doth rather justifie him fully. The Law saith to the sinner that believes in Christ; Truly for all me thou shalt live, and that eter∣nally; for Christ hath died, I require no death of thee; and that thou at thy dissolution seemest to die, it is more to conform to thy Masters and Saviours death, and in∣deed to comply with the necessity of a better and more curious fabrick of thy body, and its far sweeter life, than to satisfie any of the Laws demands. Thus Christ satisfying the killing demands of the Law, hath indeed taken away the very ground of fear, the very strength of sin, which without that strength
cannot afford Death the least sting to wound us. Fourthly, Christ hath taken away, as the strength of sin, so the strength also of the Devils Temptations to fear death. So that when a Saint fears death upon the Devils temptations, he fears a lye of the Devils, and a fancy of his own. For Christ hath really broken the force of all the devils temptations to fear death; accord∣ing to the clear meaning of that expression coupled with my Text, That he might destroy him that had the power of Death. But you will say who but God hath the power of life and Death? Doth not Jesus Christ himself vin∣dicate it as his Prerogative Royal, Rev. 1.18. speaking of himself, I am he that liveth and was dead, and behold I am alive for evermore, Amen; and have the keyes of Hell and Death. What power of death then hath the Devil? But little now; blessed be Christ. The Devil cannot bring death at his pleasure to our doors. Jobs life was not committed to his cruel mercy, he had no power to kill him. Truly, wicked men have power, when God permits, to kill the body, and what hath the Devil more? By the Power of Death here attributed to the Devil, is meant only his forcible temptations, by which he conveys many ugly forms and shapes of Death, and so also many sad apprehensions and fears thereof into mens distressed Consciences; the Devil hath leave of God to fright guilty sinners, and he hath of himself malice, power, and wit enough to bring death near; and to lay its rough hand upon the sore place of a sinners wounded Conscience. Yea, he hath besides, even all that power and strength of Deaths sting in his hand; which Death received from the Condemning Law. But now though the wicked are often laid open to the De∣vils cruel mercy; yet little it is that he can do against
Christs People, because Christ hath destroyed the De∣vil, and this his Power. Christs bloud hath cancelled his Commission, or so contracted and lessened it, that when ever he assaults a believer with the fears of Death, he knows he must flee upon resistance. Resist the Devil (saies the Apostle) and he will flee from you: He knows he must; having no Commission to stay after such resi∣stance, as Christ enables his people to make. And then as to that strength of his Temptations which is derived and urged from a pretence of the Condemnati∣on and penalty of the Law. It is but little, or indeed nothing he can say to a believer. Here the Saint hath advantage of ground given him against the Devil. For never was the Law more broken than Christs life fulfil∣led it; and never can the penalty thereof be so fully suf∣fered, as it was by Christs Death, that paid the utter∣most farthing: which the damned's torments shall never be able to do. Sixthly, Christ is the Deliverer of his People from the fears of Death; in as much as he works mightily in them as well as for them, and so wonderfully streng∣thens them in the inner man against those servile fears of Death. But in what manner, and by what graces or comforts, I have determined to shew in the second part of my Method. I shall therefore now only add; That Christ administers a mighty vertue and power to the spirits of his people; by his gracious Pardons, encou∣raging Commands, and comfortable, yea, sutable Pro∣mises. All which wonderfully serve to animate Belie∣vers against the fears of Death. First, By Gracious Pardons. The Son of man had power on earth to forgive sin; sure he hath not lost that power now he is exalted in heaven. You know he
exercised that power on earth; and so he doth still. For whilst on earth, how oft said he? Thy sins are forgiven thee. Upon his departure from the earth, near his dying; Peace I leave with you, my Peace I give unto you, not as the world giveth, give I unto you let not your heart be trou∣bled, neither let it be afraid, Joh. 14.27. After his Re∣surrection, Peace be unto you, Joh. 20.21. After his Ascension into heaven you know the Salutations in his Letters Credential by his Ambassadors and Ministers, I mean the Salutations you find in the front to many of the Epistles in the New Testament: Grace, Mercy, and Peace from God our Father, (first,) and (then) from our Lord Jesus Christ, as the very next hand. This Prince of Peace speaks Peace to his Saints, and what enemy first or last (as death is) dare or can speak War? As Christ by his own mouth spake peace on earth to his peo∣ple; so now as verily and really by his own spirit, by his infallible Word, and true Ministers, he sares to the poor Consciences of his Saints, Your sins are forgiven you; and if Sin sting not, Death cannot. Guilt's fears are blasted with that sweet peace which Christ gives, and which the world by a thousand Deaths cannot take away; fears cannot dwell where Christs words of eter∣nal life take place. So that a pardoned Conscience sings before this enemy Death; O Death where is thy sting? Secondly, By encouraging Commands, doth his Excel∣lency the Lord Jesus hearten his People and Souldiers that they fear neither Death, nor Devil, which expres∣sions of Christ are not to be considered only as beseeching perswasions, but rather as most rouzing and Authorita∣tive incitements unto courage and valour, as these are: Fear not little Flock, it is your Fathers good pleasure to
give you the Kingdom, (Luk. 12.32.) which indeed is won and fully possest by Death. And, Be of good chear, and let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be affraid, &c. So still doth Christ, as a Lord of Hosts, go on speaking couragiously to us by his Word, by his Spirit, and by his field Officers, Isa 35.4. I mean his Apostles and Ministers; and that in such words as these prest and charged home; Let your Conversation be as BECOMES the GOSPEL, and that especially in your being nothing TERRIFIED by your adversaries, Phil. 2.27, 28. And put on the whole Armour of God, &c. That ye may be able to stand in the evil day, and having done all to stand. Christ as a good Cap∣tain and great General heartens his people not to fear their last encounter in the evil day, the hour of danger, or of sudden Death; he secretly whispers such courage into his peoples hearts: And for him to say fear not, (who by a word created all things in heaven and earth) it is enough to embolden the faintest Christian Souldier unto Conquest What a Captain of Salvation is this? That at once saies, be of good courage, and makes of good courage. Oh labour to hear the voice of the Son of God, and thou shalt live in spight of Death; and truly there is no such difficulty to hear him, for he uses to speak Peace to his Saints that diligently seek him. Thirdly, By comfortable and sutable Promises, doth the Lord Jesus animate his people against all evil fear of Death; to instance in some, I will not leave you comfort∣less. I will send you the Comforter. Verily, verily I say unto you, ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be tur∣ned into joy, Joh. 16.20, 22. Your heart shall rejoyce, and your joy no man taketh from you: no not Devil nor Death, for if these could, it would be all one as if man could, for
then they should not keep it. But although one of Christs Apostles confest of himself that he was in deaths often; yet that Promise bore him our, and all the rest too of Christs Disciples; even so as that they sang in prison, and made ready not to be bound only, but to dye at Jerusalem, or any where else, for the name of the Lord Jesus. It is very remarkable, that when Jesus Christ had given his Disciples many comfortable Promi∣ses, Joh. 16. to hearten them up, he summed up all in the end of the Chapter, thus; These things have I spo∣ken unto you, (that is, these Promises,) that in me ye might have peace, in the world ye shall have tribulation, but be of good chear I have overcome the world; yea, whatsoever is the worlds properly; as misery and death are. All the Promises of God are in Christ, yea, and in him Amen. Promises are Gods and Christs words, upon which they cause their people to hope; according to that of David; Remember thy word unto thy servant, upon which thou hast caused me to hope. And the Apostle teaches, that through patience and comfort of the Scri∣ptures Saints have hope: which hope in the Promises prevails against nothing more than sin, 2 Cor. 7.1. and 1 Joh 3.3. and particularly against sinful fears of death. For what can more naturally destroy fear, than that which mightily enlivens hope? Such are Christs Pro∣mises, which words of eternal life therefore are most powerful against Death. Shall Saints then fear, though a little flock, when those young Lions, wicked men, and those old Lions, the Devil and Death set upon them, when as they have such a Promise as this to bear them up? That it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom. Death may be dreadful to those, that by it lose Crowns, but certainly desirable to those, that by it are sure to win Crowns.
Seventhly. I produce the great Examples, and instan∣ces, which testifie of Christ that he is such a deliverer of his people from the fears of Death, as first Job: Though God should slay him, yet no fear but hope: he would trust in him, for he knew his Redeemer lived. David though he walked in the valley of the shadow of death, would fear no ill, for God was with him, even Christ his great shepherd. The three Children feared Death neither before they were cast into the fiery fur∣nace, nor after; because a fourth was with them in form like the Son of God. The Apostle Paul was perswaded, that neither Death nor life, no not death could separate him from the love of God in Christ Jesus; and there∣upon manifested such freedom from fear, that he saies of himself and many others, In all these things (amongst which were manifold deaths,) we are more than Conque∣rours through him that loved us; yea, and for this pur∣pose gave Christ for us, Rom. 8.37. even we, though killed all the day long, and accounted as sheep for the slaughter, v. 36. yet we, in this condition, (that mul∣tiplies other mens fears,) are more than Conquerours. Therefore, O Saints, see the valour of your fellow souldiers, who have no other Captain; or weapons, than you have. Christ is no respecter of persons, but able and willing to save you, as well as them from the fears of Death. But to come to the second part of my Method. Secondly, I am now to proceed to another most pleasing and satisfactory account, and to discover how Christ doth so dwell, raign, and rule in the Saints hearts, as to eject thence these potent, enslaving fears, the fears of Death; how he works them out of his childrens hearts, and rids them of such troublesome Guests; that
when they are found in unregenerate men, do as it were lay violent hands on them. For the fears of Death in many are one sort of Deaths executioners, or at least as Serjeants to arrest them for the Grave; and that with such a clap and damp, that makes uncontrolable way for death, and quite overthrows them. Now how doth Christ cast and bar out these killing fears of death? Many waies. First, By Faith; a gift flowing as all other grace from Christs fulness, of which we receive grace for grace. Christians see your strength, 1 Joh. 5.4. This is the vi∣ctory that overcometh the world, even our faith. The world comprehending the miseries arising from a dying life, and from death it self, yea, Devil too: for these are the enemies and forces the world breeds, maintains, and fights us with, whilst we are in it. But faith is our victory; and surely if it makes us Conquerours, it makes us not to fear. This excellent grace of Faith hath so great a stroke in the Saints conquering, that it is called the conquest and victory it self. Nay farther; Saints in this life are said to be kept by the power of God through FAITH unto Salvation; because what ever is done by Gods and Christs power for our Salvation or Redemption from any, or all our miseries, first and last, is accomplished not without our faith. Thus Christ applies and conveys to us the merit, vertue, and power of his conquering death. Christ hath shed his bloud: but by faith he warms our hearts with it against the cold fears of death. This was that which made the Apo∣stle Paul so crow over Death. He was perswaded that as not life, so neither death could separate him from the love of God in Christ Jesus. This perswasion was his faith, that made him triumph over death without fears
of it, come when it would. Thus is Christ the Au∣thor and finisher of our faith unto this particular con∣quest and victory over Death, and over all its horrid fears: For Christ is not contented himself thus to con∣quer, unless he makes all his Servants, (not only that eminent Apostle Paul, but also) all Believers, his Se∣conds in the encounter; that they should conquer as well as he: Nay, in respect of any expected Death be more than Conquerours. Oh! Faith in Christs bloud gives Saints a noble courage against Death. I shall urge this with the citation of a truly Heroick and spiritual ex∣pression dictated by a most learned and pious Divine of our Protestant Religion, which is this: Siquis animum pacare non possit mortis contemptu, is sciat parum se adhuc profecisse in Christi fide; that is, saies he; If a man can∣not quiet his soul, (or still that turbulent passion of fear,) with the contempt of Death; Let that man know he hath made but little proficiency in the faith of Christ. Thus he, concerning a Professour too fearful of Death. To such an one I think also it may be truly and justly said with a smart rebuke, O thou of little faith. To this purpose I shall propose a Scripture-passage, most worthy of special notice: It is that of Christ him∣self concerning the Apostle Peter, Luk. 22.31, 32. Simon, Satan hath desired (saies Christ) to have you, that he may fift you, as wheat, but I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not: How did Satan sift and shake him? Truly, with fears of suffering death, of faring like his Master; so that for fear he denied him, and swore to boot. Thus Satan shook him with strong blasts of Temptations to fear death; he blew him like a shaking leafe with his fears. Well, how did he recover? I have prayed (saies the Lord) that thy faith fail not. That was his Case,
this his cure; fear of death cured by faith in him whom he forsook when Death was near. Saies Luther, Quantò major fides est, tantò mors est imbecillior: Quanto autem fides minor, tantò mors est acerbior: That is, The greater Faith is, the weaker is Death: The less Faith is, the bitterer is Death. Have then a strong faith in Christ, and your hearts shall not be troubled with any disquieting fears of Death; for these will certainly be too weak to hold your spirits in bondage, if your hearts be kept by the power of God through Faith unto Salva∣tion. Secondly, Christ by putting into, and maintaining in our hearts that divine and mighty principle of love; a love in our souls for himself, doth thereby banish the fears of Death, and garrison them out. Perfect love, saies the Apostle John, casteth out fear, Joh. 4.18. There is a very eminent Divine of our English Nation, that gives us a very rational and remarkable account of the occasion, upon which this Apostle writ this whole Epi∣stle, or at least, that Expression: yet truly I conceive the former not hard to imagine, inasmuch as the Gno∣sticks (whom that Person saies this Apostle here confu∣ted) did hold, that Christians in danger, to save their lives, might under fears of Death, deny Christ outward∣ly, so they owned him in their hearts; a devillish No∣tion; like that, (Ye shall not surely dye) Therefore the Apostle most pertinently deals with these Gnosticks in many close touches; and therefore he speaks so highly of believing in Christ, that is, professing, or confessing openly that Jesus is the Son of God; and particularly, that whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God, Joh. 5.1. Now we are apt to think that many who do so much, and cry Lord, Lord; Lord have mercy
on us; yet are not thereupon to be judged in so good a condition, and in an unquestionable state of Salvation. Therefore I conceive a right understanding of such ex∣pressions may be got by taking notice of holy John's palpable intent, and the drift of his speech upon the forementioned occasion; the Apostle therefore for the better understanding of such mistaken spirits, asserts in summe thus much; that indeed those only that confess Jesus to be the Son of God, and will not deny him in fear of Death, or Torment, are to be taken for true Christians, and happy souls indeed. Upon the same account he asserts also; That Perfect love casteth out fear; that is, the tormenting fear of death, or danger, as Ter∣tullian evinces in his Scorpiacum or Antidote against the Gnosticks, speaking thus: Johannes negat timorem esse in dilectione, quem timorem intelligi praestat; nisi, negati∣oni authorem? i.e. John denies fear to be in love: what fear can be better understood? then such as is the Au∣thor and cause of denying Christ; even as the Apostle Peter did for fear of death or suffering. He that loves Christ but tolerably aright, will not be loath to dye for Christ; or to dye and go to Christ. That Spouse who is truly sick of love for Christ, thinks no Cure of that sick∣ness like Death, even to depart and to be with Christ; to be ever with the Lord, her blessed Bride∣groom. Thirdly, Christ by giving his people that excellent grace of hope kills the fear of death, 2 Thes. 2.16. There it is plain, that good hope through his grace is not only his gift, but therewith also, or thereby everlasting Con∣solation; which therefore is neither to be interrupted by the fears of Death, or discontinued by Death it self; yea, the same Consolation springing from this grace of hope,
(Heb. 6.18, 19.) is there called strong Consolation: In∣deed stronger then Death, or the terriblest fears of Death. For Christ giving this hope, is there said to comfort and establish Saints: so that no fear of death, (as in that place of judgment day,) can either sadden whom he so comforts, or shake and disturb the minds he so establishes, for their hearts thus become fixed, tru∣sting in the Lord. The Saints grace of hope gets beyond Death before hand and enters into heaven. As this Apostle to the Hebrews represents it, as entring into that within the vail; and by it Saints on earth fit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. Now you know hope's nature is contrary to fear. He who hopes for eternal life, and for the Adoption, to wit, the Redemption of the body, (as it is spoken of Saints hope, Rom. 8 23, 24, 25.) He that hath such a saving hope whereby as an Anchor sure and stedfast he hopes for life, can never be tost, like a wave, with any slavish fears of Death. Oh, then still thy soul by hope in God. The Apostle Peter calls the Saints, the childrens hope a lively hope; Who hath (saies he) begotten us unto a lively hope. Lively hope destroys the exanimating killing fears of Death; Puts us beyond death as to fear, before it come at us, as to feeling; for he that hath this lively hope as an An∣chor sure and stedfast cannot much fear, that he shall at death become a Castaway; though he be careful with the Apostle Paul. It is Hells pit that is bottomless or fathomless, so that the despairing Damned are alwaies tormented with Eternal pains and frights; But alas! Come the worst of it to the Saints of God; this they know, that the Graves pit is not bottomless; there is enough for their hope to bottom and anchor upon sure∣ly and stedfastly; The Grave to the wicked is indeed
bottomless, and though it detains a while the body, yet it lets the soul slip into Hell, and the body too not long af∣ter. But Christs Death & burial hath so sanctified every of the Saints Graves, that at worst their graves will be by so much happier to them then that Grave was to the dead man, whom Elisha's buried bones revived; even by how much Lazarus his second, was or will be better than his first Resurrection. Christs Death and Burial hath left somewhat in every Saints grave sufficient at the lowest for his hope to bottom on, so that his body (when there) may be truly said to rest in hope, and therefore having this grace of hope he need not, unless he will, be disquieted with fears before Death. Fourthly, Christ by giving his people on earth some real foretasts of heaven, and of eternal life, doth there∣by effectually destroy their fears of Death. And there∣fore the Apostle Paul, (who was, next to his Lord and Master, the greatest conquerour and triumpher over Death we read of,) after that he had been Rapt up into the third heaven, as he stories it himself, in the second Epistle to the Corinthians, was ever after most undaun∣ted under the seriousest thoughts of death; as is most evident in his other Epistles which were written after those to the Corinthians; particularly in that to the Romans, where he tells us how little he fears death, or a thousand deaths, though killed as it were all the day long, yet more then Conquerour. He had before so sweet a sight of heaven, that Death could not fright him; so sweet a taste of heavens pleasures, that he could never after taste any bitterness in death. And thereupon justly longing to be there again, he feared not death the only passage into so much bliss. Let every true Saint consider this; I say, every soul that conscionably walks with
God, and labours to have Communion with God in his holy waies and Ordinances; that walks in some mea∣sure as that blessed Apostle Paul, who lived in all good conscience before God; that, with holy David, tastes and sees that the Lord is gracious; that tastes in deed and truth savingly of the heavenly gift, the good Word of God, and the powers of the World to come. O pre∣cious Saint, dost thou so live? How is it possible but thou must long to be filled with these heavenly joyes? How canst thou fear that Death, that will put thee in∣to actual possession of thy Masters Joy? According to that in Rom. 8.28. And not only they, viz. the Crea∣tures, but we our selves also, which have the first fruits of the Spirit do groan within our selves waiting for the Adoption, to wit, the Redemption of our body. See here; that a taste of the first fruits of the heavenly Ca∣naan which Gods Spirit from above fetches for, and feeds a Saint with, makes him not to groan under the fears of dying, but rather under fears of not dying. O you that taste and rellish heavenly things in Divine Or∣dinances, and have much of the presence of Christ with you in them, are you affraid to dye, and to be with Christ for ever? Is not this better then to live? There are three things deservedly to be called first fruits of the Spirit and of Heaven, which do render Death to those that taste them more desirable than for∣midable. The first is: First, Communion with Christ. That of it which Saints have in this world is very sensible and sweet. Truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. You know it is the holy boast of a holy man, the Apostle John, concerning himself and other real Saints: and it is sweet Communion, as in the next
words; These things write we unto you, that your joy might be full; Thus true joy comes into the heart, even unparallel'd gladness, by Gods lifting up the light of his Countenance. The wicked whore cries, Let us take our fills of love in unclean Communion; but Christs Spouse's design is, that her joy might be full in holy Communi∣on with God and Christ. The first misses joy altoge∣ther, meets with only vanity and vexation of Spirit; but the other loses her dumpish sorrow, and never en∣joys that Communion with Christ much, but she meets also with joy unspeakable and full of glory; and yet in this world never enough. Therefore they that taste it most do most earnestly long to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, as the Apostle Paul, Phil. 1.23. Having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ. He professes in∣deed, that he had his Conversation in heaven, as to real foretasts thereof, (which were enough to set him a longing; not fully to satisfie;) and therefore he con∣fesses, that whilst in the body he was in great measure absent from the Lord. And would he not be present? Yes; even with all his heart; and farewell body till the Resurrection; that he might kiss his sweet Jesus his feet, that he might be ever with the Lord. This, this was the Apostle Pauls holy passion. Oh! Then (sin∣cere Christians) for two or three of you to be with Christ, and he with you in prayer according to his pro∣mise, and in other Ordinances; yea, in any divine ex∣ercises of grace! This, this must needs make your souls long to depart and to be with Christ. This noti∣on you must know flows not from a doubtful or preten∣ded experience, but from positive express Gospel Do∣ctrine, 1 Thes. 4.17, 18. And so shall we be ever with the Lord. Wherefore comfort one another with these words.
It is mighty comfort against death (and judgment, there spoken of) to consider the happiness of being ever with the Lord. If it was the joy and boast of the enamou∣red Spouse (Cant. 2.9.) to view Christ shewing him∣self through the Lattess; how can she but long to see him with open face, to see him as he is in glory? Surely that soul, that by faith and love cleaves to Christ, can never much fear death, which it knows will never sepa∣rate such lovers as Christ and a believing soul are, but ra∣ther indeed bring it into heaven; and force it only to be more happy; in a more intimate, close, yea, constant Vision and fruition of Christ. Secondly, Freedom from sin, though but in some to∣lerable manner attained, gives us a sweet foretaste of heaven; where all just mens souls do enter, but no un∣clean thing with them. So much freedom from sin, is so much heaven upon earth; but the reliques of sin, still pestering us till death, make us (if true Saints) the more eagerly long for perfect freedom from it in heaven; which huge longing is an holy extasie, I con∣fess, and found only I think in those whose Consciences do not reproach them whilst they live: They of all men, even they that labour to the utmost to subdue sin, do long to get rid of it altogether; though it be by death. Therefore the Apostle Paul expresses himself after this manner: And not only they, Rem. 8.23. but we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the Adoption, to wit, the Redemption of the body; reckoning upon, not much mattering, yea, quite overlooking death, having the eye on a sweet deli∣verance of soul and body from sin at the Resurrection, sith in this life both of them are most sadly infected therewith. Therefore saies he we groan; but how? Even as the Creature to be delivered from the bondage
of Corruption. And which is very remarkable, We our selves, who have the first fruits of the Spirit, &c. What are they? The thirteenth verse a little before will clear that, in these words; If ye through the Spirit do mortifie the deeds of the body, ye shall live. Blessed souls are they, and they shall be blessed, who have received the first fruits of the Spirit in the mortification of sin; for they groan within themselves, till that happy time come af∣ter death, when soul and body shall no more sin. They that have tasted how sweet the life-bloud of one sturdy lusty sin is, can never be satiated till they have the bloud of all the rest, the dam and all; original sin: insatiably crying out, O when shall we be delivered from the body of this Death? which indeed is far more dreadful than natural death. But O how sweet is it for a Saint to see, Necis artificem arte perire suâ; sin killing it self with its own murthering-piece; killing its enemy and it self with one blow. How joyfully do Saints see the death of all their sins approach, full as fast as the death of their bodies; Well, then the Saints, with Sampson, would gladly dye, that so all their sins, and therefore to be sure more might be utterly destroyed at their death, than ever they could slay all their life time. A true and thorough Saint fears to sin more than to dye; therefore he feares not so much to dye and sin no more, as to live yet, and sin. O thou that hast faithfully mortified any lust, and art sure of it, Death cannot wound, nor asto∣nish thee: for certainly more comfort arises to the Saints from the mortality of sin, then terrour from the morta∣lity of the body. Thirdly, The blessed graces of the Spirit of God; the possession of which is our participation of the Divine nature; the exercise of which is our Conversation in
heaven; These Graces of the Spirit of God are indeed the very first fruits of heaven, and cannot well be at rest till they have carried the soul into their own Element, Heaven it self; for from above it is whence every good and perfect gift doth descend, and would as naturally carry the soul endued therewith up thither, as the fire mounts upwards. So that those Divine souls whose vigorous graces do make them hunger and thirst after righteousness will not stick to venture at Gods call a bodily life to satisfie that thirst in heaven. The Apostle Paul was very desirous to attain to the Resurrection of the Dead, Phil. 3.11. compared with ver. 21. Oh! how he longed to be more holy here in this world, & to be quickly in the number of the dead in the Lord? He cared not how soon. Perfect he saies he was not yet, nor likely to be perfect here below, but yet he con∣tended hard, running to the Grave as I may say, if that he might be perfect indeed, and attain to the Resurre∣ction of the Dead. Perfect holiness is so desirable to holy men, that they desire death for its sake, aiming more at the compleat holiness of soul and body after death at the Resurrection, then the continuance of an unsatisfactory life of flesh and bloud in a state of imper∣fection. Certainly the Paths of wisdom are such plea∣santness and peace; that men who walk therein are not affraid to meet death in those waies everlasting; they press forward, towards death, upon it, through it, to attain to the Resurrection of the Dead. Thus Christ giving his people his own fellowship, Mortification of sin by his own Spirit, and the graces and fruits of righte∣ousness, which are by himself derived to us, as so many foretastes of heavens bliss; Thus I say doth Christ ren∣der death far more desirable than terrible to the Saints.
To all which I might well refer the inward joyes and comforts of the holy Spirit of Christ; which are speci∣al and palpable foretastes of heaven, and the chief of the first fruits of the Spirit. But it is plain that these swal∣low up the fears of Death, and make men groan with∣in themselves, rather fearing they shall not dye, then that they shall. When a Saint (with Reverens Mr Bol∣ton) can say, he is as full of Christ as ever he can hold, there is not a crevess for one poor small fear of death to enter in at. I might, but shall not, discourse to you more particulars to demonstrate how Christ destroys in his childrens hearts the slavish fears of death, as, by his giving to them the Spirit of Adoption; by convincing them of the great gain by death; as the Apostle expres∣ses of himself, For me to live, is Christ, and to dye, gain: and having a desire to depart and to be with Christ, which is far better. When Saints cast up their accounts, and consider what they shall get by living, even more rem∣ptations to sin, more advantages and opportunities to express the naughtiness of their hearts; more thorns in the flesh, and messengers of Satan to buffet; more fore chastisements and sad desertions of the Almighty; and more of the evil which is to come upon a wicked world; Then, then they truly judge it their advantage to dye; As that Father Cyprian, strangely, yet truly; Nihil utilius Christiano quans mori velocissime: Nothing more advantagious to a Christian, then to dye very be∣times. Good men indeed therefore have dreaded more the sad Consequents of a preserved life, than the worst Concomitants of Death it self; which to the Saints hath no other Consequence, but the souls happy entrance into the Masters joy. For before their bodies can be well laid in the Grave, their souls are laid in Abrahams
besome, or which is all one, their souls are taken from an acquitting Bench, to the blessed Mansions or Palaces that Christ hath prepared for them in his Fathers Court of Heaven. But I leave you to that preaching, where∣by men preach to themselves, even according to the further enlargement of their own sweet Meditations on such Theams as these, partly treated on, and partly hin∣ted unto you. Now that I may more boldly and effe∣ctually apply this great Doctrine which is alwaies seaso∣nable whilst Death is to come; But then especially when it is near; I shall only speak to an Objection, level∣led particularly at an Argument that I well used to prove Christ a deliverer of his people from the fears of Death, which was this; Such and such Scripture Saints (and no doubt many others) Christ hath so delivered; there∣fore he is such a Deliveter. Against which this is the Objection. Do not we read of Hezekiah, an eminent and great Saint, that he chattered at the Tidings of Death? And of David, that he played the Mad man in jeopar∣dy of his life? How can Christ be such a Captain of Salvation, such a Lord General over his People and Souldiers as to deliver them from the fears of Death? If most sad fears of Death be found prevailing over two such Worthies; two such eminent godly Kings; and the later of them mentioned, one of the stoutest war∣riours recorded in Sacred Story, that was in the world; for prophane partial Historians relate an Alexander's, a Caesar's prowess: But the God of truth affirms of Da∣vid, That he was as a man after Gods heart, so a vali∣ant man also; who got the highest preferment that ever was in the world, even to be the first and best fully
allowed King of Gods own people; I say, who got this singular preferment, through Gods Blessing, by his valour: Yet he, even he in danger did what a mean Saint would scarce do in the greatest fears of Death; even played the fool and mad-man to save his life; Where was Davids Lord then, who, as you say, deli∣vers from the fears of Death? To Answer. 1. I say not, That Christ delivers all Saints, so exceeding remarkably. 2. No. nor the same person alwaies, at every nick and point of time; whom he may deliver most. And yet neither one or the other to be reflected upon him, but upon themselves, that leave him, not he them. And yet for all this what is more obvious? Then that his Ability in delivering some, yea, many, yea, most, more or less, may well and clearly denominate him such a Deliverer. First then, 1. I will give you, and oppose to the Objection as great an Instance, nay, unparallel'd for the proof of Christs power in delivering his Saints from the fears of Death; Moses, yea, Aaron also; both in the same condition as to Death. But Moses only I set before your eyes as enough to fill them; for he was the grea∣test Captain or Lord General, that ever had the Con∣duct of an Army; and whole Nation. For it is not the Title, but usefulness of a man, and the Presence of God with a Person, that makes him truly renowned and famous. Of Moses it is said, Deut. 34.10. There arose not a Prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face. Well, God himself brought to this man the message of Death, and told him he should dye, and not lead his Conquering Army into the Land of Canaan: No; though it was never so desira∣ble to him. And God moreover dreadfully spake on,
and told him, (oh sad and bitter!) that his very death at that time was a punishment for such a sin, mentioned Deut. 32.51. Well; Moses hath not a word, but dies: Nay, Moses died in an hour when his eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated, Deut. 34.7. So that he who buried him, the Lord himself, took him away in his full strength as a punishment of his great Sin: and and yet behold no fear, but after that God told him pe∣remptorily he should dye, he presently with a most sweet sedate mind blessed the people, his dear charge; went from them and died. His case might be in some measure thus illustrated to you, take an eminent ser∣vant of Christ now in this City of London, one that hath done God the most service, an upright man, none like him, as it was said of Job; one fearing God and eschewing evil, that hath been much in prayer, possibly and in preaching too; one truly, frequently, nay, con∣tinually rapt up into great and close Communion with God the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ; one highly instrumental in converting and edifying souls, walking with God in his Closet, and in his house in a perfect way; and yet more; one that hath been a great Con∣duct to reduce erring sheep. Now suppose that for some sin God should bring the Plague to his body, (as once God did to a great and good King, Hezekiah, and of late to a right Eminent Pious Divine of our own, of which Plague he died.) Now I say, suppose that for some sin God should bring the Plague to such an one's body in his perfect health with an evident Symptom of Death; and besides, (oh sad and bitter!) fully per∣swade him, that he is visited with the Plague for such a particular sin that he hath committed, and therefore that he shall not recover, but dye suddenly. Now if
this  fears not, is not dismayed upon hope in Gods mercy  is sin is pardoned, however thus after life was but  or fifteen years. And we find that fifteen years  past  gives
but little comfort, when we have but five daies to live. So what comfort against Death could Hezekiah's fifteen years administer to him, when he committed such sins in the Prime of those years, which at death he should leave behind him, to ruine his Posterity and King∣dom withall, & when he quickly had but five daies to live of his fifteen years, nay, but five hours of them, nay, but five minutes, could his past reprieve then Antidote his fears? For no doubt when the message of his re∣prieve came by the Prophet Isaiah to him, even that hour fifteen years exactly his life expired. And no doubt also that not only God himself, but Hezekiah too num∣bered his daies, and kept good reckoning: So that one might think, if we measure him by our own foolish, and melancholly, yet usual musings, he might be affrighting himself ever and anon with such sad reckon∣ings as these: Now, oh now I have but one poor year of my fifteen to come, and again, but a little longer, and it is now alas! but one Month; the next sad thought might be, now my last Sabbath is gone; by and by a sad sob and crying out, now my last night, or my last day is quite past, and now my last hour; yea, as quick as thought, now my last minute. Which appa∣ling thoughts, one, whose death is not precisely fore∣told, cannot multiply to his own terrour, though in the weakest condition, because the weakest do oft recover. And hereupon those who are to be executed at a sixt hour, are more liable to be struck with fear, because of the certain and sudden approach of Death, and that in their perfect strength. Yet though this be the truly aggravated Case of Hezekiah fourteen years and an half more or less after his great recovery: And when Death comes with the experience of its former success in
frighting him; yea, and comes effectually indeed to him, yet, heark! No chattering. So the Objection of Hezekiah a good man, that had a good heart and a good life, having done that which is good in Gods sight; I say, the objection of his fearing death is sufficiently an∣swered with his not fearing death when he came to dye in good earnest; which though it be not recorded, is not to be scrupled, because it must be concluded, that all who dye in the Lord, do dye, though not so comforta∣bly, yet solidly; not overcome by, but overcoming their fears at last. And that it was rather needful to record his chattering fears at the likely approach of his death, in as much as that seemed a strange thing, and a most unusual condition of eminent Saints when they come to dye. Or put case instances may be produced of greater confidence in some Saints some considerable time be∣fore, then at Death; truly it would make but little ap∣pearance against the Doctrine. For I discourse of the constant, or most usual temper of Christs redeemed ones all along their life time; who know indeed it is not long before they must certainly dye, yet have no cer∣tain news told them, when. The courage of the Saints life is that which proves and honours our Redeemers ef∣fectual power of Redemption; and him also that made him Redemption to the Saints. Now if the Saints be∣ing redeemed by Christ, do serve God without fear all the daies of their life; though at the last hour there may be some little surprize of fear: yet what is that to object against such a Doctrine? Alas! who knows not, but that sharp sickness and tedious Death enfeebles the spirits, so that whatever the patients heart be; yet his trembling voice may but wrong his inward spiritual heartiness. Alas! then grace, reason, or sence it self
have but little space, room, or breath to think or do much. Yet I am confident, that as great extraordinary joyes accompany but few Saints just at their departure out of this world; so also am I as sure, that great fears at that nick or point of Death do accompany none of them: Fears may assault them, but not possess them. Saints dye at least resisting them; which is even then to be actually delivered from their captivating power. But because fear of Death after all that can be said, seems to be the common temper of Gods children, as well as the Devils slaves: I shall labour to shew some sufficient difference in their fearing death, or any Cala∣mity, in these following particulars. First, Saints may as sinful men fear, but not as Saints. When grace is low, and corruption occasionally strengthened and advantaged either by security, tempta∣tion, or at length by the Commission of some more than ordinary sin; then it is easie for an approaching evil, much more death it self, to run them down. But observe it, when a Saint lives as a Saint, hath Com∣munion with God, exercises grace, baffles a Temptati∣on, maintains a wise fear of God, then let a thousand approaching miseries trumpet evil tydings; or let death it self beat an Alarum to judgment, the Saints fear not, Psal. 23.3, 4. He restoreth my soul, he leadeth me in the paths of righteousness; then, then, though I walk in the valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear no evil; no evil punishment, no evil tydings, no Death: I will fear no evil; for thou art with me. Secondly, Saints may too as natural men fear, that is, as evil and misery crosseth natures inbred lawful rules of self preservation, so flesh and bloud may fear; and that without imputation of sin: But as the worst
evils conduce to, and work together for the Saints good, and Gods glory; all is welcomed with joy; as it was by those who counted it an honour to suffer for Christs name, stocks, stripes, and imprisonments, yea, mise∣rable Deaths. Their noble eye, piercing into Eternity, immortality, and glory, could read a meaning in that Text, Count it all joy when ye fall into divers Temptations, yea, when into the Grave and Pit it self, Heb. 10.34. And ye took joyfully the spoyling of your goods, as knowing in your selves that ye have in heaven a better, and an enduring substance: Into a full possession of which, Death at worst could but put them. So that the Saints spiritual courage will quickly swallow up their natural fears. The Case is evident enough in those Worthies recorded in that Gospel-Chronicle, or rather little book of Martyrs, Heb. 11. whose natures abhor∣red Death, as much as any of ours, yet whose spirits would not ACCEPT of deliverance, that they might ob∣tain a better Resurrection. Thirdly, The Saints may be, and are more than others, wisely sensible of Gods hand; do humble them∣selves under it; mourn and grieve; and yet fear not this slavish fear. Were the Saints as stocks and stones without sence; they would not only be wanting to their duty of fearing God; but truly in such a case would there be no spiritual courage or valour in enduring. To say they are Stoicks and unsensible of misery, were to deny the power of Christ in upholding his Saints and Martyrs of all Ages in their suffering great evils. The Lord Jesus, the greatest Sufferer and Conflicter with Death, had his sence of evil, or acute pain, in crying out, (My God!) but he feared none of this fear; the distracting fear, that divides or alienates the soul from
God: For he said (My God, my God,) that twice; but once only, Why hast thou forsaken me? Which evidently shews his fear was no other than filial, upon confidence of his sure interest in Gods love, as his God and Father; and also that it was less than his pain: For his pain was excessive; his fear not so, but moderated with the highest fortitude and courage. And so Christ, in that he him∣self suffered being Tempted, is able to succour them that are tempted. True Saints are anointed with the very same Unction wherewith Christ was anointed. And as he had some of their sence of Pain; so they likewise have some of his Courage under it. Fourthly, Saints may fear God in an affliction, though not an affliction it self; God at, or in death, but not death it self. Be it known to the worst and greatest enemies of Christ and Christians, it is not the frown of a Tyrant, or the black visage of Death that chils and damps a Saints heart; but rather his doubtful and dark appre∣hensions of God in afflictions are they that weaken his heart. Oh! that is a sad Sob, Psal. 90.7. We are consu∣med by thine anger, and by thy wrath are we troubled. If God smile, the Saints fear not Prisons, Stocks, spoyling of goods; Death it self occasions little fear. If Gods favour set them a singing, and his countenance glad their hearts, what can sadden? It is Gods anger in judg∣ments that makes the Saints fear; whilst others reckon only on Gods hatred, the Saints not daring to do so, do yet judge that it is but rational and safe to conclude of Gods anger and displeasure in judgments; which seldom proclaim any thing more. How often have you in the Scriptures this proved? Sometimes that the wrath of the Lord was enkindled, as naturally evident in Plagues and judgments; and at the end of many sad
descriptions of Gods judgments by the Prophets; the sum of each dreadful visitation is this; For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. Now though the Saints through faith in Christ, do not suffer their hearts to be troubled with fears of Gods ha∣tred, yet they are troubled at his anger and displeasure. A Child, when his Fathers anger is legible indeed in stripes, concludes not that his Father hates him; yet trembles at his anger. And indeed it is no valour in the world, not to fear Gods consuming anger. To this I might add, That Saints may fear some sin visited by a mortal sickness, and the like, which they might never sufficiently know, was a sin; or themselves guilty of it, if indeed they did know it to be a sin: or, that they have not duly repented of it; or fully forsaken it: Or, they may fear their own unpreparedness for, weakness and insufficiency to grapple with affliction, pain, and Death it self. And all this is not to fear the power of any mortal calamity, or of Death it self. But I dare scarce take any occasion though of pertinent enlarge∣ments; hoping that God will supply all my defect in your serious Meditations. Fifthly, Will you have a distinction betwixt the wicked hypocrites and the Saints fears? Be pleased to take it: Saints fear not with an utter despair at the worst; but so doth every wicked man. The wicked either altogether presume in Prosperity, or in great ad∣versity altogether despair. Just as it was with Nabal, his heart over night was huge merry within him at a Kingly Feast; but the next morning when his wine was gone out of him, (saies the Scripture,) and but at the re∣port of a past danger, his heart died within him as a stone. So many men in their Cups have a courage
springing from the Tap, who drown their cares and fears in the Hogshead: whilst Saints drown theirs in Christs bloud. Alas! what spirit have wicked men when their Wine is gone out of them? The Saints hearts may quake and be shaken a little, but yet they are at Anchor: when as the very first evil tydings of ven∣geance from God, and of a dreadful mortality, drive the wicked's fearful hearts, as Chaff before the wind, or as a poor tattered Ship, without Anchor, before a Tempest. Bring the Saints to their worst fears, so that they sin to escape, and make a supply of weak faith with a foolish carnal stratagem; yet still their fears are not the fears of the wicked; for, First, Saints have even then some hope in God; which laies real hold on God though but little, and God accepts, yea, fails not that little. Therefore God was good to David, and delivered him from Achish, and made him not ashamed, though his hope in God was little, and his sin great. Saies David at that very time, Psal. 34.4. I sought the Lord, (there is some hope necessarily implied,) and he heard me, and delivered me from all my fears. Many fears, little hope, yet some he had, for he sought God. But yet it is very remar∣kable in Scripture, how God hath in the utmost ex∣tremity of his people even eminently prospered their sins of little hope and great fears for their escape, though afterward he punished them forely for both. Secondly, Whereas the wickeds fears encrease with their dangers and calamities, and the nearer approach of their unavoydable ruine; yet the grace of Gods Chil∣dren in such extremities recovers it self again, and their fears decrease, the more their miseries multiply. Wic∣ked men are like the Amorites, whose hearts melted, the
nearer Israels Host came, neither was there spirit in them any more, Josh 5.1. Their fear had quite consumed their spirits. Hence it is that despair carries away so many of them at last. But it is quite contrary with those that are in Christ, following him in all the diffi∣culties of the Regeneration, and deadly troubles of this life; their Courage encreases with their dangers. At the first commonly some smart, and some fear; in greater pain, none at all: At the first they may be somewhat affraid of evil Tidings; but not long, or not long so much; It may be there is upon further certainty and feeling of what they heard and feared before, nay, there is indeed frequently greater quiet and composure of mind under Gods fatherly hand. A soul that hath true grace, though but weak, feeling it self almost quite gone in despair, stirs up all its strength as its last gasp, and stretch, just as the spirit is failing before the Lord; and behold it revives: when as in such a case the wicked mans spirit, like a Nabals, sinks as a stone within him. See how the Saints dying hope, as I may call it, revives in an utmost extremity: For when the hypocrites hope perishes, and is like the giving up of the Ghost: The Saints hope is like the Resurrection from the Dead; as you have it in a place of Scripture truly singular and notable, Lam. 3.17, 18, 19, 20, 21. Thou hast removed my soul far off from peace, I forgat prosperity. Vers. 18. And I said my strength and my hope is perished from the Lord. Vers. 19. Remembring mine affliction and my misery, the wormwood and the gall. Vers 20. My soul hath them still in remembrance, and is humbled in me. Vers. 21. This I recall to my mind, therefore have I hope. Oh! most wonderful! It is first said, My strength and my hope is perished; then, This I sadly think on; what is next?
Therefore have I hope! What saies learned Calvin? that sagacious man in spiritual cases. What? Doth de∣spair cause hope? Saies he excellently, Incomprehensi, bili atque admirabili Dei beneficio spes ex Desperatione. By an unconceivable and most admirable working of God, the Saints hope springs out of despair. So it was with David, sometimes even at first encounter disquieted, quite amort; afterwards he rowzes himself and trusts in God: Therefore he confesses the whole matter, say∣ing, At what time I am affraid I will trust in thee, Psal. 56.3. This is a Saints most constant use, and a certain Reme∣dy is taken by this course; nothing cures fear like hope. Though a Saint be surprized at first with fear, yet hope in God will recover him e're it be too late. As it did that reverend Martyr, who recanted for fear. For he mastered his fears soon after, and burnt them with the same hand that drew back before: having in a greater pain least fear. So it is in general or in common with Gods people; it may be at first, some fear, but through Christ, victory over it at last. Thus did the terrible army of Martyrs win the field and Crown of glory; and even so do all by Christ more or less conquer their fears of Death. Take then a good man as a good man, a child of God, (my Text speaking of such an one,) one that is graci∣ous and serious, that walks with God, and there is no dispute, no room for an objection; If, I say, he be eminently righteous, constant in holiness, watchful and careful, closely walking with God; one whose soul Christ his great Shepherd hath restored and leads in the paths of Righteousness, Christ still conducting him, he is not affraid; though he walk in the valley of the sha∣dow of Death. Thus it is with the Saints, Christs Souldiers conflicting with their enemies from Deaths
first Alarum in other Calamities, to its last onset on the Graves brink. The Saints may truly make Sampson's Riddle, their Song, Judges 14.14. Out of the eater comes forth meat, and out of the strong comes forth sweetness; even so, at worst, out of the fearfullest Death, the liveliest Hope. And now I think the Objecti∣on will not in the least disturb my Application or the USE. And because I have no design to tire the Press, or any ones patience, but to make the Comforts of the Scri∣ptures go down both as quickly and as pleasantly as may be. I shall only add a few words of Information, and then of Exhortation with Direction. And first of Infor∣mation in two things. First, See how Precious Christ is! who is such a De∣liverer as hath not only purchased heaven for us, but gi∣ven us the first fruits to taste. He not only frees altoge∣ther from Eternal Death, but from the fears of Tempo∣ral and bodily Death. Therefore this being a great benefit we have by Christ, is particularly extolled by the Apostle Paul, who preached up the glory of his Dear Jesus, with what singular advantage he could take, as 1 Cor. 15.56. Thanks be to God (saies he) who hath given us the victory, that is, over Death and its power; through our Lord Jesus Christ. Oh there is the Emphasis; there is his Selah, as I may say; Through our Lord Jesus Christ. Oh! How dear should this Jesus, this Deliverer be to us? Who makes us poor Creatures so dear to himself; as that, sith we must dye, yet the fears of Death should not molest and vex us the remain∣ing part of our life. Secondly, See the Possibility of attaining this Tem∣per of not fearing Death, nay, also the Necessity of it,
Be not prejudiced ignorantly against Christs design and your own duty, yea, attainable happiness. Do not say, you cannot attain it; it requires assurance; and assu∣rance rarely, if ever, enjoyed by Saints in this life. Do not jumble mistakes together; you have seen what is required to it; and how Christ works the fears of death out of his peoples hearts. Come, come, say O Saint, hereafter with the Apostle Paul, I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me: Say with David, Though I walk in the valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear no ill, for thou art with me. Follow Job's and others their courage in the expectation of death. Is God any respecter of persons? Is not a childs portion a childs portion? You expect heaven as well as those eminent Saints, and the same Crown of glory: And why should you not fight as manfully as they, who could dare death it self? But still this Information is clouded with some kind of exceptions; And there are that say; Indeed Christ hath delivered Scripture Saints, and some others it may be from the fear of death, and can do as much for us; But yet is any thing in so great an attainment our duty? Or to us possible? Few or none attain a full assurance of faith, without which can any attain to freedom from the fears of death? What you answer is of Eminent Saints, Paul, Job, David, who had this rare thing assurance, and so by Gods grace and the power of Christ, they might conquer the fears of Death. And it is evident, though God is no respecter of persons, yet all Gods Children have not equal attain∣ments herein. Well, I know it, and for the most part, nay, I might safely say, alwaies long of themselves; either they resist God more, or seek him less than other Saints; or are foolishly and idly ignorant of his good will, and
their own duty and happiness. Alas! alas! Is it not sad to see how Protestants by a simple distinction, or at least simple use of it, are in this even turned Papists? There is say they, Certitudo objecti, not subjecti; A certainty of Saints salvation, but not of its evidence to them, as if indeed in this valley of tears, the Saints eyes be always so bleared that they cannot see (one of a thousand) such a mystery and secret. The white stone it is true, hath a new name written in it, which none can read indeed but him that hath it; What? nor he neither scarce at all; is it written in such very small Letters as cannot be seen by the ordinary illumination of Gods people? Such say Saints salvation no doubt is certain in it self; but seldom or never clearly evident to them; to this purpose or ef∣fect too many wrong God and themselves too. Well, listen to this too much, and run this dark black notion down into its blind consequences and palpable inconve∣niences, (which will scarce be avoided, errour in this world multiplying much faster than truth.) This I I tell you will be one said Consequence, the Devil comes on you, and if God permits him, (as such a strange misunderstanding of the Gospel provokes him to it,) then I assure you he will shake you sorely with the fears of death. But pray you now consider at length; Is making of Calling and Election sure, making it sure in it self, or to our selves secure and evident? is it our du∣ty sufficient to draw near unto God with faith, or ra∣ther also with the full assurance of it? Is indeed God bound in his Covenant to give the Saints more and more grace, but no comfort at all? Surely, as well not one, as not the other; and the same hinders one, as well as the other, even our ignorance and unwillingness: who as we oft refuse to return to the Lord, so also much
oftener do we refuse to be comforted. How come we to be commanded to rejoyce in the Lord alwaies? Yea, to count it all joy when we fall into divers Temptati∣ons? If no promise of ability from God to enable us to rejoyce. Hath not God confirmed his Covenant by an Oath, that we should have strong consolation as well as strong graces Heb. 6.17, 18. Is not joy one of the fruits of Christs Spirit? Doth not the Kingdom of Christ and government of our hearts consist in righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost? Doth not an Apo∣stle use his Authority thus? Rejoyce in the Lord alwaies, Rom. 14.17. and again I say rejoyce. Who dares then preach Gods Word otherwise? And clip the Scripture language, and tell people it is enough, or that it is pretty well, if a Saint can say thus, I desire to be Gods child, though I cannot call God Father, Alas! there can be but poor joy in thy desires of being Gods child, if thou knowest not but God is thy enemy. Will this be a comfort to thee, that thou desirest to be Gods child, whilst thou knowest that thou neglectest a strict command of re∣joycing in the Lord alwaies, flatly rebelling against a Conscience binding Gospel-Law, and putting God off with a Complement, that such Commands are too good for thee: I am sure they are too good to be diso∣beyed. But to return, Dost thou desire to be Gods Child? Let thy desires be like a childs desires; obedi∣ent desires. Dost thou desire to be a dutiful Child? Then rejoyce in thy Father alwaies, and again, I say, re∣joyce. Whether is ground of comfort thinkest thou, thy disobedient desires, or Gods free pardoning love? Truly, I question whether there be not a dream in such kind of fancies; fancies I call them, if taken for com∣forts and rested in. For how canst thou say, if thou
knowest what thou sayest, that thou lovest God as a Child; if thou hast no evidence that God loves thee as a Father? This is to give the Apostle John the lye, who saies plainly, that we love him because he first loved us. Some may think it modesty for a Saint to say, I desire to be Gods child, but dare not call God Father. Mode∣sty! for a child not to own his true Father! and his real evident love, the sensiblest thing that is felt of God in the world, for God is love. This I know, that some∣thing like it, is but ignorance, pride, and sloathful rest∣ing in miserable attainments, all sadly put together; not that I am any the least friend to a rash, peremptory, con∣stant, and sudden assertion, My God and my Father: But such an one I contend for, as springs from a serious meditation of Gods unspeakable love revealed in the Covenant of grace; and from the due exercise of Grace, especially in the actual worshipping of God; wherein most Scripture Saints have exprest their highest confi∣dence in God as a Father, even at their Devotions. And also such an assertion I plead for of a Saints inte∣rest in God as a Father, which together with all the rest, arises from a peculiar operating presence of the wit∣nessing Spirit, whereby a Saint is enabled to cry, Abba, Father: Which Spirit dwelling in the Saints, and ena∣bling them in all Acts of Worship, yea, of their life more or less, cannot but give them a sweet sence all along alwaies in their hearts of Gods being their Father; unless they have so sinned as David, driven away the Comforter, and so need to pray with him; Restore O Lord the Joys of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit. Therefore let Ministers especially, and all those who ought to comfort one another; let Gods Heralds, I say, and Preachers of Gospel glad Tydings
abhor to be like the Devils Goalers, to feed the Saints with weak cold comforts, like bread and water of affli∣ction, that will certainly betray them to the power of the Devil, and the fears of Death. What? Comfort and bolster up a Communicant, one that having many years professed true Christianity may now be called within an hour to heaven; What? I say, to comfort such an one with his ABC, his rudiments; that it is a matter of content and rest to him, that he desires to be Gods Child, though he cannot call God Father? We may shut up our Bibles, and cease preaching comfort, if this be enough. Every the least Saint may quickly attain to this, for it is the least that true grace can do; it may be as quickly done as said by a true Saint. But surely there is something more in drawing near to God, in following on to seek the Lord; even full assu∣rance of Faith, Heb. 10.22. And truly to comfort Saints Consciences with their attaining less then this (except in singular cases and conditions of great relapses and sore desertions,) is to comfort them with their reproach; O ye of little faith. Is this to lead sad Saints into paths of pleasantness and peace? Or rather to hoodwinck them, and so leave them in the dark unto the Devil, to fright them? Is this to comfort and cure Saints weak hearts? Or rather to keep them weak and valetudi∣nary? Or is it not to play the Mountebanks with them? And by indulging their fears and doubts to take a course to have them alwaies visiting us for our weak Physick; when as Christ hath left us, and all his, mighty strong Consolations and Cordials; and that with a Probatum est thereupon, the probation and experience of every New-Testament Saint. But I will shew you Scripture Divi∣nity, and not sparingly neither, for what I plead,
1 Joh. 1.3. And truly our fellowship is with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ. Vers. 4. And these things write we to you, that your joy might be full. Chap. 2.5. Hereby know we, that we are in him. Chap. 3.2. Beloved, now we are the Sons of God. Vers. 14. We know that we have pas∣sed from death unto life because we love the Brethren. Vers. 19. And hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts before him. Vers. 24. And here∣by we know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit which he hath given us. Chap. 4.13. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit. Vers. 16. And we have known and believed the love that God hath to us. Chap. 5.13. These things have I written unto you that believe on the name of the Son of God; that ye may know, that ye have Eternal life. Vers. 14. And this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he heareth us. Vers. 15. And if we know that he heareth us, whatsoever we ask we know, that we have the Petitions that we desired of him. Vers. 19. And we know that we are of God, and the whole world lyeth in wickedness. Vers. 20. And we know that the Son of God is come, and hath given us an understand∣ing, that we may know him that is true: And we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God and Eternal life. Here is the right description of a New Testament, Gospel-Saint, and the nature of his confidence; which he holds to the end, maugre all the terrours of Death or Devil. Upon all which let me say thus much, (for I am labouring to have the Axe laid at the root of all horrid fears of Death,) do but consider it seriously; and then judg whether to comfort souls with puny, lazy, and easie reflections on that which is sadly short of
what those Scriptures speak to be the attainment of Gods Children, whether I say it be not, to keep souls fully as unholy as truly comfortless: for so it is, if Eph. 3.17, 18.19 do hold out these Doctrines, which you will find they do; as first, That great faith is necessary to the working of a great and an awakened affection in our hearts for God and Christ. Christ dwelling in our hearts by faith roots us and grounds us in a sincere and powerful love of God. Secondly, That such a mighty affection in us for God is necessary to the begetting in us a larger assurance of his love to us; For love thinks no ill, but expects much good, especially from God. That ye, saies the Apostle, being rooted and grounded in love, might even thereby be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and know the love of Christ; even as all eminent Saints have known it, that is, his love to us in particular; as the Apostle Paul phrases it, Gal. 2.20. I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. Thirdly, That great assurance of Gods love to us is needful unto our per∣fecting of holiness; if so be we would be filled with all the fulness of God. Now who that have any fear of God, or pity to souls, dare use any other method of comforting, then God uses? Oh let none comfort others, or themselves, with poor weak tokens of being in a good state, and by never urging home an absolute necessity of the full assurance of faith, even leave them under perpetual guilt, and so unto those fears which make them walk unworthy of the state, hope, or name of Christians. Surely he that delivers from the fears of Death, leaves not poor souls to be torn and tost with extream doubtings of his love to them. Well, I leave this particular Information; Behold the possibility of
attaining this freedom from the fears of Death with all that appertains to it; being clear from the necessity of our duty, it being required of us; and from the many examples of Saints so freed, to encourage us. For with Christ, the great Deliverer, this is possible; and it is every childs portion, ready purchased, and it may be had for going for, to him. He is both able, willing, and ready to save to the uttermost them that come unto God by him. Now I come to the second Use, and that is of Exhortation, in two words. First, Let every poor soul look to it, to get grace, to be in the number of real Saints, for whom Christ inter∣cedes, as before my Text, saying, Behold I and the chil∣dren which thou hast given me. This Text speaks no comfort to any carnal wicked persons. In the time of Pestilence, and an hour of sudden Death, they have no fence against the Devils fiery darts, and the flashes of hell; no Antidote against the killing fears of Death. But let them flee penitently and believingly to Christ for refuge, yea, to Christ, first for grace, for repen∣tance unto life, and for faith in his bloud, and then for safety; and if the Son make you Sons, and so free, ye shall be free indeed. Secondly, I beseech you that are Saints, Gods chil∣dren, though but a little flock, little children, yet do not you dread Death. I do not say, Do not think of Death; Alas! who can but think of it? I do not say neither, Be not seriously sensible of it. But I beseech you for the sake of Jesus Christ, for his honour sake who is your King, and your own, who are his Souldiers, I say, quit your selves like men, stand to it stoutly, sink not under the fears of Death. Alas! you are not to fear your last encounter, if God hath given you any
victory over your greatest, and truly mortal enemies the World, Flesh, and Devil. Saints at last should be like experienced Souldiers, used to encounters, and war∣risht with spiritual Combates, so that they should ra∣ther scorn, then fear the last and harmlessest enemy, Death. But I shall only add; That this freedom from the fears of Death is a priviledge Christ hath purchased for this present state, for this life. NOw what Saint can find in his heart to lose so great a Legacy left by Christ; so great a purchase and benefit of his Death? So great a Deliverance? And foolishly multiply to himself self-willed fears, or which is worse, self-willed grounds of fear; as lust, passion, worldly incumbrances, or worldly mindedness, idleness, vain, frothy, foolish actions and carriage; or if not so, then it may be, igno∣rant suspicions of Gods mercy: All these things do but arm Death, and thine own Conscience to wound thee; oh look to thy self, make haste, for Death hastens apace. O! what true Child of God but would so long to be rid of this disingenuous temper of fearing Death, as to be even hourly on his knees begging of Christ this benefit of his gloriously conquering death; which if a Child of God receives not in this short, and now if ever, uncertain life, he will altogether miss that which is so goodly a part of the Saints Portion; which is proper to, and fitted for this present life; even before Death comes to encounter us. Well, abandon these fears with the grounds of them, and then though Death come quickly, yet through Christ you will grapple well enough with it. And oh that men were wise to get from Christ by all constant importunity, some of this blessed deliverance from the fears of Death; and oh that by a continual carelesness, because not presently seized by
the Plague, or any other mortal sickness, they would not desperately venture it, and so sadly abandon them∣selves to the frights of the Devil in an hour of sudden death. Now if any be awakened, either by Gods Word or Providence, to look after this great benefit of Christs death; which is, to be delivered from the servile fears of their own; then let such consider this Counsel which the Scripture gives in the Case. First, Have a care of harbouring one moment any known or knowable guilt; For it receives from the condemning Law strength to arm Death with. I wonder not that those Saints who have at any time much guilt upon their spirits, do then fear Death. If sin be not exami∣ned and found out, which is not done by many Saints; who even justifie themselves in some sins, not judging them to be sins, nor much caring to examine lest they should prove sins, and so to be parted with, contrary to a dear humour; and so calling good evil; and evil good; no wonder in such a case that the Woe belonging to such, when executed, as well as threatned, frights them. If Saints for want of due consideration and examining themselves, do not only commit, but continue in sin unrepented of, as the Plagued Corinthians; no won∣der that they are surprized, not only with the fears of death, but with sudden death it self. Oh! shake your Consciences, rouze them up to discharge their office faithfully; let your heart smite you for the least sin, or evil thought; and oh harbour not guilt, let it not lodge with you one night, no not an hour; for so long you will be liable to horrid fears of dying. It is so, and the very truth of many Saints condition. Therefore find out that which troubles your peace, and provokes God to leave you to the fears of Death; finding it out,
labour for the assistance of Christs Spirit, for one look from Christ, for one manifestation of Gods love that may break your hearts, and make you weep bitterly, repent and grieve throughly: thus shall not sin come upon you with an afterclap, with a repentance to be re∣pented of. Weep for sin according to the demand of the Gospel, which requires not a little grief, though less then sin deserves, for it deserves hells weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth. Do this, Believe and Repent, Repent and Believe; and then you will find in your hearts little or no fears of Death. For peace of Conscience will thus become firm, and will cast and keep them out; yea, defend the heart through Christ. I say, therefore dayly, yea, hourly exercise faith, toge∣ther with repentance, that is to say, a vigorous faith; which is never forlorn or forsaken of good works; and such a faith in Christ will be your victory over all base fears of Death. Be not then, O souls, too hasty in your exercise of faith. Believe again and again, really and truly presenting to your selves the severity of the last and solemn judgment of God. Believe not only till some ease come, but till you be willing to dye, if the Lord will, presently. For did you arraign your selves in bitter Confession of sin as before Gods Tribunal in∣deed: No less faith would serve your turn, then such as would carry you boldly from your knees through Death to Judgment; for you may so examine and judge your selves, as to be confident in Christ that you shall never be judged of the Lord. Secondly, Resist the Devil; I mean these his tem∣ptations to fear death; resist both him, and all his temptations; as, those to sin, to despair of its pardon, and to fear its wages Death. Have an (It is written) for
him, if not to wound him, yet to gag him; If nothing be readier; dart this Text into his foul mouth to stop it; this Text, managed with faith, will fright the De∣vil more than he can fright you. This Text is in this case like Goliahs Sword, none like it. Take Gods Word; for it will wound him, and make him run too, by the power of the Spirit of Christ. Well, thus re∣sist the Devil; fear him not, he is a conquered enemy. Christ hath destroyed him that hath the power of death, saies the Apostle. And therefore I desire you to resist him for two reasons. First, Because your Captain hath done it. It is fit for Souldiers to fight against such as their General Charges; It is not fit for you to yield to the Devils temptations to fear Death, when as Christ, the Captain of your salvation, hath overcome him, as his, and your Enemy, destroying him that had the power of Death. This were to raise arms with the Devil, and to strengthen him against Christ and your own lives too. But, Secondly, I advise this, because it is the way of Christ, his Method of ridding his children from fear. He first destroyed him that had the power of Death, that is, the Devil; and all this that he might deliver his people from fear of dying. So do you; follow Christs Methods of war. Would you be delivered indeed by Christ from the bondage fears of Death? Then do as Christ, resist him that hath the power of Death. The Promise you know encourages this stoutness. Resist the Devil and he will flee from you; which when he doth, your fears of Death will flee after him; because it is he only that hath this power of Death. As one saies, Timor attrahit ad se Daemonas, Fear or Cowardize invites
the Devil to come to us; the Cowards trick indeed, who never fighteth but when he thinks his enemy fears to resist him. So I may to be sure say on the contrary, that as to fear the Devil draws him upon us; so not to fear him keeps him off on's. Courage in resistance will put him to flight; for he is an absolute Coward to Christ and stout Christians. If this be not done, I mean, if the Devil be not fully resisted, all is in vain; that man will scarce ever keep his Conscience quiet that tamely suffers the Devil to play the merciless Souldier, Sophister, Goaler, or Executioner with it; Master the Devil, and then having made thy peace with God, thou hast only thy Conscience still to pacifie from time to time with that bloud that hath pacified God. Well then, take this course; do as Christ did in his fighting; and you will without doubt fight a good fight of faith, and finish your course with joy. Thirdly, Love not the world, or any thing in it that is of it; Love not your life too much; exercise self denial. Did we love God and our selves aright, we should not fear Death. Perfect love casteth out the fear of Death; But imperfect love, love divided; the love of God, and of the world too, I mean, the comforts, pleasures of this life, sweet Relations, or the like; oh this im∣perfect love, instead of casting out, doth but hatch and harbour the fears of Death. Fear then to love much any thing of this world, though never so lawful an enjoy∣ment, would you not fear Death. There is more in this than Christians will be aware of. But doubtless, the inordinate love of worldly comforts, and the imper∣fect love of God, makes men affraid to dye. To this I may add, Prize spiritual things above worldly; place your sensible dayly, yea, hourly happiness in spiritual
things; count them not only your food, but feast; yea, recreation too; alwaies reckoning thus to be merry. My Meditation of God shall be sweet, saies David, and I will be glad in the Lord. Let the comfort of your lives, your choice, constant delight and treasure be heavenly things; then you will never fear death. For as it is a comfort when an house is on fire to save all the goods, especially all the treasure. So though the Plague or any death fire the body, this our tabernacle of clay; yet will it not be a quering comfort that our Treasure is safe? And that we have a better house to go to, not made with hands, in the highest heavens? Fourthly, Watch. It is Christs direction. The un∣certainty of the time of death and judgment, hath this Use of Exhortation annexed to it by a greater Ecclesi∣astes then Solomon, Christ himself, who preached as ne∣ver man did, and spake as never man spake; saies he, What I say unto you, I say unto all, watch, Mar. 13.37. Job knowing his Redeemer lived, knew both his protection, and his duty; waited all the daies of his appointed time till his change came. He was every day at watch, look∣ing for his last enemy, Death, and therefore little feared what he could do; therefore he had not so much fear of Death, as hope in God though he should slay him. Oh! watch, watch; For you know those that watch in an Army are less affrighted at the approach of an enemy, then those that are alarum'd out of their sleep: So it is as to the fears of Death, we therefore fear it so much, because we so little think of it, or expect it, putting the evil day far from us; and so, suspecting it not to be near, fall to sleep, keep no watch; and then if on a sudden this last enemy Death approach, and seem to be very near us; we being alarum'd out of our foolish
sleep are affrighted. Therefore Solomon deals wisely with the young man, Eccles. 12. who thinks death far∣thest off, I say, he presents the young man with a most lively and unparallel'd description of his latter end; puts him in mind betimes of his latter daies; that so meditating and expecting such an end of his daies, he might not be affrighted at death, nor unprepared for judgment. Oh! watch, watch; for certainly, Chri∣stians, familiar thoughts of death, if according to Gods Word, would breed in us the contempt of Death. Fifthly, Be faithful in celebrating all Gospel Ordinances of Gods Worship; Communion with Christ in them raises a mans ambition above his Cowardice, and makes him covet to be with Christ, though it be by Death. Remember that of David, Psal. 24.4. Though I walk in the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no ill, for thou art with me. In the next verse but one he shews where God and he met, ver. 6. I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. Communion with his shepherd, especially in holy Worship, made him fear no evil that death could affront him with. Two Ordinances of the Worship of God, and for Communion with him, I only hint as expedient to this present purpose, because one of them I must speak more to in the Conclusion, they are Prayer and the Lords Supper. First, Prayer, The end of all things is at hand, be so∣ber and watch unto Prayer, 1 Pet. 4.7 Thy end to be sure is at hand, watch and pray. Watching is of little avail without Prayer. If you be wise pray much in faith. O, Saints, have you never found in prayer heavens gate opened to your knocking? Do but prevail once in prayer with God himself, as Princes, and Israelites in∣deed,
and you will easily overcome his Serjeant death it self, much more its fears. They that use in Prayer to enter into the holiest by the bloud of Jesus cannot much fear that Death should at last make them miss their good old way to heaven. Secondly, Receive the Lords Supper as oft, and as wor∣thily as you can; Many quiet their Consciences by re∣ceiving that Sacrament upon the point of Death. But truly, solid joyes, and the best preparations for death, are the result of a godly remembrance of Christs death, all along in our life time. What quiet can any have from such a practice? That is, to neglect the Ordinance and duty of remembring Christs death all their life; and to remember it only at their death? Oh! seeing fears of death, are sad associates and Companions of our life; even all your daies remember Christs death; by ver∣tue whereof you are to be delivered from such trouble∣some Company; as it is clear in the preceding verse to my Text, That through DEATH, saies the Apostle, he might destroy him that had the power of Death; and deliver them who through fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage. This is a deliverance you see wrought through Christs death. O Saint study it, eye it in faith, till thou feelest the vertue of it in thy heart, easing thee of thy fears of Death. Thus Christ undertook thy De∣liverance even by his own Death. Thus then do thou manage this thy deliverance by due remembrance of thy Saviours death; which remembrance in the use of the Lords Supper (if it be the highest Gospel Ordinance, as none doubt it so to be,) is the most effectual means to subdue, as all sin, so all fears of death. The death of Christ kills sin, guilt, death, and Devil; and will it not by faith destroy the fears of Death? Surely it
will. Only take heed to thy self in receiving the Sacra∣ment of the Lords Supper; for else thy remedy may prove thy poyson. An unbecoming remembrance at that Ordinance of Christs death, may cost thee thy life, and bring the Plague to thy body, as many good Divines are of the opinion that the Plague raged amongst those unworthy Communicants of the Corin∣thians that were even many of them weak and sickly, yea, many faln asleep. A Plague sure; because many fick and many dead. Sixthly, Maintain a very exact and holy Conversation; walk with God in thy Closet, and in thy house in a per∣fect way. Who was it that had a desire to be dissolved? Who was it? That by all means laboured to attain to the resurrection of the dead? To enjoy by death the perfection of glory, and that without the least fears of Death? Was it not that holy man the Apostle Paul? who as you find in the same place, Phil. 3.13. counted not himself to be already perfect; forgetting those things which were behind, reaching forth to those things which were before, and pressing towards the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. He prest forward, yea, would have prest too through Death gladly, that he might attain to the Re∣surrection of the Dead. He that hath a Conversation in heaven, will least fear his passage thither by Death, having in his life time been much used to be above. Those that set their minds on things above can look much beyond death, and see all clear. A holy conver∣sation in heaven is a conversation beyond Death. Cer∣tainly, none fear death more than wicked men, whose Consciences are somewhat awakened; and none, next to them, fear death more than careless Saints. Strict
livers are not only fearless of Death, but desirous of it. The Apostle Peter speaking of sufferings, counsels thus, 1 Pet. 4.19. Let them that suffer according to the will of God commit the keeping of their souls to him in well do∣ing as unto a faithful Creator. Truly, for Saints not on∣ly to suffer, but to dye as well as others is the appointed will of God. Let them then commit the keeping of their souls to God in death, or under the expectation of it, in well doing as unto a faithful Creator; for then they can no more fear Death reasonably, then they can Gods faithfulness. Seventhly, Make a good improvement of all afflictions. Conquer them by faith and patience, and you will bet∣ter deal with Death. The Apostle Paul triumph't over Death, (as you have heard) because more then Con∣querour over tribulations, persecutions, and the like sorrows. Truly, overcoming these afflictions he bids a defiance to Death it self, let it do its worst; he is per∣swaded that neither life nor death, neither the troubles of life, nor the pains of Death, if not the first, sure not the later, can separate him from his happiness, the love of God in Christ Jesus. Therefore you find a remarkable passage in Phil. 1.13, 23. near together in the same Chapter; first he mentions his bonds in Christ, or for his sake in Caesars Palace, then quickly mentions his desire to dye, to depart this miserable world. This is the unspeakable happiness of afflictions when impro∣ved; they make us not only weary of this life, and de∣sirous of the Saints everlasting rest; but they harden us, and animate us to go on to conquer the remains of death at the last hour. None live or dye more couragi∣ously then the most exercised Saints, trained up in great afflictions and sufferings for righteousness sake.
Eighthly, Study the great Examples of this Delive∣rance; Scripture Saints and others that have not feared death; though subject to the like passions and infirmi∣ties that we are; as Job, David, the Apostle Paul, and others. Example is cogent; and their courage as well as patience was recorded for our imitation. Now this is the great advantage we have by such examples: A poor soul is encouraged to expect the same deliverance by Christ that such Saints before obtained freely, seeing as God, so Christ is no respecter of persons; especially no partial Father to his own children, who have all an equal interest in the Common Saviour and Deliverer. Consider that seriously and take courage. Remember once and again that Heb. 7.25. He is able to save to the uttermost them that come unto God by him; them, that is, whosoever come, them as well as the Apostle Paul himself; Stephen and Apollo's as well as the great Apostles Peter and Paul; and the Apostle John's little children as well as himself, so long as they be children of God, and come to God by Christ. As the Apostle Peter speaks; God (saies he) making no difference between them and us, even all one in Christ, as to the benefits of his death. I beseech you consider also your living and dying Saints, whose eminent lives are fresh in your me∣mories; confider and trace in them the evident footsteps of this glorious deliverance from the fears of Death. The great instruction that the life and death of truly Christian friends do teach us, is to dye well and comfortably. And their evident victory over Death should animate the following files of Christian Souldiers to fall on; and that with more courage upon death, then death can upon them. Ninthly, Trust in God; Believe in God, believe also
in Christ; we find in Scripture that nothing we can do is a more present remedy against disquiets and fears, then a present exercising this heavenly grace of trusting in, and cleaving closer to God even when trouble is nigh, very nigh, Why art thou disquieted O my soul; hope in God. Again, What time I am affraid I will trust in thee, and many such instances. Well, the Devil fights thy soul with the fears of Death: Do thou charge him again with thy hope in God. Take this armour of God. Hope is a proper weapon to fight against fear; and the longer weapon too I will assure you. It is a proper match for fear, and much more valiant through Christ, then the fears of Death can pretend to be, for and through the Devil. Therefore to promote this grace, so highly con∣ducing to the design of Christ in delivering his people from the fears of Death, or of any dismal misery that can usher in Death to us; I shall conclude with a disco∣very of some things that make for us all, many waies; as well as for the due Complexion of this needful grace of hope, which, I confess, may blush, but never grow pale and wan upon the nearest approach, or roughest touch of Death, we will leave that dull complexion to the lumpish fears of Death. Well, to get this health∣ful lively grace of hope. First, Labour to know well God and Christ, with the design, merit, and power of his death. There is nothing knowable of God, as the truth is in Jesus, but it con∣duceth to a Saints confidence; labour therefore to know as much of God as thou canst, Psal. 9.10. They that know thy name will put their trust in thee. And in∣deed who will trust a stranger that he knows not? See further, Prov. 22.17, 18, 19. Bow down thine ear and hear the words of the wise, and apply thine heart unto my know∣ledge.
Vers. 18. For it is a pleasant thing if thou keep them within thee, they shall withall be fitted in thy lips. Vers. 19. That thy trust may be in the Lord I have made known to thee this day, even to thee. Vers. 20. Have I not written to thee excellent things in Counsels and knowledge? And all this excellent instruction from Christ is to this very purpose; that thy trust may be in God. Read Gods word much, labour to understand his blessed pregnant promises, his wisdom, power, and faithfulness, especi∣ally his love; to comprehend with all Saints the breadth, and length, and depth, and height of it. Know God much, and you will trust him the more, as Psal. 9.10. They that know thy name will put their trust in thee: For thou Lord hast not forsaken them that seek thee. Thy faithfulness, O Lord, is so experienced, who that knows in, but must trust in thee. How came Job to trust God though he should slay him, to be so fearless of any death? Truly, he had excellent knowledge of God, yea, and of Christ too; He knew his Redeemer lived. But let thy knowledge of God and Christ be such as includes Eternal life; for the Devils know God, they believe and tremble; Let not thy knowledg be like the know∣ledge of the filthy Devils, but like the knowledge of the pure God, let it shine and sparkle in all holiness of heart and life. Be good, and do good, as well as know good; be like God, and do like God. Get a renewed heart, and a reformed life, that so beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, you may be changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. Oh continue beholding Christs glory as in a glass, till you see your selves some∣what like him, and then you cannot see any thing to fright you; for as you have it, Psal. 64.10. The
RIGHTEOUS shall be glad in the Lord, and shall trust in him, and all the UPRIGHT in heart shall glory. Now surely Death and its fears shall not for bid it, and make this Scripture a lye. Secondly, Use thy self to it, to trust in God. Exercise thy self extraordinarily unto this part of Godliness; so no changes will put thee out; no, not thy last change. Job could trust God in one sad condition after another, though sadder and sadder. And then at length he could do so as well, even at death; though God himself too should slay him, he could not be put by his good use and holy custome of trusting in God, Psal. 62.8. Trust in him at all times. And if thou dost, I will assure thee, thou wilt at no time much fear death, or ought else but God. But, Thirdly, Especially in times of danger; as when War, Plague, Famine is begun, or any other mortal Calami∣ty. When thou art in the valley of the shadow of death, then it is high time to trust much in God, and to pluck up thy heart, Psal 2.12. When his wrath is kindled but a little, blessed are all they that put their trust in him: That take warning betime, and return to him that smites them, that cling to him, and kiss the Rod at the first sight, or the first lash at least. Oh that men did but know the things which do belong to their peace, to their speedy averting of Gods dreadful judgments. Oh that men would trust in God and cleave unto him, yea, to his feet, humbling themselves under his mighty hand, when he begins to plague them; that so he may not be provoked to chasten in his hot displeasure. This David earnestly prayed against, and as earnestly laboured al∣waies to prevent: For the very enkindling of Gods an∣ger is dreadful, but its waxing hot most lamentable,
desolating, and full of horrour; who can dwell with everlasting burnings? Oh therefore saies a wise David, that had felt Gods anger, when his anger is kindled but a little, blessed are all they that put their trust in him. Fourthly, Trust in God when thou findest thy heart most fearful; That is the very nick of time, that makes thy duty of trusting God most seasonable and advantagious to thee; and therefore an hour, wherein thou mayst expect the assistance of Gods Spirit to bear thee up, according to Davids confidence, grounded on good ex∣perience, Psal. 56.3. What time I am affraid I will trust in thee; Why art thou disquieted O my soul? Hope in God. And again, This I call to mind; What? Truly that my strength and hope was perished from the Lord; yet therefore have I hope. As God, so a gracious soul will be seen in the mount. God helps in extremity, lest the Spirit he hath made should fail before him, as the Prophet admi∣rably; therefore let thy trust in God be at work, when to be sure Gods power is at work too; and that is in ex∣tremity; set in with God, and thy Spirit shall be sustai∣ned. When the fear of near approaching Death charges thee home, and thy heart sinks within thee, O let it not sink like a stone, as Nabals, but pluck it up and charge it again with a more lively hope in God. This do, master thy fears and conquer. For it is often found that Cowards when they can master themselves and their own fears, turn most valiant and daring against their enemies. Fifthly, Clear up thy interest in God and in Christ. A Child trusts his Father best, a Loyal Subject his good Lord and King. To trust in such a relation is an easie, because a genuine and natural work, Psal. 7.1. O Lord my God, in thee do I put my trust. Psal. 42.5. Why art thou
cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? What is the matter? The matter! alas! War, Pestilence is at the door! Peace, O soul hope in God. Alas! but how shall I? Away, away, how shalt thou not? Dost thou not know that God is the health of thy Countenance and thy God? Yet this very David could cry out sometimes as forsaken of God, as if cut off from Gods eyes. Oh that Gods People now a daies would not imitate Scripture Saints only in their complaints, and weeping, but also in their rejoycing, and singing; not follow them only in their diffidence, but in their confi∣dence also; and not only in their dark paths, but in their Lucidis intervallis, as Isaiah phrases it, Walking with them in the light of the Lord. O be not like Scripture Saints in their spiritual swooning away, but in their coming again to themselves; be like them, not only in their de∣sertions, or dejections, but their more usual assurance of Gods love. Oh labour to speak the Dialect of Gods Children with David, either in the phrase of Psal. 3.7. or 119.94. either thus, Save me, O MY God: Or thus, I AM THINE, save me. Sixthly, Rely on nothing else. Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not to thine own understanding, Pro. 3.5. That is, to the devices of thy heart for secu∣rity, refuge, help, preservation in danger. Some trust in horses, saies the Psalmist, and some, I may say, in Coun∣try houses and air; Go to them in time of Pestilence they may, but only in case duty and necessary business bind them not to the contrary. He that flees the Plague and runs from his Duty, may most likely but rush into the Plague, as I may say, or worse; whatever he now thinks. Some trust to their invention of Antidotes against the Plague, to their own, or other mens devices
for help, and succour in time of danger; use them they may, but trust to them, and their danger is a hundred times the greater; for cursed is man that trusteth in man, much more that trusteth in himself, that leans to his own understanding; for he that doth so, would if he prospered, (which it is pity therefore he should,) I say, he would sacrifice to his own net, as well as lean to his own understanding. Seventhly, Praise God much; even with thy soul, and all that is within thee, under the greatest Judgments; It is a duty most of all seasonable, necessary, and advanta∣gious to thee. Art thou alive? Praise God, as the li∣ving; the living should do; especially, I say, in time of danger. Therefore Jacob in his time of danger and fears, began his prevalent and successful prayer for deli∣verance with (Less then the least of all Gods mercies.) For a thankful and chearful acknowledgment feeds faith and hope with former good experience; and dispels fear of evil to come with a joy in the Lord, who is the presentest and the greatest good. Be careful for nothing, saies the Apostle; How so? What remedy against dis∣quieting care and fean? Truly, Prayer and Supplication with Thanksgiving. In dangers and troubles I judge it very fitting to begin our Prayers with Thanksgivings, thanking God for what we have, when all seems to be a going; and we our selves too; who are less then the least of all Gods mercies. But especially because by Praises in the beginning of our Prayers we sing out our fears, and tune our hearts to pray in faith. But seeing both Praise and Prayer are so useful to increase faith, and blast fear, I will never contend for the priority of either, e'n put them together, let them never go asunder. To conclude then.
Oh pray much. The admirablest way under heaven by Christs blessing to conjure all base fears quite out of the heart. For if ever faith be emboldened, it is in prayer. Prayer it is the improver, as of all grace, so especially of faith, Psal 62.8. Trust in the Lord at all times: But how shall we do that? It follows; Ye people pour out your heart before him; then he adds, God is a Refuge for us. That is certain, as the Prophet thinks. Oh the confidence in God that they arrive to, who in danger can pour out their hearts before him! Faith when we pray aright doth in every Petition get faster and faster hold of God. Thus the soul in Prayer works it self even into Gods arms of mercy, and Christs bosome of love. Thus in danger we nestle closer into the Clefts of our blessed Rock till the indignation be overpast. You know that excellent Counsel, Isa. 26.20. Come, my people, enter thou into thy Chambers, and shut thy doors about thee: hide thy self as is were for a moment, untill the indignation be overpast. Wouldst thou be so safe? Then as Christ counsels, Mat. 6.6. Do thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy Closet, and when thou hast shut thy door pray to thy Father which seeth in secret, and thy Father which seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly. There is to this pur∣pose a very edifying inference may be easily gathered from 1 Tim. 5.5. Where you have the Apostle's good widow mentioned; and that she trusted in God; but that is not all; It is not a poor rash flourish, (I trust in God, and I hope in the Lord Jesus,) which is but a dream, nay, a vain and empty breath, the poor igno∣rant prophane perfons hope, which quickly gives up the Ghost. But saies the Apostle, The good widow she trusteth in God, and continueth in supplications and pray∣ers, night and day; Thus she upholds her Confidence in
God both day and night; Woe be to those that say, they trust in God day and night, and yet scarce pray at all in good earnest, day nor night. The Apostle saies indeed that this good widow is desolate, hath none to help her; but yet to facilitate her faith, you know God hath espe∣cially revealed his tender care of widows, yet their, even their trust in God (if they will make any thing on't) must be raised and enlivened through continual suppli∣cations night and day: So must every one of us do, who make God our refuge in times of danger. I think every one of our hearts tells us without asking, what need we have to trust in God under this sad Visitation, and sore Judgment of the Plague; we may quickly sit in our Fa∣milies, as a desolate widow; yea, how quickly may we be shut up in them, as many are at this time. Well, if we would approve our Consciences to God in this duty of trusting in him, which is our wisest and safest pra∣ctice, let us be exceeding fervent, yea, constant too in our supplications and prayers day and night. It is the use, you sadly know, (as of old) when a poor forlorn Family is shut up for the Plague, to make upon the door a Red Cross, and to write over, or by it, (Lord have mer∣cy, &c.) But as you love your lives both before and after infection, instead of that Red Cross, have faith in the bloud of Jesus; get your souls well sprinkled with it; And that which effectually cures the Plague of the heart, can more easily and quickly cure the Plague of the body: And so Christ may be your Passeover indeed; the destroying Angel may pass over you, and not touch those that are careful by faith to get their hearts well sprinkled with the bloud of this immaculate Lamb of God. And then instead of that short [Lord have Mercy] do you pour out your souls before the Lord, who poured
out his heart bloud for poor sinners. And to encourage you in the whole; even in all your labours to attain such a faith and confidence in Christ, as may by his power work out of your hearts the slavish fears of Death: Take that excellent place of Scripture, Nahum 1.7. The Lord is good: A strong hold in the day of trouble; AND HE KNOWETH THEM THAT TRUST IN HIM; to be sure that trust in him, like Job, though he stay them. Be assured of it, your Father which seeth in secret, (in the secret Closet, nay, in the secret Chamber and house shut up; he that seeth in se∣cret) will reward you openly. So that if you do indeed firmly believe in God, and believe also in Christ, you shall be able to say, and that from some sweet and great experience, that in very deed, When his Wrath is kin∣dled but a little, blessed (YEA, THRICE BLESSED) are all they that put their trust in him. FINIS.
