T822 13615701 100778
A TESTIMONY TO THE Lord's Power AND Blessed Appearance In and Amongst CHILDREN: Wherein is expressed the great Love of God to them, who, as Young and Tender, have tasted of his Good WORD and Heavenly LIFE. Published for the Use of Friends, and to prevent vari∣ous Reports, that they may have a true Account in the follow∣ing Testimonies, given forth by Faithful Witnesses. Printed in the Year 1679.
A Testimony to the Everlasting Power of GOD, (which in Ages past hath wonderfully appeared in Sone and Daughters) which hath been Despised, Mocked and Evil spoken of by the Wisdom which is from below, that sees it not, nor can know it; which heavenly Power hath appeared in our Days, and hath wrought wonder∣fully in and upon the Hearts of many, even to the amaze∣ment of many, and it hath met with the same Spirit of Opposition now as formerly calling it Madness, Witch∣craft and Diabolical Delusion. It was prophesied of Old, That the Lord would work a Work, which some should not believe if it were told them: This in part hath a Remnant seen in these Dayes, and even of late, as hereafter is mentioned. UPon the 4th day of the Moneth called June 1679. at a Meeting in the Town called Waltham-Abbey in Essex of the People call'd Quakers, where was present about Forty or Fifty Young Boyes and Maidens; God's heavenly Power brake forth in some Maids and Young Girls, it begun with Three or Four at first, broke them into Tears and Mting of Heart, continued so a small time, then it reached two or three of the Younger Boys, which melted them into Tears; and in a very small time reached all the Boyes and Young Girls, many of them being but about Eight or Nine and Ten Years old, the Power was so mighty that they were all broken into Tears, some into Trembling, and at last it reached unto the Elder Peo∣ple, so that all in the Meeting was broken by the Power into Tears and Melting, which did continue for about one Hour, until the Meeting was ended: This I was an Eye and Ear Wit∣ness of, and felt God's Power wonderfully, to the gladding of
my Heart, and answering the Breathings of my Soul, which I have many a Time had in a Travail to the Lord, for the Chil∣dren, That the Lord might visit them in their Young Dayes: af∣ter which Meeting I had this Hope and Faith raised up in my Soul, which to some I did declare, that God had a Work to work with some of these Children, which he would bring forth e're long. And several signal Testimonies hereof hath the Lord brought forth since, as hereafter appeareth from other Eye and Ear Witnesses thereof. And although Men in the Fallen Wisdom see not, understand not, nor believe that this is from the mighty Power of God, yet there is a Remnant gathered by this Power, and have Experience of the Operation thereof, how it hath wrought in them, even in some when they were Young; these are God's Witnesses that this is his Work; yea, it is sealed to them by his Spirit: And let all the Mockers know, God's Work in our Day will be too heavy for them; and except they Repent, will be a Stone of stumbling, upon which they will fall and be broken to pieces; yea, those that slight and neglect the Day of their Visitation, until it be too late, this same Power they stumble at, will fall upon them, and Grind them to Powder. This is from one who Travails and Breaths to the Lord, that his E∣verlasting Power may be more and more revealed in the Hearts of the Sons and Daughters of men, that many may be gathered cut of the Fall, unto Christ Jesus that never fell; that they may feel themselves growing up in his heavenly Life as living Members of him the blessed Head, then will they come to understand that these Things are from the Lord, when the inward Eye and Ear is opened, they will with me bear their Testimony, That these Things are of the Lord. G. LAWRY. The 6th day of the 5th Moneth 1679.
A Copy of a Letter to A. P. DEar A. P. &c. I cannot omit but certifie some-what of our last Night's Exercise in our Meeting, in our Family, how mightily the Power of the Lord appeared amongst us; first breaking in upon Two Young Lads, and so passd through the rest, with such Dread and Power, that there was an exceeding great shaking and tenderness amongst them, rather more then on that notable fourth day; so that it was not without diffi∣culty to bring several of them into stillness again; but at the last, it being late, they went to Bed, and there many of them lay Crying, Weeping and Lamenting for two or three Hours together: Others in a diverse Exercise; some who had been sober, and formerly good conditioned, meek and gentle, the Power was meek with them, and overcame them in a most blessed manner; so that they were filled with heavenly Praises, uttering such words as sweet-conditioned Souls are wont to do when they are sealed by the Lord's Spirit: Others most bitterly Lamenting their Conditions, especially one of the afore∣said Lads for about three Hours together in his Bed, ex∣ceeded and cryed out for Mercy, so Dreadfully, that I never (as I remember) heard a more Terrible Exercise from small or great; when I told him, how patiently his Bed-fellow lay besides him; he answered, The reason was, because he had not been so Wicked as himself had been. If I could but write down the Speeches of the poor Children, under their various Exer∣cises, I may well say, it would be as a wonderul Ting, and such a Lesson as many Hearts would be broken to read; but what shall I say, but admire the Love and Mercy of the Lord in these Things! C. was blessedly disposed on, and was truly refreshed in his Soul; and with him and several others, there was a secret inward Harmony from a feeling Sense of God's pure Visitation; and some more dreadfully seized on, and broken in upon by the Authority of the Power, so that it was admirable to behold
the variety of the Exercises suitable to the subject, matter, con∣dition and disposition of every Child. This is a hint to thee of the matter, who I know dearly loves us, and will be refreshed at any time to hear of our Wellfare. So leaving the rest to W. C. who was with us in the Meeting, if thou pleasest to enquire of him, with mine and my Wife's dear Love to thee and thy dear Wife, &c. I rest, thy dearly loving Brother in the Fellowship of God's Truth C. TAYLOR. Waltham-Abbey, the 24th of the 4th Moneth, 1679. A Copy of a Letter to T. T. DEar Brother, &c. the 24th of the 4th Moneth 79. we sit∣ting towards Evening with the Family and Children, be∣ing in all about Fifty, the Lords sweet and tender-heart-break∣ing Power was with us in a showr of abundance of Love, Mercy and Gentleness thorowout, which caused abundance of mel∣ting Tears, and great Soul-gladness, like unto the love and ten∣derness of a most tender Father, in Forgiveness and Mercy af∣ter Correction and Submission under the same, I mean especi∣ally as to such who had been more stubborn: And the more mild and gentle-conditioned were under the pure sense of the same Power in pure Love and sweet tenderness, with an enerease of what had been poured out before at the other Meetings: So that the whole Meeting & Family at that time was, as I may tru∣ly say, over-powered with Divine comfort, in the sense of Gods pure love; nothing else from God declared to them, but that they should admire his sweet Love and Mercy, and how good the Lord was, how gentle, kind, and most tender over them, together with the great admiring of the same Love, being fill∣ed with it, so that the Heavenly Flame of it drown'd all manner of Sorrow at that time, and conquered all sense of Terror and Judgment, nothing but Love at that time and Mercy appearing
and overcoming all, so that it was wonderful to behold the great Gravity and Sense of the Children in such an exercise, there being such a general Heart-breaking Power overpower∣ing them in such a manner with Gods blessing throughout de∣clared amongst them all. And now I may say, that there is not one who hath been of the worst Temper and Disposition here at present, but in pleading with them about their conditi∣ons in the sense of Gods Truth, have been broken into a sensible acknowledgment with weeping Eyes, so far hath the most bles∣sed Power of the living God appeared in this place, a Day much groaned and longed for to see, Glory to the Lord forever: And certainly the living God will bestow more of his Heaven∣ly Blessings upon us, by the still pouring forth of his heavenly Spirit, as we are dear and tender before him and of his Glory, Amen. So dear Brother, admire with us the excellency of Gods pure love, and Pray with us, that we all may be kept in the sweet and humble acknowledgment of all his most tender Mercies: And oh! that we may never give the least occasion, whereby the Lord may with-draw the sense of such great Love and Mercy from us, Amen, Amen. So dear Brother, if I could tell thee I would, how full of sweet Melody my Soul is at present from the sense of this his pure goodness, and how full of Joy and Gladness, and Heaven∣ly Praises: Oh! the glorious Heavenly Power of the Lord God, how, when he pleases, it most wonderfully overcomes the Hearts and Souls of his beloved and tender Children! Oh dear Brother! feel, feel what my Soul can admire, but my Tongue far unable to utter, neither lawful for any man to do, in this Earthly Tabernacle, in which we reach unto thee dearly, and to thy dear Wife. And I am thy dear Brother, C. Taylor. The following Testimonies are from the Teachers of the Children.
A Testimony concerning the Goodness and Mercy of God our Heavenly Father in Christ Jesus, manifested to the Children of our Family. IN the sense of the great Love and tender Mercies of the Lord God, who hath often graciously visited and livingly refresh∣ed my Soul in our Evenings or Family's Meetings. I can and do bear this living and faithful Testimony, that at a Meeting the 23d of the 4th Moneth, called June, in the Evening the great God and Father of Mercy in a special and wonderful manner did abundantly pour forth of his good and holy Spirit of Life and Grace upon our Spirits through Jesus Christ our Saviour, by which our Souls and Spirits were broken and melted before him, that Waters did gush out of the Rocks, Springs were opened in dry places, and the very Depth did utter forth its Voice. I my self was so overpowered and overcome with this Heavenly Life, Virtue and Power of God, that I did shake and tremble before him the mighty God of Heaven and Earth, who by his quick and powerful Voice shaketh the Wilderness, and breaketh the Ce∣dars of Lebanon, at whose appearance and look the Earth Trem∣bles, and at whose touch the Hills Smoke: This his great Love and powerful Operation upon my Heart and Spirit, being li∣vingly refreshed and comforted by it, did cause my Soul to mag∣nifie the Lord, and my Spirit to rejoyce in God my Saviour, singing and making sweet Melody in my Heart to the Lord, because he did so graciously answer the desire of our Souls, and powerful∣ly break in upon the Hearts and Spirits of our Children, re∣vealing himself in his great and Almighty Power among them, in and through which their Hearts were broken, their Spirits melted, and their Souls humbly bowed before him, as the a∣lone searcher of the Heart, and tryer of the Reins, making known to every one his state and condition and bringing to Light the hidden things of Darkness, and Counsels of the Hearts, which brought Sorrow and Trouble upon them, and
caused many of them to lament and cry out before the Lord. O! who can appear and stand before the great Judge of the Quick and Dead, and not tremble at his Word, and not howl and cry as under the sene of his Judgments, till they be brought forth unto Victory, and the Soul comes to feel Redemption from Sin and Iniquity, through the Blood of Jesus Christ. We are living Witnesse of this great and powerful Work of the Almighty God in and amongst the Children of our Family, by which he hath begun to work out their Salvation with Fear and Trembling, and to turn their minds from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto himself, that they may re∣ceive Forgiveness of Sins, and Inheritance amongst them which are Sanctified by Faith in Christ Jesus, to the great comfort and satisfaction of our Souls, who was thus graciously pleased to ap∣pear and reveal himself in and among us, in his Heavenly Power and Authority; for my Soul hath often been poured out before the Lord on their behalf, that he would be pleased to reach unto their Hearts in his Heavenly quickning Power, that at length they might come to experience in themselves what hath been often decla∣red to them by others, that so in the sense of this Heart-breaking Power they might learn to fear him their Creator in the dayes of their Youth, and their Souls might be engaged and constrained to love and obey him. Now the Lord hath heard our Cry, and answered our Desire, he hath manifested his great Love, Favour and Mercy unto them and us, in the sense whereof my Soul did and doth rejoyce, praising and glorifying his Name on their and our behalf; I can beat my witness in Truth, that the sense of the goodness of the Lord did rest upon my Spirit all the Night long, that after I a∣waked my Eyes were full of Tears, and my Soul full of Holy Praises and Thanks-giving unto the Lord, because of his tender Mercies and great Love towards us, breathing to the Lord, that he in his heavenly blessed Power would carry on his great Work of Regeneration, that he hath begun in and upon our Spirits, and to Bless us daily more and more with all Spiritual Blessings in Christ Jesus, to the Praise and Glory of his Grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the Beloved, according to the Riches
of his Grace, wherein he hath reached and abounded towards us, to declare unto our Souls that he has pardoned our Sins, and received us into his Fatherly love and care. What shall I say of the next following Meeting? I am not able to express the sweet refreshing Life, Vertue and Power of our heavenly Father arising in us with healing under is Wings. For as the Evening before, Fearfulness and Trembling came up∣on many, and Horror had overwhelmed them, so now at this time the sweet Love of a most tender and merciful Father, embracing their Spirits, did sweetly and livingly refresh and comfort their Souls; he healed the broken in Heart, and bound up their Wounds with the Balm of his heavenly Life, Vertue and Power, to the great comfort and satisfaction of our Souls, who partook of the Water of Life, that the Lord poured forth and made us to drink of; in and through which the Spirit of the Humble was quickned, and the Heart of the Contrite Ones revived. Now as the Lord in those two Meetings hath appeared and re∣vealed himself in and to us in a most special, gracious and power∣ful manner, so his Sweet and Heart-melting Love and tender Mercies have hitherto followed us from Meeting to Meeting, sensibly and livingly, Refreshing, Comforting, Stregthening and Confirming our Souls in his Love, Life, Vertue and Power, until this very Day, Praises, Praises, Praises, Glory and Ho∣nour be to our God henceforth forever and forever. Moreover, it is sealed to my Spirit by the holy Spirit of the Lord God, That we shall be Monuments of his Tender Mercies and Fatherly Love and Care (these are the words which livingly arose in my Heart, as we were lately gathered together, and arise again as I am writing this Testimony for God) I say, We shall be Monuments of his tender Mercies and fatherly Love and Care, if we keep Low, Humble, Meek and Tender be∣fore him, he will instruct u, & teach us in the Way which we shall go, and guide us with his Eyes, if we always Fear and Dread his holy powerful Name, which he hath revealed unto us, and pour∣ed forth in and among us, as a good and precious Ointment, which causes us to be glad and to rejoyce in him, and to love him with all our Heart, Soul and Mind. In the Sense of this
great Love and tender Mercies of the Lord God, my Soul desires that I and every one of us, especially our dear Children, that have with us tasted of the good Word and Power of the World to come; by which our Souls have been quickned and livingly refreshed and comforted, may be always kept in a living sense of the Loving kindness and Goodness of the Lord towards us, that so we may walk in Humility, Righteousness and Holiness before him, who hath reached to our Souls, and made us sensible of our inward State and Condition, and also of his Love, Grace and Mercy, that we may walk worthy of this his great Love, and Dread and Fear him in our Hearts, always having the Eyes of our Mind towards him, that in his Light, shining in our Souls, we may see even the least appearance of Evil, and waiting in it we may receive Power to be kept and preserved out of it, lest by entring in or consenting to it we should offend the Lord, and cause him to with draw his sweet Love, and to hide the Light and Favour of his Countenance from us, which would bring Sorrow, Anguish and Destruction upon our Souls. Oh! let us walk worthy of this great Love, let every one of us be circumspect in our Lives and Conversations, that our Enemies, who Reproach and Blaspheme the holy Name and powerful Work of the Lord God, who hath graciously and gloriously ap∣peared in and among us, may behold our Holy, Innocent, Up∣right Life and Conversation, and by it may be reached and con∣vinced, that not the Devil, but the Lord God in his holy Life, Vertue, Power and Spirit hath appeared in and among us, by which he hath wrought a new Heart, and renewed a right and holy Spirit in us, the blessed Effect whereof is Holiness and Righteousness, which Work is not of Man, muchless of the De∣vil, but of the Everlasting, Pure and Holy God, who in his Everlasting, Holy, Pure and Quickning Power hath begot us again into the heavenly Image of his dear Son Christ Jesus, which consists in Holiness, and Righteousness, and Truth, which the De∣vil is out of. Having therefore received Grace and Mercy, Life, Vertue and Power of God, let us cleanse our selves from all Filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God, that
we may shew forth the heavenly Vertue and Power of him that hath called and translated us from Darkness into his marvelous Light, and turned from Satans Power to his own Holy, Pure and Living Power, in which we are enabled to do good Works, new created of God in Christ Jesus unto good Works, that we may walk therein, in which if we are sound walking and doing the Works of God, we shall never fall again; for so an entrance shall be ministred unto us abundantly, into the Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, who is the true Light, which lights every man that comes into the World, in which heavenly and divine Light, we daily receive Life, Ver∣tue and Power, to escape the Corruption that is in the World through Lust, and to live Soberly, Righteously and Godly in this present World, to the Honour and Praise of him that hath called us to Glory and Vertue. For this is the very end of the heavenly, living, powerful Appearance of our God in the midst of us, that in and through the heavenly Power of his Son Christ Jesus revealed in us, in his divine, heavenly Light, Life and Spi∣rit, he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purifie unto him∣self a peculiar People, zealou unto good Works; and that so out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings he may perfect Praises for his Name. Let us therefore always be found in Well-doing, that our Light may shine before men, that they may see our good Works, and glorifie our Father which is in Heaven, who dwells in the Light, and is Light, in which, if we walk therein, we have fellowship with him, and one with another, and the Blod of Jesus Christ his Son, which cleanses us from all Sins is inwardly known and felt, and the true Fellowship with the Fher, and his Son Jesus Christ comes to be witnessed, Righteousness and Ho∣liness is shewn forth in our Lives and Conversation by which our heavenly Father comes to be praised and glorified. For herein is our heavenly Father of his Children glorified, when they bring forth much Fruit of the Spirit, which is in all Good∣ness, and Righteousness, and Truth, always proving and doing what is acceptable unto the Lord; to whom be Glory and Ho∣nour
Praises and Hallelujah, Wisdom and Dominion from my Soul, in the living Sense of his great Love and tender Mercies, now henceforth forever and ever, Amen, Amen. Testified by me J. M The 5th of the 5th Moneth 1679. WHen I consider the Goodness, Mercy and Love of Almighty God to the Sons and Daughters of Men, so largely manifested, and suited to every Capacity and Condi∣tion to this end and purpose, that all, even from the least to the greatest, may be made sensible and living Monuments of his wonderful Work, which he hath been carrying on in all Ages les or more; but now in this latter Age of the World, is cut∣ting the Work short in Righteousness; I see it clearly in the Light of the Lord; for which my Sul and Heart is overcome with Praises and Thanksgivings to him, who (I see) takes pleasure to dwell with the lowly in Heart, and that are willing to follow, him whithersoever he in his▪ Requirings may lead; Glory to his blessed Name forever. I say, the consideration of the Lord's wonderful Dealing with people, but more especially with the Young Ones in our Fami∣ly, constrains me at this time to open my Mouth, in my small Measure, to declare of his Wonderful and Soul-ravishing Vir∣tue, livingly witnessed to, in my Measure, and also am an Eye and Ear-Witness, but which is more, I find it sealed in my heart, that the Lord hath begun a blessed Work in and among the Younger sort, so that I can say in Truth, The Lord hath been here, the blessed Effects whereof do sufficiently declare it: Oh! how is my Soul overjoy'd when I see that wild Nature, which bore rule in some, changed and brought under, so that I may justly say with the Prophet, and do witness the same, both in my own particular, as also I declare it on the behalf of the Children, That in some I see instead of the Thorns comes up the Fir-tree, and
instead of the Bryar comes up the Myrtle tree, and it is for the Lord a Name, for an Everlasting Sign that shall not be cut off. This hath been the End and Tendency of all the Upright hearted Ones in their Labour and daily Exercise in this Family, who are more nearly concerned in them. And, Oh! let all Heart▪ joyn with me at this time, and at all times, to Praise and Extol the God of all Goodness, who in his Love hath given us an Earnest of our Desires, which is more to us than Thousands of Silver or Gold! This the Lord hath been bringing to pass for several years past by his Almighty Power and Out-stretches Arm invisibly in the Hearts of the Young Ones, and now is more maniestly begun to shew forth his Power, to the melting of the Rocky-hearted, and tendring of them into Tears, which was livingly witnessed to by many, who felt the Power of the Almighty to overshadow them, in a Wonderful and Soul ravishing manner, at our fourth day's Meeting in Waltham. Abby; so that in the Sense of the good∣ness of the Lord tendred to my Soul, & the Souls of the Children there present, I was broken into Tears, having a deep sense of the Work of the Lord in my own particular to work in my Heart; as also, I was overcome with Joy to feel the Lord's Power so won∣derfully to work on the Children Minds, that they were melted and broken to the Amazement of many there present, who never saw such a Day, nor witnessed the Lord's Power to change them in their Minds: Oh! but what Joy? what comfort? what Satisfaction unutterable was ministred to them, who waited up∣on the Lord for this, to see their Expectation answered in this Matter? what greater Joy could be afforded? surely none. I can truly say, it was more to me (I hope to my dying Day never to forget it) then all Visible or Created Comforts whatso∣ever. And so as the Lord did in a wonderful manner break forth in his Living Power upon the 4th day, being the 4th day of the 4th Moneth, so we have witnessed since, and do witness daily (Praises to our God for it) the same Arm of Power to work in our Family-Meetings; so that forsome Nights we have gone to Bed with the Tears in our Eyes, being filled with the Love of so tender and merciful a Father, who thus had visited us in his love, and filled our Hearts with unexpressible Joy: And this I say more
on the behalf of the Children, that some have been so livingly re∣freshed in our Evening-Meetings, that after they have been in Bed, their Sleep hath been taken from them for several hours to∣gether, and their Souls have been filled with Praises and Thanks∣givings more then could be uttered. This I was constrained to say for the Lord, that he is no hard Master, that he takes no pleasure in the Death of Sinners, but thus even in our day, as of Old, so fatherly, tenderly, and condescendingly he deals with People, even with the tender∣aged, as to accommodate himself in his appearance, to their Ca∣pacities, that they may feel him at work in their inward parts, who worketh all his Childrens work in them and for them, to the everlasting renown and praise of his worthy Name forever. Now let all be invited hereby to bow and submit their Necks to the Yoke of Christ, and let them be made willing to take it upon them; for truly it is light to them that are made willing in the day of his mighty Power. Further, let me intreat all who have been sharers with me in this late and continued Heart∣breaking-Power, to walk worthy of the same, that we together may pass the time of our sojourning here in fear, that in the end when we shall lay down these Tabernacles, we may be admitted unto the full Fruition and compleat Enjoyment of his favour, who hath called us, and that very early, whose favour is better then Life, whereof of late we have had a larg earnest, to the refreshing of our Souls, and the establishing of them in his fear, Everlast∣ing Praises, Glory, and Renown, be sounded forth unto our bountiful Lord and Master Christ Jesus, World without End, Amen. A. PATERSONE. THE END.
